Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Outcome 2 Phases Toggle Phases subsection 2.1 Oxidative phase 2.2 Non-oxidative phase 2.3 Regulation 3 Erythrocytes 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Pentose phosphate pathway 38 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Series of interconnected biochemical reactions The pentose phosphate pathway The pentose phosphate pathway (also called the phosphogluconate pathway and the hexose monophosphate shunt or HMP shunt ) is a metabolic pathway parallel to glycolysis .

[ 1 ] It generates NADPH and pentoses (five- carbon sugars ) as well as ribose 5-phosphate , a precursor for the synthesis of nucleotides .

[ 1 ] While the pentose phosphate pathway does involve oxidation of glucose , its primary role is anabolic rather than catabolic . The pathway is especially important in red blood cells (erythrocytes). The reactions of the pathway were elucidated in the early 1950s by Bernard Horecker and co-workers.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] There are two distinct phases in the pathway. The first is the oxidative phase, in which NADPH is generated, and the second is the non-oxidative synthesis of five-carbon sugars. For most organisms, the pentose phosphate pathway takes place in the cytosol ; in plants, most steps take place in plastids .

[ 4 ] Like glycolysis , the pentose phosphate pathway appears to have a very ancient evolutionary origin. The reactions of this pathway are mostly enzyme catalyzed in modern cells, however, they also occur non-enzymatically under conditions that replicate those of the Archean ocean, and are catalyzed by metal ions , particularly ferrous ions (Fe(II)).

[ 5 ] This suggests that the origins of the pathway could date back to the prebiotic world.

Outcome [ edit ] The primary results of the pathway are: The generation of reducing equivalents, in the form of NADPH, used in reductive biosynthesis reactions within cells (e.g.

fatty acid synthesis ).

Production of ribose 5-phosphate (R5P), used in the synthesis of nucleotides and nucleic acids.

Production of erythrose 4-phosphate (E4P) used in the synthesis of aromatic amino acids .

Aromatic amino acids, in turn, are precursors for many biosynthetic pathways, including the lignin in wood.

[ citation needed ] Dietary pentose sugars derived from the digestion of nucleic acids may be metabolized through the pentose phosphate pathway, and the carbon skeletons of dietary carbohydrates may be converted into glycolytic/gluconeogenic intermediates.

In mammals, the PPP occurs exclusively in the cytoplasm. In humans, it is found to be most active in the liver, mammary glands, and adrenal cortex.

[ citation needed ] The PPP is one of the three main ways the body creates molecules with reducing power, accounting for approximately 60% of NADPH production in humans.

[ citation needed ] One of the uses of NADPH in the cell is to prevent oxidative stress . It reduces glutathione via glutathione reductase , which converts reactive H 2 O 2 into H 2 O by glutathione peroxidase . If absent, the H 2 O 2 would be converted to hydroxyl free radicals by Fenton chemistry , which can attack the cell. Erythrocytes, for example, generate a large amount of NADPH through the pentose phosphate pathway to use in the reduction of glutathione.

Hydrogen peroxide is also generated for phagocytes in a process often referred to as a respiratory burst .

[ 6 ] Phases [ edit ] Oxidative phase [ edit ] In this phase, two molecules of NADP + are reduced to NADPH , utilizing the energy from the conversion of glucose-6-phosphate into ribulose 5-phosphate .

Oxidative phase of pentose phosphate pathway.

Glucose-6-phosphate ( 1 ), 6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone ( 2 ), 6-phosphogluconate ( 3 ), ribulose 5-phosphate ( 4 ) The entire set of reactions can be summarized as follows: Reactants Products Enzyme Description Glucose 6-phosphate + NADP+ → 6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone + NADPH glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase Dehydrogenation . The hydroxyl on carbon 1 of glucose 6-phosphate turns into a carbonyl, generating a lactone, and, in the process, NADPH is generated.

6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone + H 2 O → 6-phosphogluconate + H + 6-phosphogluconolactonase Hydrolysis 6-phosphogluconate + NADP + → ribulose 5-phosphate + NADPH + CO 2 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase Oxidative decarboxylation . NADP + is the electron acceptor, generating another molecule of NADPH , a CO 2 , and ribulose 5-phosphate .

The overall reaction for this process is: Glucose 6-phosphate + 2 NADP + + H 2 O → ribulose 5-phosphate + 2 NADPH + 2 H + + CO 2 Non-oxidative phase [ edit ] The pentose phosphate pathway's nonoxidative phase Reactants Products Enzymes ribulose 5-phosphate → ribose 5-phosphate ribose-5-phosphate isomerase ribulose 5-phosphate → xylulose 5-phosphate ribulose 5-phosphate 3-epimerase xylulose 5-phosphate + ribose 5-phosphate → glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate + sedoheptulose 7-phosphate transketolase sedoheptulose 7-phosphate + glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate → erythrose 4-phosphate + fructose 6-phosphate transaldolase xylulose 5-phosphate + erythrose 4-phosphate → glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate + fructose 6-phosphate transketolase Net reaction:
3 ribulose-5-phosphate → 1 ribose-5-phosphate + 2 xylulose-5-phosphate → 2 fructose-6-phosphate + glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate Regulation [ edit ] Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is the rate-controlling enzyme of this pathway [ citation needed ] . It is allosterically stimulated by NADP + and strongly inhibited by NADPH .

[ 7 ] The ratio of NADPH:NADP + is the primary mode of regulation for the enzyme and is normally about 100:1 in liver cytosol [ citation needed ] . This makes the cytosol a highly-reducing environment. An NADPH-utilizing pathway forms NADP + , which stimulates Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase to produce more NADPH.  This step is also inhibited by acetyl CoA .

[ citation needed ] G6PD activity is also post-translationally regulated by cytoplasmic deacetylase SIRT2 . SIRT2-mediated deacetylation and activation of G6PD stimulates oxidative branch of PPP to supply cytosolic NADPH to counteract oxidative damage or support de novo lipogenesis .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Erythrocytes [ edit ] Several deficiencies in the level of activity (not function) of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase have been observed to be associated with resistance to the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum among individuals of Mediterranean and African descent. The basis for this resistance may be a weakening of the red cell membrane (the erythrocyte is the host cell for the parasite) such that it cannot sustain the parasitic life cycle long enough for productive growth.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] G6PD deficiency – A hereditary disease that disrupts the pentose phosphate pathway RNA Thiamine deficiency Frank Dickens FRS References [ edit ] ^ a b Alfarouk KO, Ahmed SB, Elliott RL, et al. (2020).

"The Pentose Phosphate Pathway Dynamics in Cancer and Its Dependency on Intracellular pH" .

Metabolites .

10 : 285.

doi : 10.3390/metabo10070285 .

PMC 7407102 .

PMID 32664469 .

^ Horecker BL, Smyrniotis PZ, Seegmiller JE (1951).

"The enzymatic conversion of 6-phosphogluconate to ribulose-5-phosphate and ribose-5-phosphate" .

J. Biol. Chem .

193 (1): 383– 396.

doi : 10.1016/S0021-9258(19)52464-4 .

PMID 14907726 .

^ Horecker BL (2002).

"The pentose phosphate pathway" .

J. Biol. Chem .

277 (50): 47965– 47971.

doi : 10.1074/jbc.X200007200 .

PMID 12403765 .

^ Kruger NJ, von Schaewen A (June 2003). "The oxidative pentose phosphate pathway: structure and organisation".

Current Opinion in Plant Biology .

6 (3): 236– 246.

Bibcode : 2003COPB....6..236K .

doi : 10.1016/S1369-5266(03)00039-6 .

PMID 12753973 .

^ Keller MA, Turchyn AV, Ralser M (25 April 2014).

"Non-enzymatic glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathway-like reactions in a plausible Archean ocean" .

Molecular Systems Biology .

10 (4): 725.

doi : 10.1002/msb.20145228 .

PMC 4023395 .

PMID 24771084 .

^ Immunology at MCG 1/cytotox ^ Voet Donald , Voet Judith G (2011).

Biochemistry (4th ed.). John Wiley & Sons. p. 894.

ISBN 978-0-470-57095-1 .

^ Wang YP, Zhou LS, Zhao YZ, Wang SW, Chen LL, Liu LX, Ling ZQ, Hu FJ, Sun YP, Zhang JY, Yang C, Yang Y, Xiong Y, Guan KL, Ye D (June 2014).

"Regulation of G6PD acetylation by SIRT2 and KAT9 modulates NADPH homeostasis and cell survival during oxidative stress" .

EMBO Journal .

33 (12): 1304– 20.

doi : 10.1002/embj.201387224 .

PMC 4194121 .

PMID 24769394 .

^ Xu SN, Wang TS, Li X, Wang YP (Sep 2016).

"SIRT2 activates G6PD to enhance NADPH production and promote leukaemia cell proliferation" .

Sci Rep .

6 : 32734.

Bibcode : 2016NatSR...632734X .

doi : 10.1038/srep32734 .

PMC 5009355 .

PMID 27586085 .

^ Cappadoro M, Giribaldi G, O'Brien E, et al. (October 1998).

"Early phagocytosis of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)-deficient erythrocytes parasitized by Plasmodium falciparum may explain malaria protection in G6PD deficiency" .

Blood .

92 (7): 2527– 34.

doi : 10.1182/blood.V92.7.2527 .

PMID 9746794 .

External links [ edit ] The chemical logic behind the pentose phosphate pathway Pentose+Phosphate+Pathway at the U.S. National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) Pentose phosphate pathway Map – Homo sapiens v t e Metabolism , catabolism , anabolism General Metabolic pathway Metabolic network Primary nutritional groups Energy metabolism Aerobic respiration Glycolysis → Pyruvate decarboxylation → Citric acid cycle → Oxidative phosphorylation ( electron transport chain + ATP synthase ) Anaerobic respiration Electron acceptors other than oxygen Fermentation Glycolysis → Substrate-level phosphorylation ABE Ethanol Lactic acid Specific paths Protein metabolism Protein synthesis Catabolism (protein→peptide→amino acid) Amino acid Amino acid synthesis Amino acid degradation (amino acid→pyruvate, acetyl CoA, or TCA intermediate) Urea cycle Nucleotide metabolism Purine metabolism Nucleotide salvage Pyrimidine metabolism Purine nucleotide cycle Carbohydrate metabolism ( carbohydrate catabolism and anabolism ) Human Glycolysis ⇄ Gluconeogenesis Glycogenolysis ⇄ Glycogenesis Pentose phosphate pathway Fructolysis Polyol pathway Galactolysis Leloir pathway Glycosylation N-linked O-linked Nonhuman Photosynthesis Anoxygenic photosynthesis Chemosynthesis Carbon fixation DeLey-Doudoroff pathway Entner-Doudoroff pathway Xylose metabolism Radiotrophism Lipid metabolism ( lipolysis , lipogenesis ) Fatty acid metabolism Fatty acid degradation ( Beta oxidation ) Fatty acid synthesis Other Steroid metabolism Sphingolipid metabolism Eicosanoid metabolism Ketosis Reverse cholesterol transport Other Metal metabolism Iron metabolism Ethanol metabolism Phospagen system (ATP-PCr) Chlororespiration v t e Metabolism map Carbon fixation Photo- respiration Pentose phosphate pathway Citric acid cycle Glyoxylate cycle Urea cycle Fatty acid synthesis Fatty acid elongation Beta oxidation Peroxisomal beta oxidation Glyco- genolysis Glyco- genesis Glyco- lysis Gluconeo- genesis Pyruvate decarb- oxylation Fermentation Keto- lysis Keto- genesis feeders to gluconeo- genesis Direct / C4 / CAM carbon intake Light reaction Oxidative phosphorylation Amino acid deamination Citrate shuttle Lipogenesis Lipolysis Steroidogenesis MVA pathway MEP pathway Shikimate pathway Transcription & replication Translation Proteolysis Glycosyl- ation Sugar acids Double / multiple sugars & glycans Simple sugars Inositol-P Amino sugars & sialic acids Nucleotide sugars Hexose-P Triose-P Glycerol P-glycerates Pentose-P Tetrose-P Propionyl -CoA Succinate Acetyl -CoA Pentose-P P-glycerates Glyoxylate Photosystems Pyruvate Lactate Acetyl -CoA Citrate Oxalo- acetate Malate Succinyl -CoA α-Keto- glutarate Ketone bodies Respiratory chain Serine group Alanine Branched-chain amino acids Aspartate group Homoserine group & lysine Glutamate group & proline Arginine Creatine & polyamines Ketogenic & glucogenic amino acids Amino acids Shikimate Aromatic amino acids & histidine Ascorbate ( vitamin C ) δ-ALA Bile pigments Hemes Cobalamins ( vitamin B 12 ) Various vitamin Bs Calciferols ( vitamin D ) Retinoids ( vitamin A ) Quinones ( vitamin K ) & tocopherols ( vitamin E ) Cofactors Vitamins & minerals Antioxidants PRPP Nucleotides Nucleic acids Proteins Glycoproteins & proteoglycans Chlorophylls MEP MVA Acetyl -CoA Polyketides Terpenoid backbones Terpenoids & carotenoids ( vitamin A ) Cholesterol Bile acids Glycero- phospholipids Glycerolipids Acyl-CoA Fatty acids Glyco- sphingolipids Sphingolipids Waxes Polyunsaturated fatty acids Neurotransmitters & thyroid hormones Steroids Endo- cannabinoids Eicosanoids Major metabolic pathways in metro-style map . Click any text (name of pathway or metabolites) to link to the corresponding article.

Single lines: pathways common to most lifeforms. Double lines: pathways not in humans (occurs in e.g. plants, fungi, prokaryotes).

Orange nodes: carbohydrate metabolism .

Violet nodes: photosynthesis .

Red nodes: cellular respiration .

Pink nodes: cell signaling .

Blue nodes: amino acid metabolism .

Grey nodes: vitamin and cofactor metabolism.

Brown nodes: nucleotide and protein metabolism.

Green nodes: lipid metabolism .

v t e Metabolism : carbohydrate metabolism · pentose phosphate pathway enzymes oxidative Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 6-phosphogluconolactonase Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase nonoxidative Phosphopentose isomerase Phosphopentose epimerase Transketolase Transaldolase v t e Pentose phosphate pathway metabolic intermediates Oxidative 6-Phosphogluconolactone 6-Phosphogluconate Ribulose 5-phosphate Ribose 5-phosphate Nonoxidative Xylulose 5-phosphate Sedoheptulose 7-phosphate Erythrose 4-phosphate Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pentose_phosphate_pathway&oldid=1291303304 " Category : Pentose phosphate pathway Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 10:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pentose phosphate pathway 38 languages Add topic

