Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Climate 2 Taxonomification 3 Threats to Biodiversity Toggle Threats to Biodiversity subsection 3.1 Separation Wall 3.2 Settlements 3.3 Europeanisation of landscapes 4 Online databases Toggle Online databases subsection 4.1 Articles 4.2 Societies 4.3 Bird watching 4.4 Photographers 4.5 Neighbouring countries 5 Selected images 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Biodiversity of Israel and Palestine 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The biodiversity of Israel and Palestine is the fauna , flora and fungi of the geographical region of Israel and of Palestine (the West Bank and the Gaza Strip ). This geographical area within the historical region of Palestine extends from the Jordan River and Wadi Araba in the east, to the Mediterranean Sea and the Sinai desert in the west, to Lebanon in the north, and to the gulf of Aqaba , or Eilat in the south.

The area is part of the Palearctic realm , located in the Mediterranean Basin , whose climate supports the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub biome . This includes the Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forests and the Southern Anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests ecoregions .

There are five geographical zones and the climate varies from semi-arid to temperate to subtropical. The region is home to a variety of plants and animals; at least 47,000 living species have been identified, with another 4,000 assumed to exist. At least 116 mammal species are native to Palestine/Israel, as well as 511 bird species, 97 reptile species, and 7 amphibian species. There are also an estimated 2,780 plant species.

Geography [ edit ] Main articles: Geography of Palestine and Geography of Israel The region of Palestine with the Gaza Strip, Israel, and the West Bank are located at the eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea , traditionally called the Levant . Israel is bounded on the north by Lebanon and on the northeast by Syria. Jordan lies to the east and southeast of the West Bank and Israel; Israel and the Gaza Strip are bordered on the southwest by the Egyptian Sinai Peninsula and on the west by the Mediterranean Sea.

Climate [ edit ] The region is divided into three major climate zones, and one microclimate zone: The Mediterranean climate zone, characterized by long, hot, rainless summers and relatively short, cool, rainy winters. The rainfall may go from as much as 400 mm for a year (in the south around Gaza), to 1,200 mm for a year (in the northernmost end of Israel). The Mediterranean landscapes include several kinds of forest, garrigue , scrubland , marsh and savanna -like-grassland. The fauna and flora are mostly of European origin.

The Steppe climate zone. It is a narrow strip (no wider than 60 km, and mostly, much narrower) between the Mediterranean zone and the Desert zone. The rainfall varies from 400 mm for year to 200 mm for year. This climate zone includes mostly low-grasslands and hardy forms of scrub . The fauna and flora are mostly of Asian and Saharan origin.

The Desert climate zone, which is the largest climate zone of Israel and Palestine, covers the country's southern half as the Negev , while the Judean Desert extends to the Dead Sea region through the West Bank and into the southern Jordan Valley . Rainfall is as low as 32 mm per year in the southernmost tip of Palestine/Israel in the Arabah valley. This dry climate zone grows scattered shrub vegetation or desert-grassland in its wetter parts. In the more arid regions, the vegetation is confined to dry riverbeds and gullies, known as wadis and in some places it is almost absent. In some of the greater valleys, desert-scrub and acacia -woodland are to be found. The fauna and flora are mostly of Saharan origin. Sudanese flora is present as well.

The Tropical (Sudanese) Microclimate [ clarification needed ] by the springs of the Judean Desert. Refers mostly to Ein Gedi spring and Arugot creek . Due to the high aquifer in the region, and the steady, hot climate of the Judean Desert, a tropical savanna-related flora (not rainforest, as many think) of East-African origin has established in the area of the springs. The fauna is that of the Desert zone.

The climate is determined by the location between the subtropical aridity of the Sahara and the Arabian deserts , and the subtropical humidity of the Levant or eastern Mediterranean. The climate conditions are highly variable within the area and modified locally by altitude, latitude, and the proximity to the Mediterranean Sea.

Taxonomification [ edit ] See also: List of native plants of Palestine (A-D) , List of native plants of Palestine (E-O) , List of native plants of Palestine (P-Z) , List of adventive wild plants in Israel , and Wildlife of Israel The following is a taxonomical classification up to Phylum level of all species found in the area.

Realm Protista Realm Fungi Phyla: Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, Glomeromycota, Myxomycota, Zygomycota, Chytridiomycota, Anamorphic fungi Realm Plantae Phyla: Anthocerophyta, Bryophyta, Charophyta, Chlorophyta, Cycadophyta, Equisetophyta, Ginkgophyta, Gnetophyta, Hepatophyta, Lycopodiophyta, Magnoliophyta, Ophioglossophyta, Pinophyta, Psilotophyta, Pteridophyta Realm Animalia Subrealm: Parazoa Phylum: Porifera Subrealm: Agnotozoa Phyla: Orthonectida, Placozoa, Rhombozoa Subrealm: Eumetazoa Superphylum: Radiata Phyla: Cnidaria, Ctenophora Bilateria: Protostomia Phyla: Acanthocephala, Annelida, Arthropoda, Brachiopoda, Bryozoa, Chaetognatha, Cycliophora, Echiura, Entoprocta, Gastrotricha, Gnathostomulida, Kinorhyncha, Loricifera, Micrognathozoa, Mollusca, Myzostomida, Nematoda, Nematomorpha, Nemertea, Onychophora, Phoronida, Platyhelminthes, Priapula, Rotifera, Sipuncula, Tardigrada Bilateria: Deuterostomia Phyla: Echinodermata, Hemichordata, Chordata, Xenoturbellida Threats to Biodiversity [ edit ] Separation Wall [ edit ] The Separation wall or "West Bank Barrier", whose construction started in 1994, has impeded native wildlife's ability to move freely, impacting their access to water and migratory patterns. This barrier has and continues to separate Palestinian farmers from their agricultural lands. This has caused overgrazing due to livestock being kept on smaller plots of land. Overgrazing leads to loss of plant biomass and plant species.

[ 1 ] The construction of the wall degraded nearby habits and ecosystems leading to the decline of local species populations like gazelles. The wall has also changed the flow of water, harming amphibian populations.

[ 2 ] Settlements [ edit ] The creation of Israeli Settlements and supporting infrastructure have relied on the uprooting of trees and clearing of forests. Similar to the Separation wall, settlements act as barriers for wildlife. Increased urbanization, through the growth of settlements also leads to higher resource consumption and pollution, from things like wastewater discharge.

[ 3 ] Europeanisation of landscapes [ edit ] 89% of Israeli planted forests are made up of non-native species, primarily European evergreens. These species do not support the habitat or dietary needs of native wildlife. These evergreens have also caused acidification of soils and nearby plants. The replacing of native species with non-native European species by Israel under the guise of "Turning the Desert Green" lower the biodiversity of the region.

[ 4 ] Online databases [ edit ] The following are online well prepared databases about the biodiversity in the Palestine Israel area.

Flora of Israel Online , Hebrew University, Jerusalem BioGIS: Israel Biodiversity Information System Botanical Garden University E Book Biodiversity of Jordan and Israel Articles [ edit ] Bird Species in Israel Societies [ edit ] Palestine Wildlife Society ( Palestine Wildlife Society ) Israel Nature and National Parks Protection Authority Bird watching [ edit ] Birding Israel : the world of birds, birding tours and birdwatching in Israel International Center for the Study of Bird Migration The Israeli Center for Yardbirds Jerusalem Bird Observatory ( Jerusalem Bird Observatory ) Photographers [ edit ] Rittner Oz : Amazing collection of great images of small creatures in the area with fine scientific classification Ilia Shalamaev : Excellent photographs of wildlife in the area Vadim Onishchenko The Edge : A searchable collection of nature photos. Search for Palestine, Israel in the database. Site created by Niall Benvie Neighbouring countries [ edit ] The Arabian Oryx Website Selected images [ edit ] Cyclamen persicum Anemone coronaria Haloxylon persicum Scabiosa prolifera See also [ edit ] List of rivers of Israel References [ edit ] ^ Abdallah, Tanya; Swaileh, Khaled (2011).

"Effects of the Israeli Segregation Wall on biodiversity and environmental sustainable development in the West Bank, Palestine" .

International Journal of Environmental Studies .

doi : 10.1080/00207233.2011.608504.2011.608504 (inactive 1 July 2025) . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Husein, Duaa; Qumsiyeh, Mazin (2022).

"Impact of the Israeli Segregation and Annexation Wall on Palestinian Biodiversity" .

Africana Studia .

37 . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ "State of Palestine: Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity 2015" (PDF) .

Convention on Biological Diversity . UNEP . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ Sasa, Ghada (2023).

"Oppressive pines: Uprooting Israeli green colonialism and implanting Palestinian A'wna" .

Politics .

43 (2): 219– 235.

doi : 10.1177/02633957221122366 .

v t e Biodiversity worldwide Biodiversity hotspot Biodiversity loss Global biodiversity Ecology Bioresilience Dark diversity Ecological effects of biodiversity Elevational diversity gradient Genetic diversity Insect biodiversity Soil biodiversity Species–area relationship Species richness Measurement All-taxa biodiversity inventory Alpha diversity Beta diversity Diversity index Environmental DNA Gamma diversity Range condition scoring Species diversity Phylogenetic diversity Zeta diversity Conservation Biodiversity action plan Convention on Biological Diversity 2010 Biodiversity Target Key Biodiversity Areas Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework Economics Agricultural biodiversity Biodiversity in agriculture Biodiversity banking Biodiversity credit Crop diversity Biodiversity and drugs Food biodiversity Biodiversity offsetting Health Biodiversity hypothesis of health By region Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Benin Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Libya Madagascar Mali Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria Rodrigues Rwanda Seychelles Somalia South Africa Cape Town Marine South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Borneo Cambodia China Georgia India Assam Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Palestine Papua New Guinea Philippines Qatar Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Syria Thailand Turkey Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Latvia Lithuania Kosovo Montenegro Norway Poland Portugal Republic of Ireland Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Wales North America Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Jamaica Martinique Mexico Nicaragua Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States Oceania Australia New Caledonia New Zealand Papua New Guinea South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Antarctica Antarctica List of biodiversity databases Global 200 Megadiverse countries Millennium Ecosystem Assessment NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐h5k2t
Cached time: 20250812004412
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.318 seconds
Real time usage: 0.419 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 836/1000000
Revision size: 11458/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 63831/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1046/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 27467/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.191/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5522894/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  339.454      1 -total
 33.22%  112.780      1 Template:Reflist
 26.37%   89.519      3 Template:Cite_journal
 24.61%   83.527      1 Template:Biodiversity_Worldwide
 24.43%   82.931      2 Template:Navbox
 18.13%   61.534      1 Template:Short_description
 12.23%   41.505      1 Template:Clarify
 10.76%   36.526      1 Template:Fix-span
  9.37%   31.818      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.95%   23.595      2 Template:Category_handler Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5453142:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812004412 and revision id 1301327599. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biodiversity_of_Israel_and_Palestine&oldid=1301327599 " Categories : Biodiversity Environment of Palestine Environment of Israel Environment of Palestine (region) Natural history of Palestine Natural history of Israel Natural history of Palestine (region) Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2021 This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 06:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biodiversity of Israel and Palestine 1 language Add topic

