Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Accomplishments 2 Scientific divisions Toggle Scientific divisions subsection 2.1 Atmospheric Physics 2.2 Biogeochemistry, Atmospheric Chemistry, and Ecosystems 2.3 Ocean and Cryosphere 2.4 Seasonal-to-Decadal Variability and Predictability 2.5 Weather and Climate Dynamics 3 Facilities 4 Alumni[12] 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 5 languages Français Italiano Português Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American physics research center This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory ( GFDL ) is a laboratory in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR). The current director is Venkatachalam Ramaswamy . It is one of seven Research Laboratories within NOAA's OAR.

[ 1 ] GFDL is engaged in comprehensive long-lead-time research to expand our scientific understanding of the physical and chemical processes that govern the behavior of the atmosphere and the oceans as complex fluid systems .

[ 2 ] These systems can be modeled mathematically and their phenomenology can be studied by computer simulation methods.

GFDL's accomplishments include the development of the first climate models to study global warming , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] the first comprehensive ocean prediction codes, and the first dynamical models with significant skill in hurricane track and intensity predictions. Much current research within the laboratory is focused around the development of Earth System Models for assessment of natural and human-induced climate change.

[ 5 ] Accomplishments [ edit ] The first global numerical simulations of the atmosphere — defining the basic structure of the numerical weather prediction and climate models that are still in use today throughout the world.

[ 6 ] The first numerical simulation of the world ocean.

[ 6 ] The initial definition and further elaborations of many of the central issues in global warming research, including water vapor feedback, polar amplification of temperature change, summer mid-continental dryness and cloud feedback.

[ 6 ] The first coupled atmosphere-ocean climate models and the first simulations of global warming using these models (including the above feedback processes and the potential weakening of the Atlantic overturning circulation).

[ 6 ] The development of a state-of-art hurricane model and its transfer to operations in the NOAA National Weather Service and the Navy.

[ 6 ] Scientific divisions [ edit ] The GFDL has a diverse community of about 300 researchers, collaborators and staff, with many from Britain, India, China, Japan, France, and other countries around the world. The laboratory is currently organized into several scientific divisions (listed alphabetically below). There is also a large group of scientific programmers known as the Modeling Systems Division, as well as a large computer support group.

[ 7 ] Atmospheric Physics [ edit ] Current head: Venkatachalam Ramaswamy This divisions goal is to employ numerical models and observations of the Earth System to characterize and quantify atmospheric physical processes, particularly those involving greenhouse gases, aerosols, water vapor, and clouds, and their roles in atmospheric general circulation, weather and climate.

Biogeochemistry, Atmospheric Chemistry, and Ecosystems [ edit ] Current head: John P. Dunne This divisions goal is to develop and use the GFDL’s earth system models to create a more comprehensive understanding of the interactions between physical, chemical, and ecological drivers and feedbacks on the earth system.

Ocean and Cryosphere [ edit ] Current head: Rong Zhang [ 8 ] This divisions goal is to conduct leading research to understand ocean and cryosphere changes and variability; their interactions with weather, climate, sea level, and ecosystems; and advance prediction and projection of future changes. To support this goal, we are developing state-of-the-science numerical models for the ocean, sea ice, land ice, and fully coupled models.

Seasonal-to-Decadal Variability and Predictability [ edit ] Current head: Thomas L. Delworth [ 9 ] This divisions goal is to improve our understanding of climate variability, predictability and change on time scales ranging from seasonal to multidecadal. This includes internal variability of the coupled climate system, and the response to changing radiative forcing. We are actively working to develop a next-generation experimental seasonal-to-decadal prediction system.

Weather and Climate Dynamics [ edit ] Further information: NOAA National Operational Model Archive and Distribution System (NOMADS) Current head: Thomas Knutson This divisions goal is to develop innovative physical and dynamical components for the next generation of earth system models, with special emphasis on high resolution (1–25 km) atmospheric model development. We aim to explore the frontiers of weather and climate modeling and analysis, and to improve the predictions of high-impact events such as hurricanes, floods, severe storms, and droughts, from weather to seasonal and interannual (2 year) time-scales.

Facilities [ edit ] The GFDL is located at Princeton University 's Forrestal Campus in Princeton, NJ.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Since March 2011, the GFDL no longer possesses an on-site supercomputer . They instead utilize a massively parallel Cray supercomputer with over 140,000 processor cores which is currently located at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Oak Ridge , Tennessee . This contrasts from their previous systems architecture, which consisted of eight Silicon Graphics Altix computers, each housing 1024 processor cores .

[ 12 ] Hardware updates occur on average, every 18 months.

The GFDL has been using high-performance computing systems to perform numerical modeling since the 1950s.

Alumni[12] [ edit ] Joseph Smagorinsky : GFDL's first director Jerry D. Mahlman : GFDL's second director Ants Leetmaa: GFDL's third director Isaac Held Kirk Bryan (oceanographer) Syukuro Manabe Yoshio Kurihara Kikuro Miyakoda Isidoro Orlanski Gareth Williams Frank Lipps Abraham Oort See also [ edit ] Modular Ocean Model GFDL CM2.X References [ edit ] ^ "Labs & Programs" .

NOAA Research . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Alvich, Jason.

"About GFDL" .

www.gfdl.noaa.gov . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Manabe, Syukuro; Bryan, Kirk (1969).

"Climate calculations with a combined ocean-atmosphere model" (PDF) .

Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences .

26 (4): 786– 789 . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Cooney, Catherine M. (2012).

"Downscaling Climate Models: Sharpening the Focus on Local-Level Changes" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

120 (1): A22 – A28 .

ISSN 0091-6765 .

JSTOR 41352962 .

^ Alvich, Jason.

"Most Recent Publications" .

www.gfdl.noaa.gov . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ a b c d e "NOAA Magazine Article on GFDL" . Archived from the original on 2012-04-15.

^ "Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory" . 6 October 2015.

^ "Rong Zhang Homepage" .

Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory . NOAA.

^ "Tom Delworth Homepage" .

Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory . NOAA.

^ Alvich, Jason.

"Visiting GFDL" .

www.gfdl.noaa.gov . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ "Directions" .

Atmospheric & Oceanic Sciences . Princeton . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ "Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory?NAAA Activities FY-80 Plans FY-81 Review of Twenty-Five years of Research. 1955-1980" . September 1980.

External links [ edit ] National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory NOAA GFDL ranking among the Top 500 Supercomputer Sites National Climate-Computing Research Center Authority control databases International ISNI National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geophysical_Fluid_Dynamics_Laboratory&oldid=1264962110 " Categories : Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Oceanographic organizations Supercomputer sites Organizations based in Princeton, New Jersey Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2014 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 24 December 2024, at 10:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 5 languages Add topic

