Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education Toggle Early life and education subsection 1.1 Primary and secondary education 1.2 College and law school 2 Early career and marriage 3 Military service 4 U.S. House of Representatives (1947–1950) 5 U.S. Senate (1950–1953) 6 Vice presidency (1953–1961) 7 1960 presidential campaign 8 1962 California gubernatorial campaign 9 Wilderness years 10 1968 presidential campaign 11 Presidency (1969–1974) Toggle Presidency (1969–1974) subsection 11.1 Foreign policy 11.1.1 China 11.1.2 Vietnam War 11.1.3 Latin American policy 11.1.4 Soviet Union 11.1.5 Middle Eastern policy 11.1.6 South Asia policy 11.2 Domestic policy 11.2.1 Economy 11.2.2 Governmental initiatives and organization 11.2.3 Civil rights 11.3 Space policy 11.4 Reelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation 11.4.1 1972 presidential campaign 11.4.2 Watergate 11.4.3 Resignation 12 Post-presidency (1974–1994) Toggle Post-presidency (1974–1994) subsection 12.1 Pardon and illness 12.2 Return to public life 12.3 Author and elder statesman 13 Death and funeral 14 Legacy 15 Personality and public image 16 Books 17 See also 18 Notes 19 References Toggle References subsection 19.1 Citations 19.2 Print sources 19.3 Nixon Library 19.4 Other sources 20 Further reading 21 External links Toggle External links subsection 21.1 Official websites 21.2 Media coverage 21.3 Other Toggle the table of contents Richard Nixon 152 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Bislama Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Kadazandusun Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of the United States from 1969 to 1974 "Nixon" redirects here. For other uses, see Nixon (disambiguation) and Richard Nixon (disambiguation) .

Richard Nixon Official portrait, 1972 37th President of the United States In office January 20, 1969 – August 9, 1974 Vice President Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) None (Oct–Dec 1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Preceded by Lyndon B. Johnson Succeeded by Gerald Ford 36th Vice President of the United States In office January 20, 1953 – January 20, 1961 President Dwight D. Eisenhower Preceded by Alben W. Barkley Succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson United States Senator from California In office December 1, 1950 – January 1, 1953 Preceded by Sheridan Downey Succeeded by Thomas Kuchel Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from California's 12th district In office January 3, 1947 – November 30, 1950 Preceded by Jerry Voorhis Succeeded by Patrick J. Hillings Personal details Born Richard Milhous Nixon ( 1913-01-09 ) January 9, 1913 Yorba Linda, California , U.S.

Died April 22, 1994 (1994-04-22) (aged 81) New York City, U.S.

Resting place Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum Political party Republican Spouse Pat Ryan ​ ​ ( m.

1940 ; died 1993 ) ​ Children Tricia Julie Parents Francis A. Nixon Hannah Milhous Education Whittier College ( BA ) Duke University ( JD ) Occupation Author lawyer politician Signature Military service Branch/service United States Navy Years of service 1942–1946 (active) 1946–1966 (inactive) Rank Commander Battles/wars World War II Pacific War Awards Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal American Campaign Medal Asiatic–Pacific Campaign Medal World War II Victory Medal Armed Forces Reserve Medal Richard Nixon's voice Nixon speaks on peace in Vietnam Recorded November 3, 1969 This article is part of a series about Richard Nixon Personal Birthplace Electoral history Depictions Pre-vice presidency House of Representatives 1946 election Senate 1950 election Checkers speech 36th Vice President of the United States Eisenhower administration Inaugurations first second Motorcade attack Kitchen Debate Post-vice presidency 1962 California gubernatorial bid "Last press conference" 37th President of the United States Presidency Timeline Transition Inaugurations first second Appointments Federal judges Supreme Court candidates Judicial controversies Policies Economic Nixon shock Foreign International trips Nixon Doctrine Vietnamization Environmental EPA Clean Water NOAA Legacy of Parks Cannabis war on drugs Native American Tenure End of the draft Visit to China Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty War on cancer Philadelphia Plan Minority Business Enterprise OSHA Apollo program Paris Peace Accords decent interval 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War airlift Mideast Peace Process Marine Mammal Protection Act Endangered Species Act Impeachment process Watergate scandal timeline Tapes United States v. Nixon Resignation speech Pardon Post-presidency Nixon interviews Foundation Presidential Library and Museum Center for the National Interest Bibliography Six Crises Death and state funeral Presidential campaigns 1960 election primaries convention debates 1968 election primaries convention " Bring Us Together " 1972 election primaries convention Vice presidential campaigns 1952 selection convention election 1956 convention election v t e Richard Milhous Nixon (January 9, 1913 – April 22, 1994) was the 37th president of the United States , serving from 1969 until his resignation in 1974. A member of the Republican Party , he represented California in both houses of the United States Congress before serving as the 36th vice president under President Dwight D. Eisenhower from 1953 to 1961.

His presidency saw the reduction of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War , détente with the Soviet Union and China , the Apollo 11 Moon landing, and the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational Safety and Health Administration . Nixon's second term ended early when he became the only U.S. president to resign from office, as a result of the Watergate scandal .

Nixon was born into a poor family of Quakers in Yorba Linda , Southern California. He graduated from Whittier College with a Bachelor of Arts in 1934 and from Duke University with a Juris Doctor in 1937, practiced law in California, and then moved with his wife Pat to Washington, D.C.

, in 1942 to work for the federal government . After serving in the Naval Reserve during World War II , he was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946 . His work on the Alger Hiss case established his reputation as a leading anti-communist . In 1950 , he was elected to the Senate . Nixon was the running mate of Eisenhower, the Republican Party's presidential nominee in the 1952 and 1956 elections . Nixon served for eight years as vice president and his two terms saw an increase in the notability of the office. He narrowly lost the 1960 presidential election to John F. Kennedy . After his loss in the 1962 race for governor of California, he announced his retirement from politics. However, in 1968 , he made another run for the presidency and defeated the Democratic incumbent vice president Hubert Humphrey .

Seeking to bring the North Vietnamese to the negotiating table, Nixon ordered military operations and carpet bombing campaigns in Cambodia. He covertly aided Pakistan during the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971 and ended American combat involvement in Vietnam in 1973 and the military draft the same year. His visit to China in 1972 led to diplomatic relations between the two nations , and he finalized the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with the Soviet Union. During the course of his first term, he enacted many progressive environmental policy shifts such as creating the Environmental Protection Agency and passing laws including the Endangered Species and Clean Air Acts . In addition to implementing the Twenty-sixth Amendment that lowered the voting age from 21 to 18, he ended the direct international convertibility of the U.S. dollar to gold in 1971, effectively taking the United States off the gold standard . He also imposed wage and price controls for 90 days, launched the Wars on Cancer and Drugs , passed the Controlled Substances Act , and presided over the end of the Space Race by overseeing the Apollo 11 Moon landing. He was re-elected in 1972 , when he defeated George McGovern in one of the largest landslide victories in American history .

In his second term, Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli materiel losses in the Yom Kippur War , a conflict which led to the oil crisis at home. From 1973, ongoing revelations from the Nixon administration's involvement in Watergate eroded his support in Congress and the country. The scandal began with a break-in at the Democratic National Committee office, ordered by administration officials, and escalated despite cover-up efforts by the Nixon administration, of which he was aware. On August 9, 1974, facing almost certain impeachment and removal from office, Nixon resigned. Afterward, he was issued a controversial pardon by his successor, Gerald Ford . During nearly 20 years of retirement, Nixon wrote nine books and undertook many foreign trips, rehabilitating his image into that of an elder statesman and leading expert on foreign affairs. On April 18, 1994, he suffered a debilitating stroke , and died four days later . Nixon is generally ranked as a below-average president, mainly due to his role in the Watergate scandal. Evaluations of his time in office have proven complex, with the successes of his presidency contrasted against the circumstances surrounding his departure from office.

Early life and education Nixon (second from right) makes his newspaper debut in 1916, contributing five cents to a fund for World War I orphans; his brother Donald is to his right.

Richard Milhous Nixon was born on January 9, 1913, in what was then the township precinct of Yorba Linda, California , [ 1 ] in a house built by his father, on his family's lemon ranch.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] His parents were Francis A. Nixon and Hannah (Milhous) Nixon . His mother was a Quaker , and his father converted from Methodism to the Quaker faith. Through his mother, Nixon was a descendant of the early English settler Thomas Cornell .

[ 5 ] Nixon's upbringing was influenced by Quaker observances of the time such as abstinence from alcohol, dancing, and swearing. He had four brothers: Harold, Donald , Arthur, and Edward .

[ 6 ] Four of the five Nixon boys were named after historic British kings; Richard was named after Richard the Lionheart .

[ 7 ] Nixon's early life was marked by hardship, and he later quoted Dwight Eisenhower in describing his boyhood: "We were poor, but the glory of it was we didn't know it".

[ 8 ] The Nixon family ranch failed in 1922, and the family moved to Whittier, California . In an area of East Whittier with many Quakers, Frank Nixon opened a grocery store and gas station at what is now the corner of Whittier Boulevard and Santa Gertrudes Avenue.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] During this period, the Nixon family attended East Whittier Friends Church.

[ 11 ] Richard's younger brother Arthur died in 1925 at the age of seven after a short illness.

[ 12 ] Richard was 12 years old when a spot was found on his lung; with a family history of tuberculosis , he was forbidden to play sports. The spot turned out to be scar tissue from pneumonia .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Primary and secondary education Nixon as a senior at Whittier High School in 1930 Nixon attended East Whittier Elementary School, where he was president of his eighth-grade class.

[ 15 ] His older brother Harold had attended Whittier High School , which his parents thought resulted in a dissolute lifestyle. They decided to send Nixon to the larger Fullerton Union High School .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Though he had to ride a school bus an hour each way during his freshman year, he attained excellent grades. Later, he lived with an aunt in Fullerton during the week.

[ 18 ] He played junior varsity football, and seldom missed practice, though he rarely was used in games.

[ 19 ] He had greater success as a debater, winning a number of championships and taking his only formal tutelage in public speaking from Fullerton's Head of English, H. Lynn Sheller. Nixon later mused on Sheller's words, "Remember, speaking is conversation...don't shout at people. Talk to them. Converse with them." [ 20 ] Nixon said he tried to use a conversational tone as much as possible.

[ 20 ] At the start of his junior year in September 1928, Nixon's parents permitted him to transfer to Whittier High School. At Whittier, Nixon lost a bid for student body president—his first electoral defeat. He often rose at 4 a.m. to drive the family truck to Los Angeles to purchase vegetables and then drove to the store to wash and display them before going to school. Harold was diagnosed with tuberculosis the previous year; when their mother took him to Arizona hoping to improve his health, the demands on Nixon increased, causing him to give up football. Nevertheless, Nixon graduated from Whittier High third in his class of 207.

[ 21 ] College and law school Nixon was offered a tuition grant to attend Harvard University , but with Harold's continued illness requiring his mother's care until his death in 1933, Richard was needed at the store. He remained in his hometown and enrolled at Whittier College in September 1930. His expenses were met by his maternal grandfather.

[ 2 ] [ 22 ] Nixon played for the basketball team; he also tried out for football, and though he lacked the size to play, he remained on the team as a substitute and was noted for his enthusiasm.

[ 23 ] Instead of fraternities and sororities, Whittier had literary societies. Nixon was snubbed by the only one for men, the Franklins, many of whom were from prominent families, unlike Nixon. He responded by helping to found a new society, the Orthogonian Society.

[ 24 ] In addition to the society, his studies, and work at the store, Nixon engaged in several extracurricular activities; he was a champion debater and hard worker.

[ 25 ] In 1933, he was engaged to Ola Florence Welch, daughter of the Whittier police chief, but they broke up in 1935.

[ 26 ] After graduating summa cum laude with a Bachelor of Arts in history from Whittier in 1934, Nixon was accepted at the new Duke University School of Law , [ 27 ] [ 28 ] which offered scholarships to top students, including Nixon.

[ 29 ] It paid high salaries to its professors, many of whom had national or international reputations.

[ 30 ] The number of scholarships was greatly reduced for second- and third-year students, creating intense competition.

[ 29 ] Nixon kept his scholarship, was elected president of the Duke Bar Association, [ 31 ] inducted into the Order of the Coif , [ 32 ] and graduated third in his class in June 1937.

[ 27 ] [ 33 ] Early career and marriage Nixon's family: Julie and David Eisenhower , President Nixon, First Lady Pat Nixon , Tricia , and Edward Cox on December 24, 1971 After graduating from Duke, Nixon initially hoped to join the FBI . He received no response to his application, and learned years later that he had been hired, but his appointment had been canceled at the last minute due to budget cuts.

[ 34 ] He was admitted to the California bar in 1937, and began practicing in Whittier with the law firm Wingert and Bewley in the National Bank of Whittier Building .

[ 27 ] [ 35 ] His work concentrated on commercial litigation for local petroleum companies and other corporate matters, as well as on wills .

[ 36 ] Nixon was reluctant to work on divorce cases, disliking frank sexual talk from women.

[ 37 ] In 1938, he opened up his own branch of Wingert and Bewley in La Habra, California , [ 38 ] and became a full partner in the firm the following year.

[ 39 ] In later years, Nixon proudly said he was the only modern president to have previously worked as a practicing attorney.

[ 37 ] During this period, Nixon was also the president of the Citra-Frost Company, which attempted to produce and sell frozen orange juice, but the company went bankrupt after 18 months.

[ 40 ] In January 1938, Nixon was cast in the Whittier Community Players production of The Dark Tower in which he played opposite his future wife, a high school teacher named Thelma "Pat" Ryan .

[ 27 ] In his memoirs, Nixon described it as "a case of love at first sight ", [ 41 ] but apparently for Nixon only, since Pat Ryan turned him down several times before agreeing to date him.

[ 42 ] Once they began their courtship, Ryan was reluctant to marry Nixon; they dated for two years before she assented to his proposal. They wed in a small ceremony on June 21, 1940. After a honeymoon in Mexico , the Nixons began their married life in Whittier.

[ 43 ] They had two daughters: Tricia , born in 1946 and Julie , born in 1948.

[ 44 ] Military service Nixon as a lieutenant commander in the United States Navy , c.

1945 In January 1942, the couple moved to the Northern Virginia suburbs, where Nixon took a job at the Office of Price Administration in Washington, D.C.

[ 27 ] [ 45 ] In his political campaigns, Nixon suggested that this was his response to Pearl Harbor , but he had sought the position throughout the latter part of 1941. Both Nixon and his wife believed he was limiting his prospects by remaining in Whittier.

[ 46 ] He was assigned to the tire rationing division, where he was tasked with replying to correspondence. He did not enjoy the role, and four months later applied to join the United States Navy .

[ 47 ] Though he could have claimed an exemption from the draft as a birthright Quaker, or a deferral due to his government service, Nixon nevertheless sought a commission in the Navy. His application was approved, and he was appointed a lieutenant junior grade in the United States Naval Reserve on June 15, 1942.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] In October 1942, he was given his first assignment as aide to the commander of the Naval Air Station Ottumwa in Wapello County, Iowa , until May 1943. Seeking more excitement, he requested sea duty; on July 2, 1943, he was assigned to Marine Aircraft Group 25 and the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command (SCAT), where he supported the logistics of operations in the South Pacific theater during World War II .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] On October 1, 1943, Nixon was promoted to lieutenant .

[ 48 ] Nixon commanded the SCAT forward detachments at Vella Lavella , Bougainville , and finally at Nissan Island .

[ 48 ] [ 52 ] His unit prepared manifests and flight plans for R4D/C-47 operations and supervised the loading and unloading of the transport aircraft. For this service, he received a Navy Letter of Commendation , awarded a Navy Commendation Ribbon, which was later updated to the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal , from his commanding officer for "meritorious and efficient performance of duty as Officer in Charge of the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command". Upon his return to the U.S., Nixon was appointed the administrative officer of the Alameda Naval Air Station in Alameda, California .

In January 1945, he was transferred to the Bureau of Aeronautics office in Philadelphia , where he helped negotiate the termination of World War II contracts, and received his second letter of commendation, from the Secretary of the Navy [ 53 ] for "meritorious service, tireless effort, and devotion to duty". Later, Nixon was transferred to other offices to work on contracts, and he moved from the Virginia suburbs of Washington, D.C. to  Philadelphia, New York and finally to Baltimore.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander .

[ 48 ] [ 53 ] On March 10, 1946, he was relieved of active duty.

[ 48 ] On June 1, 1953, he was promoted to commander in the U.S. Naval Reserve, and he retired from the U.S. Naval Reserve on June 6, 1966.

[ 48 ] While in the Navy, Nixon became a very good five-card stud poker player, helping finance his first congressional campaign with the winnings. In a 1983 interview, he described turning down an invitation to dine with Charles Lindbergh because he was hosting a game.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] U.S. House of Representatives (1947–1950) Further information: 1946 California's 12th congressional district election Nixon's 1946 congressional campaign flyer Republicans in California's 12th congressional district were frustrated by their inability to defeat Democratic representative Jerry Voorhis , and they sought a consensus candidate who would run a strong campaign against him. In 1945, they formed a "Committee of 100" to decide on a candidate, hoping to avoid internal dissensions which had led to previous Voorhis victories. After the committee failed to attract higher-profile candidates, Herman Perry, manager of Whittier's Bank of America branch, suggested Nixon, a family friend with whom he had served on Whittier College's board of trustees before the war. Perry wrote to Nixon in Baltimore , and after a night of excited conversation with his wife, Nixon gave Perry an enthused response, [ 58 ] [ 59 ] confirming that he was registered to vote in California at his parents' Whittier residence.

[ 60 ] Nixon flew to California and was selected by the committee. When he left the Navy at the start of 1946, Nixon and his wife returned to Whittier, where he began a year of intensive campaigning.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] He contended that Voorhis had been ineffective as a representative and suggested that Voorhis's endorsement by a group linked to Communists meant that Voorhis must have radical views.

[ 61 ] Nixon won the election, receiving 65,586 votes to Voorhis's 49,994.

[ 62 ] In June 1947, Nixon supported the Taft–Hartley Act , a federal law that monitors the activities and power of labor unions, and he served on the Education and Labor Committee . In August 1947, he became one of 19 House members to serve on the Herter Committee , [ 63 ] which went to Europe to report on the need for U.S. foreign aid. Nixon was the youngest member of the committee and the only Westerner.

[ 64 ] Advocacy by Herter Committee members, including Nixon, led to congressional passage of the Marshall Plan .

[ 65 ] In his memoirs, Nixon wrote that he joined the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) "at the end of 1947". However, he was already a HUAC member in early February 1947, when he heard "Enemy Number One" Gerhard Eisler and his sister Ruth Fischer testify. On February 18, 1947, Nixon referred to Eisler's belligerence toward HUAC in his maiden speech to the House. Also by early February 1947, fellow U.S. Representative Charles J. Kersten had introduced him to Father John Francis Cronin in Baltimore. Cronin shared with Nixon his 1945 privately circulated paper "The Problem of American Communism in 1945", [ 66 ] with much information from the FBI's William C. Sullivan who by 1961 headed domestic intelligence under J. Edgar Hoover .

[ 67 ] By May 1948, Nixon had co-sponsored the Mundt–Nixon Bill to implement "a new approach to the complicated problem of internal communist subversion ... It provided for registration of all Communist Party members and required a statement of the source of all printed and broadcast material issued by organizations that were found to be Communist fronts." He served as floor manager for the Republican Party. On May 19, 1948, the bill passed the House by 319 to 58, but later it failed to pass the Senate.

[ 68 ] The Nixon Library cites this bill's passage as Nixon's first significant victory in Congress.

[ 69 ] Nixon in Yorba Linda, California , c.

April 1950 Nixon first gained national attention in August 1948, when his persistence as a House Un-American Activities Committee member helped break the Alger Hiss spy case. While many doubted Whittaker Chambers 's allegations that Hiss, a former State Department official, had been a Soviet spy, Nixon believed them to be true and pressed for the committee to continue its investigation. After Hiss filed suit, alleging defamation, Chambers produced documents corroborating his allegations, including paper and microfilm copies that Chambers turned over to House investigators after hiding them overnight in a field; they became known as the " Pumpkin Papers ".

[ 70 ] Hiss was convicted of perjury in 1950 for denying under oath he had passed documents to Chambers.

[ 71 ] In 1948, Nixon successfully cross-filed as a candidate in his district, winning both major party primaries, [ 72 ] and was comfortably reelected.

[ 73 ] U.S. Senate (1950–1953) See also: 1950 United States Senate election in California Nixon's 1950 Senate campaign flyer Nixon campaigning in Sausalito, California , during his 1950 U.S. Senate campaign In 1949, Nixon began to consider running for the United States Senate against the Democratic incumbent, Sheridan Downey , [ 74 ] and entered the race in November.

[ 75 ] Downey, faced with a bitter primary battle with Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas , announced his retirement in March 1950.

[ 76 ] Nixon and Douglas won the primary elections [ 77 ] and engaged in a contentious campaign in which the ongoing Korean War was a major issue.

[ 78 ] Nixon tried to focus attention on Douglas's liberal voting record. As part of that effort, a " Pink Sheet " was distributed by the Nixon campaign suggesting that Douglas's voting record was similar to that of New York Congressman Vito Marcantonio , reputed to be a communist, and their political views must be nearly identical.

[ 79 ] Nixon won the election by almost twenty percentage points.

[ 80 ] During the campaign, Nixon was first called "Tricky Dick" by his opponents for his campaign tactics.

[ 81 ] In the Senate, Nixon took a prominent position in opposing global communism , traveling frequently and speaking out against it.

[ 82 ] He maintained friendly relations with Joseph McCarthy , a controversial U.S. Senate colleague from Wisconsin and fellow anti-communist , but was careful to keep some distance between himself and McCarthy's allegations.

[ 83 ] Nixon criticized President Harry S. Truman 's handling of the Korean War .

[ 82 ] He supported statehood for Alaska and Hawaii , voted in favor of civil rights for minorities, and supported federal disaster relief for India and Yugoslavia .

[ 84 ] He voted against price controls and other monetary restrictions, benefits for illegal immigrants, and public power.

[ 84 ] Vice presidency (1953–1961) See also: Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower Further information: Checkers speech Front cover of campaign literature for the Eisenhower –Nixon campaign in the 1952 presidential election Nixon's official portrait as vice president , c.

1953–1961 General Dwight D. Eisenhower was nominated for president by the Republicans in 1952. He had no strong preference for a vice-presidential candidate, and Republican officeholders and party officials met in a " smoke-filled room " and recommended Nixon to the general, who agreed to the senator's selection. Nixon's youth (he was then 39), stance against communism, and political base in California—one of the largest states—were all seen as vote-winners by the leaders. Among the candidates considered along with Nixon were Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio, Governor Alfred Driscoll of New Jersey, and Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] On the campaign trail, Eisenhower spoke of his plans for the country, and left the negative campaigning to his running mate .

[ 87 ] In mid-September, the Republican ticket faced a major crisis when the media reported that Nixon had a political fund, maintained by his backers, which reimbursed him for political expenses.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Such a fund was not illegal, but it exposed Nixon to allegations of a potential conflict of interest. With pressure building for Eisenhower to demand Nixon's resignation from the ticket , Nixon went on television to address the nation on September 23, 1952.

[ 90 ] The address, later named the Checkers speech , was heard by about 60 million Americans, which represented the largest audience ever for a television broadcast at that point.

[ 91 ] In the speech, Nixon emotionally defended himself, stating that the fund was not secret and that his donors had not received special favors. He painted himself as a patriot and man of modest means, mentioning that his wife had no mink coat; instead, he said, she wore a "respectable Republican cloth coat".

[ 90 ] The speech was remembered for the gift which Nixon had received, but which he would not give back, which he described as "a little cocker spaniel dog ...sent all the way from Texas. And our little girl—Tricia, the 6-year-old—named it Checkers." [ 90 ] The speech prompted a huge public outpouring of support for Nixon.

[ 92 ] Eisenhower decided to retain him on the ticket, [ 93 ] and the ticket was victorious in the November election .

[ 87 ] Eisenhower granted Nixon more responsibilities during his term than any previous vice president.

[ 94 ] Nixon attended Cabinet and National Security Council meetings and chaired them in Eisenhower's absence. A 1953 tour of the Far East succeeded in increasing local goodwill toward the United States and gave Nixon an appreciation of the region as a potential industrial center. He visited Saigon and Hanoi in French Indochina .

[ 95 ] On his return to the United States at the end of 1953, Nixon increased the time he devoted to foreign relations.

[ 96 ] Biographer Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional years, said of his vice presidency: Eisenhower radically altered the role of his running mate by presenting him with critical assignments in both foreign and domestic affairs once he assumed his office. The vice president welcomed the president's initiatives and worked energetically to accomplish White House objectives. Because of the collaboration between these two leaders, Nixon deserves the title, "the first modern vice president".

[ 97 ] Los Angeles Times San Francisco Chronicle American newspaper covers on May 9, 1958, covering student protests against Nixon at the National University of San Marcos in Lima , Peru Despite intense campaigning by Nixon, who reprised his strong attacks on the Democrats, the Republicans lost control of both houses of Congress in the 1954 elections . These losses caused Nixon to contemplate leaving politics once he had served out his term.

[ 98 ] On September 24, 1955, President Eisenhower suffered a heart attack and his condition was initially believed to be life-threatening. Eisenhower was unable to perform his duties for six weeks. The Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution had not yet been proposed, and the vice president had no formal power to act. Nonetheless, Nixon acted in Eisenhower's stead during this period, presiding over Cabinet meetings and ensuring that aides and Cabinet officers did not seek power.

[ 99 ] According to Nixon biographer Stephen Ambrose , Nixon had "earned the high praise he received for his conduct during the crisis ... he made no attempt to seize power".

[ 100 ] His spirits buoyed, Nixon sought a second term, but some of Eisenhower's aides aimed to displace him. In a December 1955 meeting, Eisenhower proposed that Nixon not run for reelection and instead become a Cabinet officer in a second Eisenhower administration, to give him administrative experience before a 1960 presidential run. Nixon believed this would destroy his political career. When Eisenhower announced his reelection bid in February 1956, he hedged on the choice of his running mate, saying it was improper to address that question until he had been renominated. Although no Republican was opposing Eisenhower, Nixon received a substantial number of write-in votes against the president in the 1956 New Hampshire primary election. In late April, the President announced that Nixon would again be his running mate.

[ 101 ] Eisenhower and Nixon were reelected by a comfortable margin in the November 1956 election .

[ 102 ] In early 1957, Nixon undertook another foreign trip, this time to Africa. On his return, he helped shepherd the Civil Rights Act of 1957 through Congress. The bill was weakened in the Senate, and civil rights leaders were divided over whether Eisenhower should sign it. Nixon advised the President to sign the bill, which he did.

[ 103 ] Eisenhower suffered a mild stroke in November 1957, and Nixon gave a press conference, assuring the nation that the Cabinet was functioning well as a team during Eisenhower's brief illness.

[ 104 ] Nikita Khrushchev and Nixon speak as the press looks on at the Kitchen Debate on July 24, 1959; What's My Line?

host John Charles Daly is on the far left.

On April 27, 1958, Richard and Pat Nixon reluctantly embarked on a goodwill tour of South America . In Montevideo , Uruguay, Nixon made an impromptu visit to a college campus, where he fielded questions from students on U.S. foreign policy. The trip was uneventful until the Nixon party reached Lima , Peru, where he was met with student demonstrations. Nixon went to the historical campus of National University of San Marcos , the oldest university in the Americas, got out of his car to confront the students, and stayed until forced back into the car by a volley of thrown objects. At his hotel, Nixon faced another mob, and one demonstrator spat on him.

[ 105 ] In Caracas , Venezuela, Nixon and his wife were spat on by anti-American demonstrators and their limousine was attacked by a pipe-wielding mob.

[ 106 ] According to Ambrose, Nixon's courageous conduct "caused even some of his bitterest enemies to give him some grudging respect".

[ 107 ] Reporting to the cabinet after the trip, Nixon claimed there was "absolute proof that [the protestors] were directed and controlled by a central Communist conspiracy." Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and his brother, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles , both concurred with Nixon.

[ 108 ] In July 1959, Eisenhower sent Nixon to the Soviet Union for the opening of the American National Exhibition in Moscow. On July 24, Nixon was touring the exhibits with Nikita Khrushchev when the two stopped at a model of an American kitchen and engaged in an impromptu exchange about the merits of capitalism versus communism that became known as the " Kitchen Debate ".

[ 109 ] 1960 presidential campaign Main article: Richard Nixon 1960 presidential campaign See also: 1960 Republican Party presidential primaries and 1960 United States presidential election 1960 presidential election results John F. Kennedy and Nixon before their first televised 1960 debate In 1960, Nixon launched his first campaign for President of the United States, officially announcing on January 9, 1960.

[ 110 ] He faced little opposition in the Republican primaries [ 111 ] and chose former Massachusetts senator Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

as his running mate.

[ 112 ] His Democratic opponent was John F. Kennedy and the race remained close for the duration.

[ 113 ] Nixon campaigned on his experience, but Kennedy called for new blood and claimed the Eisenhower–Nixon administration had allowed the Soviet Union to overtake the U.S. in quantity and quality of ballistic missiles .

[ 114 ] While Kennedy faced issues about his Catholicism, Nixon remained a divisive figure to some.

[ 115 ] Televised presidential debates made their debut as a political medium during the campaign. In the first of four such debates, Nixon appeared pale, with a five o'clock shadow , in contrast to the photogenic Kennedy.

[ 112 ] Nixon's performance in the debate was perceived to be mediocre in the visual medium of television, though many people listening on the radio thought Nixon had won.

[ 116 ] Nixon narrowly lost the election, with Kennedy winning the popular vote by only 112,827 votes (0.2 percent).

[ 112 ] There were charges of voter fraud in Texas and Illinois, both states won by Kennedy. Nixon refused to consider contesting the election, feeling a lengthy controversy would diminish the United States in the eyes of the world and that the uncertainty would hurt U.S. interests.

[ 117 ] At the end of his term of office as vice president in January 1961, Nixon and his family returned to California, where he practiced law and wrote a bestselling book, Six Crises , which included coverage of the Hiss case, Eisenhower's heart attack, and the Fund Crisis, which had been resolved by the Checkers speech.

[ 112 ] [ 118 ] 1962 California gubernatorial campaign Main article: 1962 California gubernatorial election 1962 California gubernatorial campaign sticker Local and national Republican leaders encouraged Nixon to challenge incumbent Pat Brown for governor of California in the 1962 gubernatorial election.

[ 112 ] Despite initial reluctance, Nixon entered the race.

[ 112 ] The campaign was clouded by public suspicion that Nixon viewed the office as a stepping stone for another presidential run, some opposition from the far-right of the party, and his own lack of interest in being California's governor.

[ 112 ] Nixon hoped a successful run would confirm his status as the nation's leading active Republican politician, and ensure he remained a major player in national politics.

[ 119 ] Instead, he lost to Brown by more than five percentage points, and the defeat was widely believed to be the end of his political career.

[ 112 ] In an impromptu concession speech the morning after the election, Nixon blamed the media for favoring his opponent, saying, "You won't have Nixon to kick around anymore because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference." [ 120 ] The California defeat was highlighted in the November 11, 1962, episode of Howard K. Smith 's ABC News show, Howard K. Smith: News and Comment , titled "The Political Obituary of Richard M. Nixon".

[ 121 ] Alger Hiss appeared on the program, and many members of the public complained that it was unseemly to give a convicted felon air time to attack a former vice president. The furor drove Smith and his program from the air, [ 122 ] and public sympathy for Nixon grew.

[ 121 ] Wilderness years Nixon shows his papers to an East German officer as he crosses between the sectors of divided Berlin in July 1963 In 1963 the Nixon family traveled to Europe, where Nixon gave press conferences and met with leaders of the countries he visited.

[ 123 ] The family moved to New York City, where Nixon became a senior partner in the leading law firm Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie & Alexander .

[ 112 ] On the morning of November 22, 1963, Nixon was in Dallas , staying at the Baker Hotel . He left the city via Love Field an hour before the arrival of Air Force One .

[ 124 ] When announcing his California campaign, Nixon had pledged not to run for president in 1964; even if he had not, he believed it would be difficult to defeat Kennedy, or after his assassination , Kennedy's successor, Lyndon Johnson.

[ 125 ] In 1964, Nixon won write-in votes in the primaries , and was considered a serious contender by both Gallup polls [ 126 ] [ 127 ] and members of the press.

[ 128 ] He was even placed on a primary ballot as an active candidate by Oregon's secretary of state.

[ 129 ] As late as two months before the 1964 Republican National Convention , however, Nixon fulfilled his promise to remain out of the presidential nomination process and instead endorsed Arizona senator Barry Goldwater , the eventual Republican nominee. When Goldwater won the nomination, Nixon was selected to introduce him at the convention. Nixon felt that Goldwater was unlikely to win, but campaigned for him loyally. In the 1964 general election , Goldwater lost in a landslide to Johnson and Republicans experienced heavy losses in Congress and among state governors.

[ 130 ] Nixon was one of the few leading Republicans not blamed for the disastrous results, and he sought to build on that in the 1966 congressional elections in which he campaigned for many Republicans and sought to regain seats lost in the Johnson landslide. Nixon was credited with helping Republicans win major electoral gains that year.

[ 131 ] In 1967, Nixon was approached by an associate at his firm in Leonard Garment about a case involving the press and perceived invasion of privacy. Garment suggested Nixon to argue on behalf of the Hill family in Time, Inc. v. Hill at the Supreme Court of the United States . Nixon studied strenuously in the months prior to the oral argument before the Court. While the final decision was in favor of Time Inc., Nixon was encouraged by the praise he received for his argument. It was the first and only case he argued in front of the Supreme Court.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] 1968 presidential campaign Main article: Richard Nixon 1968 presidential campaign See also: 1968 Republican Party presidential primaries and 1968 United States presidential election Nixon and President Lyndon B. Johnson meet at the White House prior to Nixon's nomination in July 1968 Nixon campaigning for president in Paoli, Pennsylvania , July 1968 Results of the 1968 presidential election ; the popular vote split between Nixon and Democrat Hubert Humphrey was less than one percentage point.

At the end of 1967, Nixon told his family he planned to run for president a second time. Pat Nixon did not always enjoy public life, [ 134 ] being embarrassed, for example, by the need to reveal how little the family owned in the Checkers speech.

[ 135 ] She still managed to be supportive of her husband's ambitions. Nixon believed that with the Democrats torn over the issue of the Vietnam War , a Republican had a good chance of winning, although he expected the election to be as close as in 1960.

[ 134 ] An exceptionally tumultuous primary election season began as the Tet Offensive was launched in January 1968. President Johnson withdrew as a candidate in March, after an unexpectedly poor showing in the New Hampshire primary. In June, Senator Robert F. Kennedy , a Democratic candidate, was assassinated just moments after his victory in the California primary. On the Republican side, Nixon's main opposition was Michigan governor George Romney , though New York governor Nelson Rockefeller and California governor Ronald Reagan each hoped to be nominated in a brokered convention . Nixon secured the nomination on the first ballot.

[ 136 ] He was able to secure the nomination to the support of many Southern delegates, after he and his subordinates made concessions to Strom Thurmond and Harry Dent .

[ 137 ] He selected Maryland governor Spiro Agnew as his running mate, a choice which Nixon believed would unite the party, appealing both to Northern moderates and to Southerners disaffected with the Democrats.

[ 138 ] Nixon's Democratic opponent in the general election was Vice President Hubert Humphrey , who was nominated at a convention marked by violent protests .

[ 139 ] Throughout the campaign, Nixon portrayed himself as a figure of stability during this period of national unrest and upheaval.

[ 139 ] He appealed to what he later called the " silent majority " of socially conservative Americans who disliked the hippie counterculture and the anti-war demonstrators. Agnew became an increasingly vocal critic of these groups, solidifying Nixon's position with the right.

[ 140 ] Nixon waged a prominent television advertising campaign, meeting with supporters in front of cameras.

[ 141 ] He stressed that the crime rate was too high, and attacked what he perceived as a surrender of the United States' nuclear superiority by the Democrats.

[ 142 ] Nixon promised " peace with honor " in the Vietnam War and proclaimed that "new leadership will end the war and win the peace in the Pacific".

[ 143 ] He did not give specifics of how he hoped to end the war, resulting in media intimations that he must have a "secret plan".

[ 143 ] His slogan of "Nixon's the One" proved to be effective.

[ 141 ] Johnson's negotiators hoped to reach a truce in Vietnam, or at least a cessation of bombings. On October 22, 1968, candidate Nixon received information that Johnson was preparing a so-called " October surprise ", abandoning three non-negotiable conditions for a bombing halt, to help elect Humphrey in the last days of the campaign.

[ 144 ] Whether the Nixon campaign interfered with negotiations between the Johnson administration and the South Vietnamese by engaging Anna Chennault , a fundraiser for the Republican party, remains a controversy.

[ 144 ] It is not clear whether the government of South Vietnam needed encouragement to opt out of a peace process they considered disadvantageous.

[ 145 ] In a three-way race between Nixon, Humphrey, and American Independent Party candidate George Wallace , Nixon defeated Humphrey by only 500,000 votes, a margin almost as close as in 1960, with both elections seeing a gap of less than one percentage point of the popular vote. However, Nixon earned 301 electoral votes to 191 for Humphrey and 46 for Wallace, a majority.

[ 139 ] [ 146 ] He became the first non-incumbent vice president to be elected president.

[ 147 ] In his victory speech, Nixon pledged that his administration would try to bring the divided nation together .

[ 148 ] Nixon said: "I have received a very gracious message from the Vice President, congratulating me for winning the election. I congratulated him for his gallant and courageous fight against great odds. I also told him that I know exactly how he felt. I know how it feels to lose a close one ." [ 149 ] Presidency (1969–1974) Main article: Presidency of Richard Nixon For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Richard Nixon presidency .

Nixon is sworn in as the 37th president by Chief Justice Earl Warren . The new first lady, Pat, holds the family Bible.

Nixon was inaugurated as president on January 20, 1969, sworn in by his onetime political rival, Chief Justice Earl Warren . Pat Nixon held the family Bibles open at Isaiah 2:4, which reads, "They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks." In his inaugural address, which received almost uniformly positive reviews, Nixon remarked that "the greatest honor history can bestow is the title of peacemaker" [ 150 ] —a phrase that found a place on his gravestone.

[ 151 ] He spoke about turning partisan politics into a new age of unity: In these difficult years, America has suffered from a fever of words; from inflated rhetoric that promises more than it can deliver; from angry rhetoric that fans discontents into hatreds; from bombastic rhetoric that postures instead of persuading. We cannot learn from one another until we stop shouting at one another, until we speak quietly enough so that our words can be heard as well as our voices.

[ 152 ] Foreign policy Main article: Foreign policy of the Richard Nixon administration China Main article: 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China President Nixon shakes hands with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai upon arriving in Beijing, 1972 Nixon and Zhou Enlai toast during Nixon's 1972 visit to China Nixon laid the groundwork for his overture to China before he became president, writing in Foreign Affairs a year before his election: "There is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation." [ 153 ] Among the reasons that Nixon sought to improve relations with China was in the hope of weakening the Soviet Union and decreasing China's support to the North in the Vietnam War.

[ 154 ] Nixon ultimately used the idea of gaining leverage against the Soviet Union through relations with China to obtain the support of key conservative figures including Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan.

[ 155 ] Assisting him in pursuing relations with China was Henry Kissinger , Nixon's national security advisor and future secretary of state . They collaborated closely, bypassing Cabinet officials. With relations between the Soviet Union and China at a nadir— border clashes between the two took place during Nixon's first year in office—Nixon sent private word to the Chinese that he desired closer relations. A breakthrough came in early 1971, when Chinese Communist Party (CCP) chairman Mao Zedong invited a team of American table tennis players to visit China and play against top Chinese players . Nixon followed up by sending Kissinger to China for clandestine meetings with Chinese officials.

[ 153 ] On July 15, 1971, with announcements from Washington and Beijing, it was learned that the President would visit China the following February.

[ 156 ] The secrecy had allowed both sets of leaders time to prepare the political climate in their countries for the visit.

[ 157 ] In February 1972, Nixon and his wife traveled to China after Kissinger briefed Nixon for over 40 hours in preparation.

[ 158 ] Upon touching down, the President and First Lady emerged from Air Force One and were greeted by Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai . Nixon made a point of shaking Zhou's hand, something which then-secretary of state John Foster Dulles had refused to do in 1954 when the two met in Geneva.

[ 159 ] More than a hundred television journalists accompanied the president. On Nixon's orders, television was strongly favored over printed publications, as Nixon felt that the medium would capture the visit much better than print. It also gave him the opportunity to snub the print journalists he despised.

[ 159 ] Mao Zedong and Nixon Nixon and Kissinger immediately met for an hour with CCP Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou at Mao's official private residence, where they discussed a range of issues.

[ 160 ] Mao later told his doctor that he had been impressed by Nixon's forthrightness, unlike the leftists and the Soviets.

[ 160 ] He said he was suspicious of Kissinger, [ 160 ] though the National Security Advisor referred to their meeting as his "encounter with history".

[ 159 ] A formal banquet welcoming the presidential party was given that evening in the Great Hall of the People . The following day, Nixon met with Zhou; the joint communique following this meeting recognized Taiwan as a part of China and looked forward to a peaceful solution to the problem of reunification.

[ 161 ] When not in meetings, Nixon toured architectural wonders, including the Forbidden City , the Ming tombs , and the Great Wall .

[ 159 ] Americans took their first glance into everyday Chinese life through the cameras that accompanied Pat Nixon, who toured the city of Beijing and visited communes, schools, factories, and hospitals.

[ 159 ] The visit ushered in a new era of US–China relations .

[ 139 ] Fearing the possibility of a US–China alliance, the Soviet Union yielded to pressure for détente with the United States.

[ 162 ] This was one component of triangular diplomacy .

[ 163 ] Vietnam War Main articles: Vietnam War , Vietnamization , and Role of the United States in the Vietnam War Nixon delivers an address to the nation about the incursion in Cambodia When Nixon took office, about 300 American soldiers were dying each week in Vietnam, [ 164 ] and the war was widely unpopular in the United States, the subject of ongoing violent protests. The Johnson administration had offered to suspend bombing unconditionally in exchange for negotiations, but to no avail. According to Walter Isaacson, Nixon concluded soon after taking office that the Vietnam War could not be won, and he was determined to end it quickly.

[ 165 ] He sought an arrangement that would permit American forces to withdraw while leaving South Vietnam secure against attack.

[ 166 ] Nixon approved a secret B-52 carpet bombing campaign of North Vietnamese and Khmer Rouge positions in Cambodia beginning in March 1969 and code-named Operation Menu , without the consent of Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk .

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] [ 169 ] In mid-1969, Nixon began efforts to negotiate peace with the North Vietnamese, sending a personal letter to their leaders, and peace talks began in Paris. Initial talks did not result in an agreement, [ 170 ] and in May 1969 he publicly proposed to withdraw all American troops from South Vietnam provided North Vietnam did so, and suggesting South Vietnam hold internationally supervised elections with Viet Cong participation.

[ 171 ] Nixon visits American troops in South Vietnam, July 30, 1969 In July 1969, Nixon visited South Vietnam , where he met with his U.S. military commanders and President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu . Amid protests at home demanding an immediate pullout, he implemented a strategy of replacing American troops with Vietnamese troops , known as " Vietnamization ".

[ 139 ] He soon instituted phased U.S. troop withdrawals, [ 172 ] but also authorized incursions into Laos, in part to interrupt the Ho Chi Minh trail passing through Laos and Cambodia and used to supply North Vietnamese forces. In March 1970, at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge and negotiated by Pol Pot 's then-second-in-command, Nuon Chea , North Vietnamese troops launched an offensive and overran much of Cambodia.

[ 173 ] Nixon announced the ground invasion of Cambodia on April 30, 1970, against North Vietnamese bases in the east of the country, [ 174 ] and further protests erupted against perceived expansion of the conflict, which resulted in Ohio National Guardsmen killing four unarmed students at Kent State University .

[ 175 ] Nixon's responses to protesters included an impromptu, early morning meeting with them at the Lincoln Memorial on May 9, 1970.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] [ 178 ] Nixon's campaign promise to curb the war, contrasted with the escalated bombing, led to claims that Nixon had a " credibility gap " on the issue.

[ 172 ] It is estimated that between 50,000 and 150,000 people were killed during the bombing of Cambodia between 1970 and 1973.

[ 168 ] In 1971, excerpts from the " Pentagon Papers ", which had been leaked by Daniel Ellsberg , were published by The New York Times and The Washington Post . When news of the leak first appeared, Nixon was inclined to do nothing; the Papers, a history of United States' involvement in Vietnam, mostly concerned the lies of prior administrations and contained few real revelations. He was persuaded by Kissinger that the Papers were more harmful than they appeared, and the President tried to prevent publication, but the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the newspapers.

[ 179 ] As U.S. troop withdrawals continued, conscription was phased out by 1973, and the armed forces became all-volunteer.

[ 180 ] After years of fighting, the Paris Peace Accords were signed at the beginning of 1973. The agreement implemented a cease fire and allowed for the withdrawal of remaining American troops without requiring withdrawal of the 160,000 North Vietnam Army regulars located in the South.

[ 181 ] Once American combat support ended, there was a brief truce, before fighting resumed, and North Vietnam conquered South Vietnam in 1975 .

[ 182 ] Latin American policy See also: U.S. intervention in Chile § 1973 coup , and Operation Condor Nixon with Mexican president Gustavo Díaz Ordaz (to his right); motorcade in San Diego, California, September 1970 Nixon had been a firm supporter of Kennedy during the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion and 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis . On taking office in 1969, he stepped up covert operations against Cuba and its president, Fidel Castro . He maintained close relations with the Cuban-American exile community through his friend, Bebe Rebozo , who often suggested ways of irritating Castro. The Soviets and Cubans became concerned, fearing Nixon might attack Cuba and break the understanding between Kennedy and Khrushchev that ended the missile crisis. In August 1970, the Soviets asked Nixon to reaffirm the understanding, which he did, despite his hard line against Castro. The process was not completed before the Soviets began expanding their base at the Cuban port of Cienfuegos in October 1970. A minor confrontation ensued, the Soviets stipulated they would not use Cienfuegos for submarines bearing ballistic missiles, and the final round of diplomatic notes were exchanged in November.

[ 183 ] The election of Marxist candidate Salvador Allende as President of Chile in September 1970 spurred a vigorous campaign of covert opposition to him by Nixon and Kissinger.

[ 184 ] : 25 This began by trying to convince the Chilean congress to confirm Jorge Alessandri as the winner of the election, and then messages to military officers in support of a coup.

[ 184 ] Other support included strikes organized against Allende and funding for Allende opponents. It was even alleged that "Nixon personally authorized" $700,000 in covert funds to print anti-Allende messages in a prominent Chilean newspaper.

[ 184 ] : 93 Following an extended period of social, political, and economic unrest, General Augusto Pinochet assumed power in a violent coup d'état on September 11, 1973; among the dead was Allende .

[ 185 ] Soviet Union Nixon with Brezhnev during the Soviet leader's trip to the U.S., 1973 Nixon used the improving international environment to address the topic of nuclear peace. Following the announcement of his visit to China, the Nixon administration concluded negotiations for him to visit the Soviet Union. The President and First Lady arrived in Moscow on May 22, 1972, and met with Leonid Brezhnev , the general secretary of the Communist Party ; Alexei Kosygin , the Chairman of the Council of Ministers ; and Nikolai Podgorny , the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet , among other leading Soviet officials.

[ 186 ] Nixon engaged in intense negotiations with Brezhnev.

[ 186 ] Out of the summit came agreements for increased trade and two landmark arms control treaties: SALT I , the first comprehensive limitation pact signed by the two superpowers, [ 139 ] and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty , which banned the development of systems designed to intercept incoming missiles. Nixon and Brezhnev proclaimed a new era of "peaceful coexistence". A banquet was held that evening at the Kremlin .

[ 186 ] Nixon and Kissinger planned to link arms control to détente and to the resolution of other urgent problems through what Nixon called " linkage ". David Tal argues: The linkage between strategic arms limitations and outstanding issues such as the Middle East, Berlin and, foremost, Vietnam thus became central to Nixon's and Kissinger's policy of détente. Through the employment of linkage, they hoped to change the nature and course of U.S. foreign policy, including U.S. nuclear disarmament and arms control policy, and to separate them from those practiced by Nixon's predecessors. They also intended, through linkage, to make U.S. arms control policy part of détente ... His policy of linkage had in fact failed. It failed mainly because it was based on flawed assumptions and false premises, the foremost of which was that the Soviet Union wanted strategic arms limitation agreement much more than the United States did.

[ 187 ] Seeking to foster better relations with the United States, China and the Soviet Union both cut back on their diplomatic support for North Vietnam and advised Hanoi to come to terms militarily.

[ 188 ] Nixon later described his strategy: I had long believed that an indispensable element of any successful peace initiative in Vietnam was to enlist, if possible, the help of the Soviets and the Chinese. Though rapprochement with China and détente with the Soviet Union were ends in themselves, I also considered them possible means to hasten the end of the war. At worst, Hanoi was bound to feel less confident if Washington was dealing with Moscow and Beijing. At best, if the two major Communist powers decided that they had bigger fish to fry, Hanoi would be pressured into negotiating a settlement we could accept.

[ 189 ] In 1973, Nixon encouraged the Export-Import Bank to finance in part a trade deal with the Soviet Union in which Armand Hammer 's Occidental Petroleum would export phosphate from Florida to the Soviet Union, and import Soviet ammonia . The deal, valued at $20 billion over 20 years, involved the construction of two major Soviet port facilities at Odessa and Ventspils , [ 190 ] [ 191 ] [ 192 ] and a pipeline connecting four ammonia plants in the greater Volga region to the port at Odessa.

[ 192 ] In 1973, Nixon announced his administration was committed to seeking most favored nation trade status with the USSR, [ 193 ] which was challenged by Congress in the Jackson-Vanik Amendment .

[ 194 ] During the previous two years, Nixon had made considerable progress in U.S.–Soviet relations, and he embarked on a second trip to the Soviet Union in 1974.

[ 195 ] He arrived in Moscow on June 27 to a welcome ceremony, cheering crowds, and a state dinner at the Grand Kremlin Palace that evening.

[ 195 ] Nixon and Brezhnev met in Yalta , where they discussed a proposed mutual defense pact, détente, and MIRVs . Nixon considered proposing a comprehensive test-ban treaty, but he felt he would not have time to complete it during his presidency.

[ 195 ] There were no significant breakthroughs in these negotiations.

[ 195 ] Middle Eastern policy Nixon with Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir , June 1974 Nixon with President Anwar Sadat of Egypt, June 1974 As part of the Nixon Doctrine , the U.S. avoided giving direct combat assistance to its allies and instead gave them assistance to defend themselves. During the Nixon administration, the U.S. greatly increased arms sales to the Middle East, particularly Israel, Iran and Saudi Arabia.

[ 196 ] The Nixon administration strongly supported Israel, an American ally in the Middle East, but the support was not unconditional. Nixon believed Israel should make peace with its Arab neighbors and that the U.S. should encourage it. The president believed that—except during the Suez Crisis —the U.S. had failed to intervene with Israel, and should use the leverage of the large U.S. military aid to Israel to urge the parties to the negotiating table. The Arab-Israeli conflict was not a major focus of Nixon's attention during his first term—for one thing, he felt that no matter what he did, American Jews would oppose his reelection.

[ a ] On October 6, 1973, an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria, supported with arms and materiel by the Soviet Union, attacked Israel in the Yom Kippur War . Israel suffered heavy losses and Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses, cutting through inter-departmental squabbles and bureaucracy and taking personal responsibility for any response by Arab nations. More than a week later, by the time the U.S. and Soviet Union began negotiating a truce , Israel had penetrated deep into enemy territory. The truce negotiations rapidly escalated into a superpower crisis; when Israel gained the upper hand, Egyptian president Sadat requested a joint U.S.–USSR peacekeeping mission, which the U.S. refused. When Soviet Premier Brezhnev threatened to unilaterally enforce any peacekeeping mission militarily, Nixon ordered the U.S. military to DEFCON 3, [ 197 ] placing all U.S. military personnel and bases on alert for nuclear war. This was the closest the world had come to nuclear war since the Cuban Missile Crisis. Brezhnev backed down as a result of Nixon's actions.

[ 198 ] Because Israel's victory was largely due to U.S. support, the Arab OPEC nations retaliated by refusing to sell crude oil to the U.S., resulting in the 1973 oil crisis .

[ 199 ] The embargo caused gasoline shortages and rationing in the United States in late 1973, but was eventually ended by the oil-producing nations as peace in the Middle East took hold.

[ 200 ] After the war, and under Nixon's presidency, the U.S. reestablished relations with Egypt for the first time since 1967. Nixon used the Middle East crisis to restart the stalled Middle East Peace Negotiations ; he wrote in a confidential memo to Kissinger on October 20: I believe that, beyond a doubt, we are now facing the best opportunity we have had in 15 years to build a lasting peace in the Middle East. I am convinced history will hold us responsible if we let this opportunity slip by ... I now consider a permanent Middle East settlement to be the most important final goal to which we must devote ourselves.

[ 201 ] Nixon made one of his final international visits as president to the Middle East in June 1974, and became the first president to visit Israel.

[ 202 ] South Asia policy Nixon with Pakistani president Yahya Khan at the White House,  October 1970 Since 1960s, the United States perceived Pakistan as an integral bulwark against global communism in the Cold War. Nixon was fond of Pakistani president Yahya Khan and according to American journalist Gary Bass , "Nixon liked very few people, but he did like General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan." [ 203 ] During the Bangladesh Liberation War , the United States stood by Pakistan against Bengali nationalists in terms of diplomacy and military threats.

[ 204 ] Nixon urged President Khan multiple times to exercise restraint, [ 205 ] fearing an Indian invasion of Pakistan that would lead to Indian domination of the subcontinent and strengthen the position of the Soviet Union.

[ 206 ] In the wake of the Third India–Pakistan War , Nixon issued a statement blaming Pakistan for starting the conflict and blaming India for escalating it while personally favoring a ceasefire.

[ 207 ] The United States used the threat of an aid cut-off to force Pakistan to back down, while its continued military aid to Islamabad prevented India from launching incursions deeper into the country. Nixon denied getting involved in the situation, saying that it was an internal matter of Pakistan, but when Pakistan's defeat seemed certain, he sent the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise to the Bay of Bengal .

[ 208 ] Domestic policy Economy Further information: Nixon shock and 1970s energy crisis Nixon at the Washington Senators ' 1969 Opening Day with team owner Bob Short (arms folded) and Baseball Commissioner Bowie Kuhn (hand on mouth). Nixon's aide , Major Jack Brennan , sits behind them in uniform At the time Nixon took office in 1969, inflation was at 4.7 percent—its highest rate since the Korean War. The Great Society had been enacted under Johnson, which, together with the Vietnam War costs, was causing large budget deficits. Unemployment was low, but interest rates were at their highest in a century.

[ 209 ] Nixon's major economic goal was to reduce inflation; the most obvious means of doing so was to end the war.

[ 209 ] This could not be accomplished overnight, and the U.S. economy continued to struggle through 1970, contributing to a lackluster Republican performance in the midterm congressional elections (Democrats controlled both Houses of Congress throughout Nixon's presidency).

[ 210 ] According to political economist Nigel Bowles in his 2011 study of Nixon's economic record, the new president did little to alter Johnson's policies through the first year of his presidency.

[ 211 ] Nixon was far more interested in foreign affairs than domestic policies, but he believed that voters tend to focus on their own financial condition and that economic conditions were a threat to his reelection. As part of his " New Federalism " philosophy, he proposed greater local autonomy in the allocation of domestic spending through grants to the states. These proposals were for the most part lost in the congressional budget process. However, Nixon gained political credit for advocating them.

[ 210 ] In 1970, Congress had granted the president the power to impose wage and price freezes, though the Democratic majorities, knowing Nixon had opposed such controls throughout his career, did not expect Nixon to actually use the authority.

[ 211 ] With inflation unresolved by August 1971, and an election year looming, Nixon convened a summit of his economic advisers at Camp David . Nixon's options were to limit fiscal and monetary expansionist policies that reduced unemployment or end the dollar's fixed exchange rate; Nixon's dilemma has been cited as an example of the Impossible trinity in international economics.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] He then announced temporary wage and price controls, allowed the dollar to float against other currencies, and ended the convertibility of the dollar into gold.

[ 214 ] Bowles points out, by identifying himself with a policy whose purpose was inflation's defeat, Nixon made it difficult for Democratic opponents ... to criticize him. His opponents could offer no alternative policy that was either plausible or believable since the one they favored was one they had designed but which the president had appropriated for himself.

[ 211 ] Nixon's policies dampened inflation through 1972, although their aftereffects contributed to inflation during his second term and into the Ford administration.

[ 214 ] Nixon's decision to end the gold standard in the United States led to the collapse of the Bretton Woods system . According to Thomas Oatley, "the Bretton Woods system collapsed so that Nixon might win the 1972 presidential election." [ 212 ] After Nixon won re-election, inflation was returning.

[ 215 ] He reimposed price controls in June 1973. The price controls became unpopular with the public and businesspeople, who saw powerful labor unions as preferable to the price board bureaucracy.

[ 215 ] The controls produced food shortages , as meat disappeared from grocery stores and farmers drowned chickens rather than sell them at a loss.

[ 215 ] Despite the failure to control inflation, controls were slowly ended, and on April 30, 1974, their statutory authorization lapsed.

[ 215 ] Governmental initiatives and organization Nixon gives the 1971 State of the Union Address Official Nixon portrait by James Anthony Wills , c.

1984 Nixon advocated a " New Federalism ", which would devolve power to state and local elected officials, though Congress was hostile to these ideas and enacted few of them.

[ 216 ] He eliminated the Cabinet-level United States Post Office Department , which in 1971 became the government-run United States Postal Service .

[ 217 ] Nixon was a late supporter of the conservation movement . Environmental policy had not been a significant issue in the 1968 election, and the candidates were rarely asked for their views on the subject. Nixon broke new ground by discussing environmental policy in his State of the Union speech in 1970. He saw that the first Earth Day in April 1970 presaged a wave of voter interest on the subject, and sought to use that to his benefit; in June he announced the formation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

[ 218 ] He relied on his domestic advisor John Ehrlichman , who favored protection of natural resources, to keep him "out of trouble on environmental issues." [ 219 ] Other initiatives supported by Nixon included the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and the National Environmental Policy Act required environmental impact statements for many Federal projects.

[ 219 ] [ 218 ] Nixon vetoed the Clean Water Act of 1972—objecting not to the policy goals of the legislation but to the amount of money to be spent on them, which he deemed excessive. After Congress overrode his veto, Nixon impounded the funds he deemed unjustifiable.

[ 220 ] In 1971, Nixon proposed health insurance reform—a private health insurance employer mandate, [ b ] federalization of Medicaid for poor families with dependent minor children, [ 221 ] and support for health maintenance organizations (HMOs).

[ 222 ] A limited HMO bill was enacted in 1973.

[ 222 ] In 1974, Nixon proposed more comprehensive health insurance reform—a private health insurance employer mandate [ b ] and replacement of Medicaid by state-run health insurance plans available to all, with income-based premiums and cost sharing .

[ 223 ] Nixon was concerned about the prevalence of domestic drug use in addition to drug use among American soldiers in Vietnam. He called for a war on drugs and pledged to cut off sources of supply abroad. He also increased funds for education and for rehabilitation facilities.

[ 224 ] As one policy initiative, Nixon called for more money for sickle-cell research, treatment, and education in February 1971 [ 225 ] and signed the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act on May 16, 1972.

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] [ c ] While Nixon called for increased spending on such high-profile items as sickle-cell disease and for a war on cancer , at the same time he sought to reduce overall spending at the National Institutes of Health .

[ 228 ] Civil rights Graph of increases in U.S. incarceration rate The Nixon presidency witnessed the first large-scale integration of public schools in the South.

[ 229 ] Nixon sought a middle way between the segregationist Wallace and liberal Democrats, whose support of integration was alienating some Southern whites.

[ 230 ] Hopeful of doing well in the South in 1972, he sought to dispose of desegregation as a political issue before then. Soon after his inauguration, he appointed Vice President Agnew to lead a task force, which worked with local leaders—both white and black—to determine how to integrate local schools. Agnew had little interest in the work, and most of it was done by Labor Secretary George Shultz . Federal aid was available, and a meeting with President Nixon was a possible reward for compliant committees. By September 1970, less than ten percent of black children were attending segregated schools. By 1971, however, tensions over desegregation surfaced in Northern cities, with angry protests over the busing of children to schools outside their neighborhood to achieve racial balance. Nixon opposed busing personally but enforced court orders requiring its use.

[ 231 ] Some scholars, such as James Morton Turner and John Isenberg, believe that Nixon, who had advocated for civil rights in his 1960 campaign, slowed down desegregation as president, appealing to the racial conservatism of Southern whites, who were angered by the civil rights movement . This, he hoped, would boost his election chances in 1972.

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] In addition to desegregating public schools, Nixon implemented the Philadelphia Plan in 1970—the first significant federal affirmative action program.

[ 234 ] He also endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment after it passed both houses of Congress in 1972 and went to the states for ratification.

[ 235 ] He also pushed for African American civil rights and economic equity through a concept known as black capitalism.

[ 236 ] Nixon had campaigned as an ERA supporter in 1968, though feminists criticized him for doing little to help the ERA or their cause after his election. Nevertheless, he appointed more women to administration positions than Lyndon Johnson had.

[ 237 ] Space policy Further information: Space policy of the United States Nixon visiting the Apollo 11 astronauts in quarantine aboard the aircraft carrier USS Hornet After a nearly decade-long national effort , the United States won the race to land astronauts on the Moon on July 20, 1969, with the flight of Apollo 11 . Nixon spoke with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin during their moonwalk. He called the conversation "the most historic phone call ever made from the White House".

[ 238 ] Nixon was unwilling to keep funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) at the high level seen during the 1960s as NASA prepared to send men to the Moon. NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine drew up ambitious plans for the establishment of a permanent base on the Moon by the end of the 1970s and the launch of a crewed expedition to Mars as early as 1981. Nixon rejected both proposals due to the expense.

[ 239 ] Nixon also canceled the Air Force Manned Orbital Laboratory program in 1969, because uncrewed spy satellites were a more cost-effective way to achieve the same reconnaissance objective.

[ 240 ] NASA cancelled the last three planned Apollo lunar missions to place Skylab in orbit more efficiently and free money up for the design and construction of the Space Shuttle .

[ 241 ] On May 24, 1972, Nixon approved a five-year cooperative program between NASA and the Soviet space program , culminating in the 1975 joint mission of an American Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft linking in space.

[ 242 ] Reelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation 1972 presidential campaign Main articles: Richard Nixon 1972 presidential campaign and 1972 United States presidential election Results of the 1972 presidential election . Nixon won 520 electoral college votes (60.7% of the popular vote) to George McGovern 's 17.

Nixon believed his rise to power had peaked at a moment of political realignment . The Democratic " Solid South " had long been a source of frustration to Republican ambitions. Goldwater had won several Southern states by opposing the Civil Rights Act of 1964 but had alienated more moderate Southerners. Nixon's efforts to gain Southern support in 1968 were diluted by Wallace's candidacy. Through his first term, he pursued a Southern Strategy with policies, such as his desegregation plans, that would be broadly acceptable among Southern whites, encouraging them to realign with the Republicans in the aftermath of the civil rights movement . He nominated two Southern conservatives, Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell , to the Supreme Court, but neither was confirmed by the Senate.

[ 243 ] Nixon entered his name on the New Hampshire primary ballot on January 5, 1972, effectively announcing his candidacy for reelection.

[ 244 ] Virtually assured the Republican nomination, [ 245 ] the President had initially expected his Democratic opponent to be Massachusetts senator Ted Kennedy (brother of the late president ), who was largely removed from contention after the July 1969 Chappaquiddick incident .

[ 246 ] Instead, Maine senator Edmund Muskie became the front runner, with South Dakota senator George McGovern in a close second place.

[ 244 ] On June 10, McGovern won the California primary and secured the Democratic nomination.

[ 247 ] The following month, Nixon was renominated at the 1972 Republican National Convention . He dismissed the Democratic platform as cowardly and divisive.

[ 248 ] McGovern intended to sharply reduce defense spending [ 249 ] and supported amnesty for draft evaders as well as abortion rights . With some of his supporters believed to be in favor of drug legalization, McGovern was perceived as standing for "amnesty, abortion and acid". McGovern was also damaged by his vacillating support for his original running mate, Missouri senator Thomas Eagleton , dumped from the ticket following revelations that he had received electroshock treatment for depression .

[ 250 ] [ 251 ] Nixon was ahead in most polls for the entire election cycle, and was reelected on November 7, 1972, in one of the largest landslide election victories in American history . He defeated McGovern with over 60 percent of the popular vote, losing only in Massachusetts and D.C.

[ 252 ] Watergate Main articles: Watergate scandal and Impeachment process against Richard Nixon Nixon takes questions at 1973 press conference The term Watergate has come to encompass an array of clandestine and often illegal activities undertaken by members of the Nixon administration. Those activities included "dirty tricks", such as bugging the offices of political opponents, and the harassment of activist groups and political figures. The activities were brought to light after five men were caught breaking into the Democratic party headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington, D.C., on June 17, 1972.

The Washington Post picked up on the story; reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward relied on an informant known as " Deep Throat "—later revealed to be Mark Felt , associate director at the FBI —to link the men to the Nixon administration. Nixon downplayed the scandal as mere politics, calling news articles biased and misleading. A series of revelations made it clear that the Committee to Re-elect President Nixon , and later the White House, were involved in attempts to sabotage the Democrats. Senior aides such as White House Counsel John Dean faced prosecution; in total 48 officials were convicted of wrongdoing.

[ 139 ] [ 253 ] [ 254 ] Demonstrator demands impeachment , October 1973 On November 17, 1973, President Nixon held a press conference at Disney's Contemporary Resort and famously said "I'm not a crook" In July 1973, White House aide Alexander Butterfield testified under oath to Congress that Nixon had a secret taping system and recorded his conversations and phone calls in the Oval Office.

These tapes were subpoenaed by Watergate Special Counsel Archibald Cox ; Nixon provided transcripts of the conversations but not the actual tapes, citing executive privilege . With the White House and Cox at loggerheads, Nixon had Cox fired in October in the " Saturday Night Massacre "; he was replaced by Leon Jaworski . In November, Nixon's lawyers revealed that a tape of conversations held in the White House on June 20, 1972, had an 18 + 1 ⁄ 2 minute gap.

[ 254 ] Rose Mary Woods , the President's personal secretary, claimed responsibility for the gap, saying that she had accidentally wiped the section while transcribing the tape, but her story was widely mocked. The gap, while not conclusive proof of wrongdoing by the President, cast doubt on Nixon's statement that he had been unaware of the cover-up.

[ 255 ] Though Nixon lost much popular support, even from his own party, he rejected accusations of wrongdoing and vowed to stay in office.

[ 254 ] He admitted he had made mistakes but insisted he had no prior knowledge of the burglary, did not break any laws, and did not learn of the cover-up until early 1973.

[ 256 ] On October 10, 1973, Vice President Agnew resigned for reasons unrelated to Watergate: he was convicted on charges of bribery, tax evasion and money laundering during his tenure as governor of Maryland. Believing his first choice, John Connally , would not be confirmed by Congress, [ 257 ] Nixon chose Gerald Ford , Minority Leader of the House of Representatives , to replace Agnew.

[ 258 ] One researcher suggests Nixon effectively disengaged from his own administration after Ford was sworn in as vice president on December 6, 1973.

[ 259 ] On November 17, 1973, during a televised question-and-answer session [ 260 ] with 400 Associated Press managing editors , Nixon said, "People have got to know whether or not their president is a crook. Well, I'm not a crook. I've earned everything I've got." [ 261 ] Nixon announces the release of edited transcripts of the Watergate tapes, April 29, 1974 The legal battle over the tapes continued through early 1974, and in April Nixon announced the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between himself and his aides. The House Judiciary Committee opened impeachment hearings against the President on May 9, 1974, which were televised on the major TV networks. These hearings culminated in votes for impeachment.

[ 256 ] On July 24, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the full tapes, not just selected transcripts, must be released.

[ 262 ] The scandal grew to involve a slew of additional allegations against the President, ranging from the improper use of government agencies to accepting gifts in office and his personal finances and taxes; Nixon repeatedly stated his willingness to pay any outstanding taxes due, and later paid $465,000 (equivalent to $3 million in 2024) in back taxes in 1974.

[ 263 ] Nixon Oval Office meeting with H. R. Haldeman: the "Smoking Gun" Conversation, June 23, 1972 ( Full Transcript ) Even with support diminished by the continuing series of revelations, Nixon hoped to fight the charges. But one of the new tapes, recorded soon after the break-in, demonstrated that Nixon had been told of the White House connection to the Watergate burglaries soon after they took place, and had approved plans to thwart the investigation. In a statement accompanying the release of what became known as the "Smoking Gun Tape" on August 5, 1974, Nixon accepted blame for misleading the country about when he had been told of White House involvement, stating that he had had a lapse of memory.

[ 264 ] Senate Minority Leader Hugh Scott , Senator Barry Goldwater , and House Minority Leader John Jacob Rhodes met with Nixon soon after. Rhodes told Nixon he faced certain impeachment in the House. Scott and Goldwater told the president that he had, at most, only 15 votes in his favor in the Senate, far fewer than the 34 needed to avoid removal from office.

[ 265 ] Resignation Further information: Richard Nixon's resignation speech Nixon leaving the White House on Marine One shortly before his resignation became effective on August 9, 1974 President Nixon's resignation speech On August 8, 1974, facing a loss of political support and it being increasingly certain that he would be impeached and removed from office, Nixon addressed the nation on television , announcing that he would resign the presidency the following day, on August 9.

[ 256 ] His resignation speech was delivered from the Oval Office and was carried live on radio and television. Nixon said he was resigning for the good of the country and asked the nation to support the new president, Gerald Ford . Nixon went on to review the accomplishments of his presidency , especially in foreign policy.

[ 266 ] In defending his presidency, Nixon quoted " Citizenship in a Republic ", a 1910 speech by Theodore Roosevelt : Sometimes I have succeeded and sometimes I have failed, but always I have taken heart from what Theodore Roosevelt once said about the man in the arena, "whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs and comes up short again and again because there is not effort without error and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do the deed, who knows the great enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievements and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly".

[ 267 ] Nixon's speech received generally favorable initial responses from network commentators, with only Roger Mudd of CBS News criticizing it for failing to admit wrongdoing.

[ 268 ] Conrad Black , a Nixon biographer, labeled the resignation speech "a masterpiece", saying, "What was intended to be an unprecedented humiliation for any American president, Nixon converted into a virtual parliamentary acknowledgement of almost blameless insufficiency of legislative support to continue. He left while devoting half his address to a recitation of his accomplishments in office." [ 269 ] Post-presidency (1974–1994) Pardon and illness Further information: Pardon of Richard Nixon President Ford announcing his decision to pardon Nixon, September 8, 1974, in the Oval Office Following his resignation, the Nixons flew to their home La Casa Pacifica in San Clemente, California .

[ 270 ] According to his biographer, Jonathan Aitken , "Nixon was a soul in torment" after his resignation.

[ 271 ] Congress had funded Nixon's transition costs, including some salary expenses, though reducing the appropriation from $850,000 to $200,000. With some of his staff still with him, Nixon was at his desk by 7:00 a.m. with little to do.

[ 271 ] His former press secretary, Ron Ziegler , sat with him alone for hours each day.

[ 272 ] Nixon's resignation had not put an end to the desire among many to see him punished. The Ford White House considered a pardon of Nixon, even though it would be unpopular in the country. Nixon, contacted by Ford emissaries, was initially reluctant to accept the pardon, but then agreed to do so. Ford insisted on a statement of contrition, but Nixon felt he had not committed any crimes and should not have to issue such a document. Ford eventually agreed and, on September 8, 1974, he granted Nixon a "full, free, and absolute pardon", which ended any possibility of an indictment. Nixon then released a statement: I was wrong in not acting more decisively and more forthrightly in dealing with Watergate, particularly when it reached the stage of judicial proceedings and grew from a political scandal into a national tragedy. No words can describe the depth of my regret and pain at the anguish my mistakes over Watergate have caused the nation and the presidency, a nation I so deeply love, and an institution I so greatly respect.

[ 273 ] [ 274 ] In October 1974, Nixon fell ill with phlebitis . Told by his doctors that he could either be operated on or die, a reluctant Nixon chose surgery, and President Ford visited him in the hospital. Nixon was under subpoena for the trial of three of his former aides—Dean, Haldeman, and John Ehrlichman —and The Washington Post , disbelieving his illness, printed a cartoon showing Nixon with a cast on the "wrong foot". Judge John Sirica excused Nixon's presence despite the defendants' objections.

[ 275 ] Congress instructed Ford to retain Nixon's presidential papers—beginning a three-decade legal battle over the documents that was eventually won by the former president and his estate.

[ 276 ] Nixon was in the hospital when the 1974 midterm elections were held, and Watergate and the pardon were contributing factors to the Republican loss of 49 seats in the House and four in the Senate.

[ 277 ] Return to public life President Jimmy Carter and ex-presidents Gerald Ford and Nixon meet at the White House before former vice president Hubert Humphrey 's funeral, 1978 In December 1974, Nixon began planning his comeback despite the considerable ill will against him in the country. He wrote in his diary, referring to himself and Pat, So be it. We will see it through. We've had tough times before and we can take the tougher ones that we will have to go through now. That is perhaps what we were made for—to be able to take punishment beyond what anyone in this office has had before particularly after leaving office. This is a test of character and we must not fail the test.

[ 278 ] By early 1975, Nixon's health was improving. He maintained an office in a Coast Guard station 300 yards (270 m) from his home, at first taking a golf cart and later walking the route each day; he mainly worked on his memoirs.

[ 279 ] He had hoped to wait before writing his memoirs; the fact that his assets were being eaten away by expenses and lawyer fees compelled him to begin work quickly.

[ 280 ] He was handicapped in this work by the end of his transition allowance in February, which compelled him to part with many of his staff, including Ziegler.

[ 281 ] In August of that year, he met with British talk-show host and producer David Frost , who paid him $600,000 (equivalent to $3.5 million in 2024) for a series of sit-down interviews , filmed and aired in 1977.

[ 282 ] They began on the topic of foreign policy, recounting the leaders he had known, but the most remembered section of the interviews was that on Watergate. Nixon admitted he had "let down the country" and that "I brought myself down. I gave them a sword and they stuck it in. And they twisted it with relish. And, I guess, if I'd been in their position, I'd have done the same thing." [ 283 ] The interviews garnered 45–50 million viewers—becoming the most-watched program of its kind in television history.

[ 284 ] The interviews helped improve Nixon's financial position—at one point in early 1975 he had had only $500 in the bank—as did the sale of his Key Biscayne property to a trust set up by wealthy friends of Nixon, such as Bebe Rebozo .

[ 285 ] In February 1976, Nixon visited China at the personal invitation of Mao. Nixon had wanted to return to China but chose to wait until after Ford's own visit in 1975.

[ 286 ] Nixon remained neutral in the close 1976 primary battle between Ford and Reagan. Ford won, but was defeated by Georgia governor Jimmy Carter in the general election . The Carter administration had little use for Nixon and blocked his planned trip to Australia, causing the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser to withhold its official invitation.

[ 287 ] In 1976, Nixon was disbarred by the New York State Bar Association for obstruction of justice in the Watergate affair. He chose not to present any defense.

[ 288 ] In early 1978, he visited the United Kingdom; there, he was shunned by American diplomats, most ministers of the James Callaghan government, and two former prime ministers, Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath . He was welcomed, however, by the Leader of the Opposition , Margaret Thatcher , and former prime ministers Lord Home and Sir Harold Wilson . Nixon addressed the Oxford Union regarding Watergate: [Some people] felt that on this matter that I had not handled it properly, and they were right. I screwed it up and I paid the price.

[ 289 ] [ 290 ] Author and elder statesman President Ronald Reagan meets with his three immediate predecessors, Gerald Ford , Jimmy Carter and Nixon, at the White House, October 1981; the three former presidents would represent the United States at the funeral of Egyptian president Anwar Sadat .

In 1978, Nixon published his memoirs, RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon , the first of nine books he was to author in his retirement.

[ 270 ] John A. Farrell deemed it one of the better presidential memoirs, candid and capturing its author's voice; he deemed its rise up the bestseller lists justified.

[ 291 ] Nixon visited the White House in 1979, invited by Carter for the state dinner for Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping . Carter had not wanted to invite Nixon, but Deng had said he would visit Nixon in California if the former president was not invited. Nixon had a private meeting with Deng and visited Beijing again in mid-1979.

[ 292 ] On August 10, 1979, the Nixons purchased a 12‐room condominium occupying the seventh floor of 817 Fifth Avenue New York City [ 293 ] after being rejected by two Manhattan co-ops .

[ 294 ] When the deposed Shah of Iran died in Egypt in July 1980, Nixon defied the State Department, which intended to send no U.S. representative, by attending the funeral. Though Nixon had no official credentials, as a former president he was seen as the American presence at its former ally's funeral.

[ 295 ] Nixon supported Ronald Reagan for president in 1980 , making television appearances portraying himself as, in biographer Stephen Ambrose's words, "the senior statesman above the fray".

[ 296 ] He wrote guest articles for many publications both during the campaign and after Reagan's victory.

[ 297 ] After 18 months in the New York City townhouse, Nixon and his wife moved in 1981 to Saddle River , New Jersey.

[ 270 ] Throughout the 1980s, Nixon maintained an ambitious schedule of speaking engagements and writing, [ 270 ] traveled, and met with many foreign leaders, especially those of Third World countries. He joined former presidents Ford and Carter as representatives of the United States at the funeral of Egyptian president Anwar Sadat .

[ 270 ] On a trip to the Middle East, Nixon made his views known regarding Saudi Arabia and Libya, which attracted significant U.S. media attention; The Washington Post ran stories on Nixon's "rehabilitation".

[ 298 ] Nixon visited the Soviet Union in 1986 and on his return sent President Reagan a lengthy memorandum containing foreign policy suggestions and his personal impressions of Soviet general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev .

[ 270 ] Following this trip, Nixon was ranked in a Gallup poll as one of the ten most admired men in the world.

[ 299 ] Nixon with President Bill Clinton in the residence of the White House, March 1993 In 1986, Nixon addressed a convention of newspaper publishers, impressing his audience with his tour d'horizon of the world.

[ 300 ] At the time, political pundit Elizabeth Drew wrote, "Even when he was wrong, Nixon still showed that he knew a great deal and had a capacious memory, as well as the capacity to speak with apparent authority, enough to impress people who had little regard for him in earlier times." [ 300 ] Newsweek ran a story on "Nixon's comeback" with the headline "He's back".

[ 301 ] On July 19, 1990, the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, California , opened as a private institution with the Nixons in attendance. They were joined by a large crowd of people, including Presidents Ford, Reagan, and George H. W. Bush , as well as their wives, Betty , Nancy , and Barbara .

[ 302 ] In January 1994, the former president founded the Nixon Center (today the Center for the National Interest ), a Washington policy think tank and conference center.

[ 303 ] [ 304 ] Pat Nixon died on June 22, 1993, of emphysema and lung cancer . Her funeral services were held on the grounds of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace. Former president Nixon was distraught throughout the interment and delivered a tribute to her inside the library building.

[ 305 ] Death and funeral Main article: Death and state funeral of Richard Nixon Five U.S. presidents (then-incumbent president Bill Clinton , George H. W. Bush , Ronald Reagan , Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford ) and their wives attending Nixon's funeral, April 27, 1994 Nixon suffered a severe stroke on April 18, 1994, while preparing to eat dinner in his home at Park Ridge , New Jersey.

[ 306 ] A blood clot resulting from the atrial fibrillation he had suffered for many years had formed in his upper heart, broken off , and traveled to his brain.

[ 307 ] He was taken to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan , initially alert but unable to speak or to move his right arm or leg.

[ 306 ] Damage to the brain caused swelling ( cerebral edema ) and Nixon slipped into a deep coma. He died at 9:08 p.m. on April 22, 1994, with his daughters at his bedside. He was 81 years old.

[ 306 ] Nixon's funeral took place on April 27, 1994, in Yorba Linda, California . Eulogists at the Nixon Library ceremony included President Bill Clinton , former secretary of state Henry Kissinger , Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole , California governor Pete Wilson , and the Reverend Billy Graham . Also in attendance were former presidents Ford, Carter, Reagan, George H. W. Bush and their wives.

[ 308 ] Richard Nixon was buried beside his wife Pat on the grounds of the Nixon Library. In keeping with his wishes, his funeral was not a full state funeral , though his body did lie in repose in the Nixon Library lobby from April 26 to the morning of the funeral service.

[ 309 ] Mourners waited in line for up to eight hours in chilly, wet weather to pay their respects.

[ 310 ] At its peak, the line to pass by Nixon's casket was three miles long with an estimated 42,000 people waiting.

[ 311 ] John F. Stacks of Time magazine said of Nixon shortly after his death, An outsize energy and determination drove him on to recover and rebuild after every self-created disaster that he faced. To reclaim a respected place in American public life after his resignation, he kept traveling and thinking and talking to the world's leaders ... and by the time Bill Clinton came to the White House [in 1993], Nixon had virtually cemented his role as an elder statesman. Clinton, whose wife served on the staff of the committee that voted to impeach Nixon, met openly with him and regularly sought his advice.

[ 312 ] Tom Wicker of The New York Times noted that Nixon had been equalled only by Franklin Roosevelt in being five times nominated on a major party ticket and, quoting Nixon's 1962 farewell speech, wrote, Richard Nixon's jowly, beard-shadowed face, the ski-jump nose and the widow's peak, the arms upstretched in the V-sign, had been so often pictured and caricatured, his presence had become such a familiar one in the land, he had been so often in the heat of controversy, that it was hard to realize the nation really would not "have Nixon to kick around anymore".

[ 313 ] Ambrose said of the reaction to Nixon's death, "To everyone's amazement, except his, he's our beloved elder statesman." [ 314 ] The graves of Nixon and his wife Pat Upon Nixon's death, the news coverage mentioned Watergate and the resignation but much of the coverage was favorable to the former president.

The Dallas Morning News stated, "History ultimately should show that despite his flaws, he was one of our most farsighted chief executives." [ 315 ] This offended some; columnist Russell Baker complained of "a group conspiracy to grant him absolution".

[ 316 ] Cartoonist Jeff Koterba of the Omaha World-Herald depicted History before a blank canvas, his subject Nixon, as America looks on eagerly. The artist urges his audience to sit down; the work will take some time to complete, as "this portrait is a little more complicated than most".

[ 317 ] Hunter S. Thompson wrote a scathing piece denouncing Nixon for Rolling Stone , entitled "He Was a Crook" (which also appeared a month later in The Atlantic ).

[ 318 ] In his article, Thompson described Nixon as "a political monster straight out of Grendel and a very dangerous enemy".

[ 318 ] Legacy Main article: List of awards and honors received by Richard Nixon Richard Nixon's Presidential Library and Museum located in Yorba Linda, California This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Historian and political scientist James MacGregor Burns asked of Nixon, "How can one evaluate such an idiosyncratic president, so brilliant and so morally lacking?" [ 319 ] Evaluations of his presidency have proven complex, contrasting his presidency's domestic and foreign policy successes with the acrimonious circumstances of his departure.

[ 319 ] According to Ambrose, "Nixon wanted to be judged by what he accomplished. What he will be remembered for is the nightmare he put the country through in his second term and for his resignation." [ 320 ] Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional career, suggests, "He was remarkable among his congressional peers, a success story in a troubled era, one who steered a sensible anti-Communist course against the excess of McCarthy." [ 321 ] Aitken feels that "Nixon, both as a man and as a statesman, has been excessively maligned for his faults and inadequately recognised for his virtues. Yet even in a spirit of historical revisionism , no simple verdict is possible." [ 322 ] Nixon saw his policies on Vietnam, China and the Soviet Union as central to his place in history.

[ 196 ] Nixon's onetime opponent George McGovern commented in 1983, "President Nixon probably had a more practical approach to the two superpowers, China and the Soviet Union, than any other president since World War II ... With the exception of his inexcusable continuation of the war in Vietnam, Nixon really will get high marks in history." [ 323 ] Political scientist Jussi Hanhimäki disagrees, saying that Nixon's diplomacy was merely a continuation of the Cold War policy of containment by diplomatic, rather than military, means.

[ 196 ] Historian Christopher Andrew concludes that "Nixon was a great statesman on the world stage as well as a shabby practitioner of electoral politics in the domestic arena. While the criminal farce of Watergate was in the making, Nixon's inspirational statesmanship was establishing new working relationships both with Communist China and with the Soviet Union." [ 324 ] Nixon's stance on domestic affairs has been credited with the passage and enforcement of environmental and regulatory legislation. In a 2011 paper on Nixon and the environment, historian Paul Charles Milazzo points to Nixon's creation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and to his enforcement of legislation such as the 1973 Endangered Species Act , stating that "though unsought and unacknowledged, Richard Nixon's environmental legacy is secure".

[ 325 ] Nixon himself did not consider the environmental advances he made in office an important part of his legacy; some historians contend that his choices were driven more by political expediency than any strong environmentalism .

[ 219 ] Some historians say Nixon's Southern Strategy turned the Southern United States into a Republican stronghold, while others deem economic factors more important in the change.

[ 243 ] Throughout his career, Nixon moved his party away from the control of isolationists, and as a Congressman he was a persuasive advocate of containing Soviet communism.

[ 326 ] Historian Keith W. Olson has written that Nixon left a legacy of fundamental mistrust of government, rooted in Vietnam and Watergate.

[ 327 ] During the impeachment of Bill Clinton in 1998, both sides tried to use Nixon and Watergate to their advantage: Republicans suggested that Clinton's misconduct was comparable to Nixon's, while Democrats contended that Nixon's actions had been far more serious than Clinton's.

[ 328 ] For a time, there was a decrease in the power of the presidency as Congress passed restrictive legislation in the wake of Watergate. Olson suggests that legislation in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks restored the president's power.

[ 327 ] According to his biographer Herbert Parmet, "Nixon's role was to steer the Republican party along a middle course, somewhere between the competitive impulses of the Rockefellers, the Goldwaters, and the Reagans." [ 329 ] A self-described "progressive conservative," [ 330 ] [ 331 ] Nixon presided over a number of activist governmental initiatives during the course of his presidency. As one speechwriter said of Nixon, "His heart was on the right, and his head was, with FDR, 'slightly left of center.

' " [ 332 ] Commenting on Nixon's progressive conservative approach to government, one historian has argued that Nixon's progressive conservatism gave his administration's policies a distinctive cast that defied easy categorization. Nixon worked hard to find a middle ground between the hyperactivism of the growth liberals JFK and LBJ and the sort of minimalist government championed by Barry Goldwater and the Republican right. Driven by his own predilections and by the object lesson of growth liberalism's implosion, Nixon moved as president to scale back government undertakings abroad and at home while still honoring basic international and domestic commitments.

[ 333 ] Personality and public image Nixon's career was frequently dogged by his persona and the public's perception of it. Editorial cartoonists and comedians often exaggerated his appearance and mannerisms, to the point where the line between the human and the caricature became increasingly blurred. He was often portrayed with unshaven jowls, slumped shoulders and a furrowed, sweaty brow.

[ 334 ] Nixon with Elvis Presley in December 1970 Nixon had a complex personality, both very secretive and awkward, yet strikingly reflective about himself. He was inclined to distance himself from people and was formal in all aspects, wearing a coat and tie even when home alone.

[ 335 ] Nixon biographer Conrad Black described him as being "driven" though also "uneasy with himself in some ways".

[ 336 ] According to Black, Nixon thought that he was doomed to be traduced, double-crossed, unjustly harassed, misunderstood, underappreciated, and subjected to the trials of Job , but that by the application of his mighty will, tenacity, and diligence, he would ultimately prevail.

[ 337 ] 1960 campaign button Nixon sometimes drank alcohol to excess, especially during 1970. He also was prescribed sleeping pills. According to Ray Price , Nixon sometimes took them in together. Nixon also took dilantin , recommended by Jack Dreyfus . That medicine is usually prescribed to treat and prevent seizures, but in Nixon's case it was for depression. His periodic overindulgences, especially during stressful times such as during Apollo 13 , concerned Price and others, including then-advisor Ehrlichman and long-time valet Manolo Sanchez .

[ 338 ] Author David Owen deemed Nixon an alcoholic .

[ 339 ] [ 340 ] Biographer Elizabeth Drew summarized Nixon as a "smart, talented man, but most peculiar and haunted of presidents".

[ 341 ] In his account of the Nixon presidency, author Richard Reeves described Nixon as "a strange man of uncomfortable shyness, who functioned best alone with his thoughts".

[ 342 ] Nixon's presidency was doomed by his personality, Reeves argues: He assumed the worst in people and he brought out the worst in them ... He clung to the idea of being "tough". He thought that was what had brought him to the edge of greatness. But that was what betrayed him. He could not open himself to other men and he could not open himself to greatness.

[ 343 ] In October 1999, a volume of 1971 White House audio tapes was released which contained multiple statements by Nixon deemed derogatory toward Jews.

[ 344 ] In one conversation with H. R. Haldeman , Nixon said that Washington was "full of Jews" and that "most Jews are disloyal", making exceptions for some of his top aides.

[ 345 ] He then added, "But, Bob, generally speaking, you can't trust the bastards. They turn on you. Am I wrong or right?" [ 345 ] Elsewhere on the 1971 recordings, Nixon denies being antisemitic, saying, "If anybody who's been in this chair ever had reason to be antisemitic, I did ... And I'm not, you know what I mean?" [ 345 ] Nixon believed that putting distance between himself and other people was necessary for him as he advanced in his political career and became president. Even Bebe Rebozo , by some accounts his closest friend, did not call him by his first name. Nixon said of this, Even with close friends, I don't believe in letting your hair down, confiding this and that and the other thing—saying, "Gee, I couldn't sleep ..." I believe you should keep your troubles to yourself. That's just the way I am. Some people are different. Some people think it's good therapy to sit with a close friend and, you know, just spill your guts ... [and] reveal their inner psyche—whether they were breast-fed or bottle-fed. Not me. No way.

[ 346 ] When Nixon was told that most Americans felt they did not know him even at the end of his career, he replied, "Yeah, it's true. And it's not necessary for them to know." [ 346 ] Books External videos Part One of Booknotes interview with Nixon on Seize the Moment , February 23, 1992 Part Two of Booknotes interview, March 1, 1992 Nixon, Richard M. (1960).

Six Crises . Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-00125-0 .

Nixon, Richard M. (1978).

RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-70741-5 .

Nixon, Richard M. (1980).

The Real War . Sidgwick & Jackson Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-283-98650-5 .

Nixon, Richard M. (1982).

Leaders . Random House ISBN 978-0-446-51249-7 .

Nixon, Richard M. (1984).

Real Peace . Sidgwick & Jackson Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-283-99076-2 .

Nixon, Richard M. (1987).

No More Vietnams . Arbor House Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-87795-668-6 .

Nixon, Richard M. (1988).

1999: Victory Without War . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-62712-6 .

Nixon, Richard M. (1990).

In the Arena: A Memoir of Victory, Defeat, and Renewal . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-72318-7 .

Nixon, Richard M. (1992).

Seize the Moment: America's Challenge in a One-Superpower World . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-74343-7 .

Nixon, Richard M. (1994).

Beyond Peace . Random House.

ISBN 978-0-679-43323-1 .

See also Cultural depictions of Richard Nixon Electoral history of Richard Nixon List of presidents of the United States List of presidents of the United States by previous experience Nixon , film, 1995 Presidential transition of Richard Nixon Timeline of the Watergate scandal Notes ^ Black , pp. 583–585. In 1972, Nixon did more than double his percentage of the Jewish vote, from 17 percent to 35 percent.

Merkley , p.

68 .

^ a b Voluntary for employees ^ See especially page 2 (after introductory material) in which a bar graph displays NHLBI funding for sickle cell research from FY 1972 through FY 2001, totaling $923 million for these thirty years, starting at $10 million for 1972, then about $15 million a year through 1976, about $20 million for 1977, etc.

References Citations ^ "Richard Nixon in the U.S. Census Records" .

National Archives . August 15, 2016.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved August 31, 2022 .

^ a b "Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum" (PDF) . September 21, 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2015.

^ NPS, Nixon Birthplace .

^ Ferris , p. 209.

^ Reitwiesner, William Addams .

"The Ancestors of Senator John Forbes Kerry (b. 1943)" .

Archived from the original on April 27, 2019 . Retrieved August 31, 2016 .

^ Nixon Library, Childhood .

^ Aitken , p. 11.

^ Aitken , p. 12.

^ Aitken , p. 21.

^ Paul Carter (January 9, 2023).

"Whittier to the White House" .

^ Paul Carter (January 9, 2023).

"Whittier to the White House" .

^ Ambrose 1987 , p. 41.

^ Aitken , p. 27.

^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 56–57.

^ Black , p. 16.

^ Morris , p. 89.

^ Black , pp. 17–19.

^ Morris , p. 91.

^ Morris , p. 92.

^ a b Aitken , p. 28.

^ Black , pp. 20–23.

^ Black , pp. 23–24.

^ Gellman , p. 15.

^ Black , pp. 24–25.

^ Ambrose 1987 , p. 61.

^ Aitken , pp. 58–63.

^ a b c d e Nixon Library, Student & Sailor .

^ "Richard M. Nixon's '34 100th birthday celebrated" .

Whittier College . January 9, 2013 . Retrieved March 29, 2024 .

^ a b Ambrose 1987 , pp. 33–34.

^ Aitken , p. 67.

^ Parmet , p. 81.

^ Nixon Library, Family Collection Guide .

^ Wang, Audrey (January 9, 2025).

"Richard Nixon, the Blue Devil: The making of the only Duke alumnus to become president of the United States" .

Duke Chronicle . Retrieved March 31, 2025 .

^ Aitken , p. 76.

^ Keith Durflinger (August 29, 2017).

"Historic Whittier bank building was President Nixon's law office at one time" . Whittier Daily News.

^ Aitken , pp. 79–82.

^ a b Morris , p. 193.

^ Black , p. 44.

^ Black , p. 43.

^ "Dick Nixon's Orange County" .

OC Weekly . August 5, 1999.

Archived from the original on November 30, 2024 . Retrieved October 14, 2024 .

^ Nixon 1978 , p. 23.

^ Farrell , pp. 385–393.

^ Farrell , pp. 37, 402.

^ Nixon Library, Nixon Family .

^ Nixon 1978 , p. 26.

^ Morris , pp. 124–126.

^ Kornitzer , pp. 143–144.

^ a b c d e f "Naval Profiles: Richard Milhous Nixon" .

Naval History and Heritage Command . U.S. Navy. February 18, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2017 . Retrieved March 6, 2017 .

^ Aitken , pp. 96–97.

^ Naval Historical Center, Commander Nixon .

^ Black , pp. 58–60.

^ a b Armstrong , p. 81.

^ a b Black , p. 62.

^ Aitken , p. 112.

^ Nixon 1978 , p. 33.

^ Chad, Norman (June 16, 2019).

"For U.S. presidents, poker is a main event" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2023 . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ Paijich, Bob (December 25, 2012).

"Men Of Action -- Richard "The Big Bluffer" Nixon" .

Card Player .

^ a b Parmet , pp. 91–96.

^ a b Gellman , pp. 27–28.

^ Aitken , p. 114.

^ Parmet , pp. 111–113.

^ Gellman , p. 82.

^ "Final Report on Foreign Aid of the House Select Committee on Foreign Aid" (PDF) . Marshall Foundation. May 1, 1948.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 21, 2015 . Retrieved May 30, 2020 .

^ Gellman , pp. 105–107, 125–126.

^ Morris , p. 365.

^ Cronin, John Francis (October 29, 1945).

"The Problem of American Communism in 1945: Facts and Recommendations" (PDF) . A Confidential Study for Private Circulation.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 14, 2013 . Retrieved July 26, 2017 .

^ Ambrose, Stephen E.

(March 18, 2014).

Nixon Volume I: The Education of a Politician 1913–1962 . Simon and Schuster. pp.

144– 147.

ISBN 978-1-4767-4588-6 . Retrieved July 26, 2017 .

^ Nixon 1978 , Running for Congress: 1946.

^ "Timeline" . Nixon Library. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017 . Retrieved April 2, 2017 .

^ Black , pp. 129–135.

^ Gellman , pp. 239–241.

^ Morris , p. 381.

^ Nixon Library, Congressman .

^ Gellman , p. 282.

^ Morris , p. 535.

^ Gellman , pp. 296–297.

^ Gellman , p. 304.

^ Gellman , p. 310.

^ Morris , p. 581.

^ Gellman , p. 335.

^ Gellman , p. 303.

^ a b Nixon Library, Senator .

^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 211, 311–312.

^ a b Black , p. 178.

^ Gellman , pp. 440–441.

^ Aitken , pp. 205–206.

^ a b Aitken , pp. 222–223.

^ John W. Malsberger, "Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and the Fund Crisis of 1952," Historian, 73 (Fall 2011), pp 526–47.

^ Kornitzer , p. 191.

^ a b c Aitken , pp. 210–217.

^ Thompson , p. 291.

^ Aitken , p. 218.

^ Morris , p. 846.

^ John W. Malsberger, The General and the Politician: Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and American Politics (2014) ^ Aitken , pp. 225–227.

^ Ambrose 1987 , p. 342.

^ Gellman, Irwin. "The Richard Nixon vice presidency: Research without the Nixon manuscripts" in Small , pp. 102–120.

^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 357–358.

^ Aitken , pp. 256–258.

^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 375–376.

^ Aitken , pp. 237–241.

^ Parmet , p. 294.

^ Black , pp. 349–352.

^ Black , p. 355.

^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 465–469.

^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 469–479.

^ Ambrose 1987 , p. 463.

^ Rabe, Stephen G.

(1988).

Eisenhower and Latin America: The Foreign Policy of Anticommunism . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina press. p.

102 .

ISBN 978-0-8078-4204-1 .

^ Farrell , pp. 1394–1400.

^ "Nixon Makes it Official".

The Desert Sun . January 9, 1960.

^ UPI 1960 in Review .

^ a b c d e f g h i Nixon Library, Vice President .

^ Museum of Broadcast Communications, "Kennedy–Nixon Debates" .

^ Steel & 2003-05-25 .

^ Costello, William (June 24, 1960).

The Facts About Nixon . Viking Adult.

Reprint: ISBN 978-0670018918 .

^ Foner , p. 843.

^ Carlson & 2000-11-17 .

^ Black , p. 431.

^ Black , pp. 432–433.

^ Aitken , pp. 304–305.

^ a b Ambrose 1987 , p. 673.

^ Museum of Broadcast Communications, "Smith, Howard K." .

^ Black , p. 446.

^ "Richard Nixon and November 22, 1963" .

Richard Nixon Foundation . Retrieved June 21, 2025 .

^ Aitken , pp. 297, 321.

^ Gallup, George (April 5, 1964).

"42% of GOP Rank and File on Lodge Bandwagon" .

The Boston Globe . p. 32 . Retrieved October 9, 2024 – via Newspapers.com .

^ Gallup, George (January 3, 1964).

"Johnson Leads Nixon, 3 To 1 In Latest Presidential Poll" .

The Montgomery Advertiser . p. 3.

Archived from the original on December 25, 2024 . Retrieved October 9, 2024 – via Newspapers.com .

^ "Goldwater Looks to California and Oregon Primaries as Crucial to His Chances..." The New York Times . March 12, 1964.

Archived from the original on August 15, 2021 . Retrieved August 15, 2021 .

^ "ROCKEFELLER WINS OREGON PRIMARY, UPSETTING LODGE..." The New York Times . May 16, 1964.

Archived from the original on August 15, 2021 . Retrieved August 12, 2021 .

^ Aitken , pp. 321–322.

^ Aitken , pp. 323–326.

^ "Cover-Up and Privacy in Nixon vs. ABC" .

The New York Times . October 6, 1988 . Retrieved August 23, 2024 .

^ Barbas, Samantha (2017).

"Richard Nixon at the Supreme Court" .

Process .

Organization of American Historians .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2024 . Retrieved September 23, 2024 .

^ a b Parmet , p. 502.

^ Morris , pp. 410–411.

^ Parmet , pp. 503–508.

^ Perlstein, Rick (2008).

Nixonland: The Rise of a President and the Fracturing of America . New York: Scribner . pp.

295– 303.

ISBN 978-0-7432-4302-5 .

^ Parmet , p. 509.

^ a b c d e f g Nixon Library, President .

^ Morrow & 1996-09-30 .

^ a b Black , pp. 513–514.

^ Black , p. 550.

^ a b Schulzinger , p. 413.

^ a b "Misunderstanding a Monkey Wrench" .

Richard Nixon Foundation . June 2, 2017.

Archived from the original on June 6, 2017 . Retrieved November 12, 2017 .

^ Baker, Peter (January 2, 2017). " Nixon Tried to Spoil Johnson's Vietnam Peace Talks in '68, Notes Show " ( Archived March 7, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ).

The New York Times , Politics Section.  See also " H.R. Haldeman's Notes from Oct. 22, 1968 " ( Archived February 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ), The New York Times , December 31, 2016, which reprints four pages of Haldeman's notes.

^ Black , p. 558.

^ Azari, Julia (August 20, 2020).

"Biden Had To Fight For The Presidential Nomination. But Most VPs Have To" .

FiveThirtyEight .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 5, 2020 .

^ Evans & Novak , pp. 33–34.

^ UPI 1968 in Review .

^ Black , pp. 567–568.

^ Frick , p. 189.

^ UPI 1969 in Review .

^ a b Miller Center .

^ Lampton, David M.

(2024).

Living U.S.-China relations: From Cold War to Cold War . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield . p. 23.

ISBN 978-1-5381-8725-8 .

^ Minami, Kazushi (2024).

People's Diplomacy: How Americans and Chinese Transformed US-China Relations during the Cold War . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press . p. 38.

ISBN 9781501774157 .

^ Ambrose 1989 , p. 453.

^ Goh, Evelyn. "The China card" in Small , pp. 425–443.

^ Black , p. 778.

^ a b c d e PBS, The Nixon Visit .

^ a b c Black , pp. 780–782.

^ Ambrose 1989 , p. 516.

^ Dallek , p. 300.

^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969-1976, Volume I Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1969-1972" .

2001-2009.state.gov .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2021 . Retrieved December 7, 2021 .

^ "Vietnam War Deaths and Casualties By Month" . The American War Library.

Archived from the original on December 4, 2013 . Retrieved June 22, 2012 .

^ Drew , p. 65.

^ Black , p. 569.

^ Black , p. 591.

^ a b Owen, Taylor; Kiernan, Ben (October 2006).

"Bombs Over Cambodia" (PDF) .

The Walrus . pp.

32– 36.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 20, 2016 . Retrieved January 29, 2012 .

Kiernan and Owen later revised their estimate of 2.7 million tons of U.S. bombs dropped on Cambodia down to the previously accepted figure of roughly 500,000 tons: See Kiernan, Ben ; Owen, Taylor (April 26, 2015).

"Making More Enemies than We Kill? Calculating U.S. Bomb Tonnages Dropped on Laos and Cambodia, and Weighing Their Implications" .

The Asia-Pacific Journal .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 12, 2015 . Retrieved November 15, 2016 .

^ Clymer, Kenton (2013).

The United States and Cambodia, 1969–2000: A Troubled Relationship .

Routledge . pp.

14– 16.

ISBN 978-1-134-34156-6 .

^ Ambrose 1989 , pp. 281–283.

^ Address to the Nation on Vietnam Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine May 14, 1969 ^ a b Time & 1971-04-05 .

^ Mosyakov, Dmitry (2004).

"The Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese Communists: A History of Their Relations as Told in the Soviet Archives" . In Cook, Susan E. (ed.).

Genocide in Cambodia and Rwanda . Yale Genocide Studies Program Monograph Series. p. 54ff. Archived from the original on March 9, 2013.

In April–May 1970, many North Vietnamese forces entered Cambodia in response to the call for help addressed to Vietnam not by Pol Pot, but by his deputy Nuon Chea. Nguyen Co Thach recalls: 'Nuon Chea has asked for help and we have liberated five provinces of Cambodia in ten days.' ^ AP/ St. Peterburg Independent .

^ Gitlin, Todd (1987).

The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage . Bantam Books. p.

410 .

ISBN 978-0-553-37212-0 .

^ Safire , pp.

205–209 ^ UPI/ Beaver County Times & 1970-05-09 .

^ Black , pp. 675–676.

^ Ambrose 1989 , pp. 446–448.

^ Evans .

^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 53–55.

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 473.

^ Ambrose 1989 , pp. 379–383.

^ a b c Kornbluh, Peter (2003).

The Pinochet File: A Declassified Dossier on Atrocity and Accountability . New York: The New Press.

ISBN 978-1-56584-936-5 .

^ Black , p. 921.

^ a b c BBC & 1972-05-22 .

^ David Tal, " 'Absolutes' and 'Stages' in the Making and Application of Nixon's SALT Policy." Diplomatic History 37.5 (2013): 1090–1116, quoting pp 1091, 1092. Nixon himself later wrote, "[W]e decided to link progress in such areas of Soviet concern as strategic arms limitation and increased trade with progress in areas that were important to us—Vietnam, the Mideast, and Berlin. This concept became known as linkage." Richard Nixon (1978).

RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon . Simon and Schuster. p. 346.

ISBN 978-1-4767-3183-4 .

^ Gaddis , pp. 294, 299.

^ Nixon 1985 , pp. 105–106.

^ Smith, Hedrick (June 29, 1974).

"OCCIDENTAL SIGNS DEAL WITH SOVIET" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2024 . Retrieved December 6, 2021 .

^ "THE RIDDLE OF ARMAND HAMMER" .

The New York Times . November 29, 1981.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2021 . Retrieved December 6, 2021 .

^ a b Rich, Spencer (October 4, 1979).

"Soviets Dumping Ammonia, ITC Says" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2024 . Retrieved December 7, 2021 .

^ "NIXON IN APPEAL ON SOVIET TRADE" .

The New York Times . October 5, 1973.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2021 . Retrieved December 7, 2021 .

^ Herring, George C. (2008).

From Colony to Superpower; U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776 . Oxford University Press. p. 804.

ISBN 978-0-19-507822-0 .

^ a b c d Black , p. 963.

^ a b c Hanhimäki, Jussi M. "Foreign Policy Overview" in Small , pp. 345–361.

^ "DEFCON DEFense CONdition" .

fas.org .

Archived from the original on June 17, 2015 . Retrieved June 17, 2015 .

^ Nixon 1978 , pp. 938–940.

^ Black , pp. 923–928.

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 311.

^ Tyler, Patrick (2010), p. 161 ^ Black , pp. 951–952, 959.

^ Bass 2013 , p. 7.

^ Jarrod Hayes (2012).

"Securitization, social identity, and democratic security: Nixon, India, and the ties that bind" .

International Organization .

66 (1): 63– 93.

doi : 10.1017/S0020818311000324 .

JSTOR 41428946 .

S2CID 145504278 .

^ Black 2007 , p. 751.

^ "The Kissinger Tilt" .

Time . January 17, 1972. p. 17. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012 . Retrieved September 30, 2008 .

^ Black 2007 , p. 753.

^ Scott, Paul (December 21, 1971).

"Naval 'Show of Force' By Nixon Meant as Blunt Warning to India" .

Bangor Daily News .

Archived from the original on June 2, 2022 . Retrieved November 8, 2020 .

^ a b Ambrose 1989 , pp. 225–226.

^ a b Ambrose 1989 , pp. 431–432.

^ a b c Bowles, Nigel. "Economic Policy" in Small , pp. 235–251.

^ a b Oatley, Thomas (2019).

International Political Economy: Sixth Edition . Routledge. pp.

351– 352.

ISBN 978-1-351-03464-7 .

^ Gowa, Joanne (1983).

Closing the Gold Window . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-1622-4 .

JSTOR 10.7591/j.ctvr7f40n .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved August 5, 2021 .

^ a b Aitken , pp. 399–400.

^ a b c d Hetzel , p. 92.

^ Aitken , p. 395.

^ USPS, Periodicals postage .

^ a b Aitken , pp. 397–398.

^ a b c Rinde, Meir (2017).

"Richard Nixon and the Rise of American Environmentalism" .

Distillations . Vol. 3, no. 1. pp.

16– 29.

Archived from the original on April 5, 2018 . Retrieved April 4, 2018 .

^ Aitken , p. 396.

^ NHI: CQ Almanac 1971 .

^ a b HMO: CQ Almanac 1973 .

^ NHI: CQ Almanac 1974 .

^ Ambrose 1989 , p. 418.

^ Office of the Federal Register , pp. 179–182.

^ The American Presidency Project .

^ National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute , p. 2.

^ Wailoo , pp. 165, 170.

^ Boger , p. 6.

^ Sabia .

^ Parmet , pp. 595–597, 603.

^ The Republican Reversal—James Morton Turner, Andrew C. Isenberg | Harvard University Press . Harvard University Press. November 12, 2018. p. 36.

ISBN 9780674979970 .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2019 . Retrieved July 31, 2019 – via www.hup.harvard.edu.

^ The Partisan Sort . Chicago Studies in American Politics. University of Chicago Press. p. 24.

Archived from the original on July 31, 2019 . Retrieved July 31, 2019 .

^ Delaney & 1970-07-20 .

^ Frum , p. 246.

^ Frazier, Nishani (2017).

Harambee City: Congress of Racial Equality in Cleveland and the Rise of Black Power Populism . University of Arkansas Press. pp.

184– 207.

ISBN 978-1-68226-018-0 .

^ PBS, Nixon, Domestic Politics .

^ Parmet , p. 563.

^ Handlin .

^ Hepplewhite , pp. 204–205, ch. 5.

^ "MIT lecture notes in "Aircraft Systems Engineering," fall 2005, on early Space Shuttle policy" (PDF) . Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Fall 2005. p. 7.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 26, 2014 . Retrieved August 22, 2014 .

^ Ezell , p. 192, ch. 6–11.

^ a b Mason, Robert "Political realignment" in Small , pp. 252–269.

^ a b Black , p. 766.

^ Black , p. 795.

^ Black , p. 617.

^ Black , p. 816.

^ Black , p. 834.

^ White , p. 123.

^ Time & 1972-08-14 .

^ Time & 1970-11-20 .

^ Parmet , p. 629.

^ The Washington Post , The Post Investigates .

^ a b c The Washington Post , The Government Acts .

^ Aitken , pp. 511–512.

^ a b c The Washington Post , Nixon Resigns .

^ Aitken , p. 555.

^ Ambrose 1989 , pp. 231–232, 239.

^ Beckmann, Matthew N. (April 1, 2017).

"Did Nixon quit before he resigned?" .

Research & Politics .

4 (2): 2053168017704800.

doi : 10.1177/2053168017704800 .

ISSN 2053-1680 .

^ Frum , p. 26.

^ Kilpatrick & 1973-11-18 .

^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 394–395.

^ Samson .

^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 414–416.

^ Black , p. 978.

^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 435–436.

^ PBS, Resignation Speech .

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 437.

^ Black , p. 983.

^ a b c d e f Nixon Library, Post Presidency .

^ a b Aitken , p. 529.

^ Aitken , pp. 529–530.

^ Aitken , p. 532.

^ Black , p. 990.

^ Aitken , pp. 533–534.

^ Black , pp. 994, 999.

^ Black , p. 998.

^ Aitken , p. 535.

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 481.

^ Aitken , pp. 537, 539.

^ Black , p. 1000.

^ Black , p. 1004.

^ Drew , p. 138.

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 512.

^ Aitken , pp. 539–540.

^ Black , p. 1005.

^ Aitken , p. 543.

^ "Nixon disbarred in New York in 1st ruling of Watergate guilt", Toledo Blade , July 9, 1976, p.1 ^ L, Stephen; rigan (December 1, 1978).

"Protesters Heckle Nixon at Oxford Opponents of Oxford Speech Cool Nixon's Warm Welcome" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved January 3, 2022 .

^ Reed, Roy (December 1, 1978).

"Welcome For Nixon At Oxford Is Warm" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2022 . Retrieved January 3, 2022 .

^ Farrell , p. 2852.

^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 524–525.

^ "Nixons Buy Fifth Avenue Condo in N.Y." Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . August 11, 1979.

Archived from the original on September 10, 2015 . Retrieved June 17, 2015 .

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 528.

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 533.

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 534.

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 540.

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 545.

^ Drew , p. 142.

^ a b Drew , p. 144.

^ Aitken , pp. 561–562.

^ Aitken , pp. 565–568.

^ Black , pp. 1045–1046.

^ "Nixon Center Becomes Center for the National Interest" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: Center for the National Interest. PR Newswire. March 9, 2011.

Archived from the original on September 9, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ Black , pp. 1049–1050.

^ a b c Weil & Randolph & 1994-04-23 .

^ Altman, Lawrence K. (April 24, 1994).

"THE 37TH PRESIDENT: THE LAST DAYS; Disabled, Yet Retaining Control Over His Care" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2016 . Retrieved February 12, 2016 .

^ Black , pp. 1051–1053.

^ BBC & 2004-06-11 .

^ The Deseret News & 1994-04-27 .

^ Frick , p. 206.

^ Stacks & 1994-05-02 .

^ Wicker & 1994-04-24 .

^ Sawhill & 2011-02 .

^ Frick , pp. 205–206.

^ Frick , pp. 204–205.

^ Frick , p. 210.

^ a b Thompson, Hunter S.

(July 1994).

"He Was a Crook" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on June 7, 2017 . Retrieved June 4, 2017 .

^ a b Skidmore , p. 495.

^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 592.

^ Gellman , p. 460.

^ Aitken , p. 577.

^ Greider & 1983-10-10 .

^ Andrew 1995 , p. 384.

^ Milazzo, Paul Charles. "Nixon and the Environment" in Small , pp. 270–291.

^ Black , p. 1053.

^ a b Olson, Keith W. "Watergate" in Small , pp. 481–496.

^ Frick , pp. 211–214.

^ Parmet , p. viii.

^ "Ocala Star-Banner 29 Apr 1960" .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2025 . Retrieved January 31, 2025 .

^ "The Owosso Argus-Press 11 Jun 1960" .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2025 . Retrieved January 31, 2025 .

^ The presidency of Richard Nixon By Melvin Small, 1999, P.154 ^ More The Politics of Economic Growth in Postwar America By Robert M. Collins, Robert M. Collins Professor of History University of Missouri, 2002, P.104-105 . Oxford University Press. April 4, 2002.

ISBN 978-0-19-534848-4 .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2025 . Retrieved January 31, 2025 .

^ Reeves , pp. 281–283.

^ Drew , p. 150.

^ Black , p. 574.

^ Black , p. 700.

^ "The Year Nixon Fell Apart" .

Politico . March 26, 2017.

Archived from the original on June 7, 2019 . Retrieved July 15, 2019 .

^ "David Owen: Lessons in removing politicians from public office" .

The Independent . August 12, 2008.

Archived from the original on July 15, 2019 . Retrieved July 15, 2019 .

^ Boseley, Sarah (March 28, 2009).

"A doctor writes: Politicians' pride is a medical disorder" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on July 15, 2019 . Retrieved July 15, 2019 .

^ Drew , p. 151.

^ Reeves , p. 12.

^ Reeves , p. 13.

^ "New tapes reveal depth of Nixon's anti-Semitism" Archived January 17, 2021, at the Wayback Machine .

The Washington Post , October 6, 1999. Retrieved on April 4, 2011.

^ a b c Noah, Timothy .

"Nixon: I Am Not an Anti-Semite" Archived September 11, 2011, at the Wayback Machine .

Slate , October 7, 1999. Retrieved on July 17, 2011.

^ a b Greene .

Print sources Aitken, Jonathan (1996).

Nixon: A Life . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-89526-720-7 .

Ambrose, Stephen E.

(1987).

Nixon: The Education of a Politician 1913–1962 . Vol. I. New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-52836-2 .

Ambrose, Stephen E. (1989).

Nixon: The Triumph of a Politician 1962–1972 . Vol. II. New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-72506-8 .

Ambrose, Stephen E. (1991).

Nixon: Ruin and Recovery 1973–1990 . Vol. III. New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-69188-2 .

Andrew, Christopher (1995).

For the President's Eyes Only: Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush . New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-092178-1 .

Armstrong, William M. (2017).

Marine Air Group 25 and SCAT . Charleston: Arcadia.

ISBN 978-1-46712-743-1 .

Black, Conrad (2007).

Richard M. Nixon: A Life in Full . New York: PublicAffairs Books.

ISBN 978-1-58648-519-1 .

Blythe, Will (2006).

To Hate Like This is to be Happy Forever . New York: Harper Collins.

ISBN 978-0-06-074023-8 .

Boger, John Charles (2005).

School Resegregation: Must the South Turn Back?

. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-8078-5613-0 .

Dallek, Robert (2007).

Nixon and Kissinger: Partners in Power . New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-072230-2 .

Drew, Elizabeth (2007).

Richard M. Nixon . The American Presidents Series. New York: Times Books.

ISBN 978-0-8050-6963-1 .

Evans, Rowland ; Novak, Robert (1971).

Nixon in the White House: The Frustration of Power . New York: Random House.

ISBN 978-0-394-46273-8 .

Ezell, Edward Clinton ; Ezell, Linda Neuman (1978).

The Partnership: A History of the Apollo–Soyuz Test Project . Washington D.C.: NASA History Office. Archived from the original on January 23, 2011 . Retrieved January 11, 2013 .

Farrell, John A.

(2017).

Richard Nixon: The Life (eBook ed.). Penguin Random House.

ISBN 9780345804969 .

Ferris, Gary W. (1999).

Presidential Places: A Guide to the Historic Sites of the U.S. Presidents . Winston-Salem, N.C.: John F. Blair.

ISBN 978-0-89587-176-3 .

Foner, Eric (2006).

Give Me Liberty!: An American History . Vol. 2. New York: W. W. Norton & Co.

ISBN 978-0-393-92784-9 .

Frick, Daniel (2008).

Reinventing Richard Nixon . Lawrence, Kans.: University of Kansas Press.

ISBN 978-0-7006-1599-5 .

Frum, David (2000).

How We Got Here: The '70s . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-04195-4 .

Gaddis, John Lewis (1982).

Strategies of Containment: A Critical Appraisal of Postwar American National Security Policy . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-503097-6 .

Gellman, Irwin (1999).

The Contender . New York: The Free Press.

ISBN 978-1-4165-7255-8 .

Greenberg, David.

Nixon's Shadow: The History of an Image (2003). Important study of how Nixon was perceived by media and scholars.

Hall, Mitchell K. ed.

Historical Dictionary of the Nixon-Ford Era (2008) 285pp Hepplewhite, T.A. (1999).

The Space Shuttle Decision: NASA's Search for a Reusable Space Vehicle . Washington D.C.: NASA History Office.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2020 . Retrieved July 12, 2017 .

Hetzel, Robert L. (2008).

The Monetary Policy of the Federal Reserve . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-88132-6 .

Ingle, H. Larry (2015).

Nixon's First Cover-up: The Religious Life of a Quaker President . Columbia, Missouri: University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 978-0-8262-2042-4 .

Kornitzer, Bela (1960).

The Real Nixon: An Intimate Biography . New York: Rand McNally & Company.

Langguth, A.J.

(2000).

Our Vietnam: The War 1954–1975 . New York: Simon and Schuster. p.

524 .

ISBN 978-0-7432-1244-1 .

Malsberger, John W.

The General and the Politician: Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and American Politics (2014) Merkley, Paul Charles (2004).

American Presidents, Religion, and Israel: the Heirs of Cyrus . Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-275-98340-6 .

Morris, Roger (1990).

Richard Milhous Nixon: The Rise of an American Politician . New York: Henry Holt & Co.

ISBN 978-0-8050-1834-9 .

Nixon, Richard (1978).

RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon . New York: Grosset & Dunlap.

ISBN 978-0-448-14374-3 .

Nixon, Richard (1985).

No More Vietnams . Westminster, Md.: Arbor House Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0-87795-668-6 .

Parmet, Herbert S. (1990).

Richard Nixon and His America . Boston: Little, Brown & Co.

ISBN 978-0-316-69232-8 .

Perlstein, Richard (2008).

Nixonland: The Rise of a President and the Fracturing of America . New York: Scribner.

ISBN 978-0-7432-4302-5 .

Reeves, Richard (2001).

President Nixon: Alone in the White House . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-80231-2 .

Safire, William (2005) [1975].

Before The Fall: An Insider View of the Pre-Watergate White House, with a 2005 Preface by the Author . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-4128-0466-0 .

Originally published: Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1975 (new material 2005) Small, Melvin , ed. (2011).

A Companion to Richard M. Nixon . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-4443-3017-5 .

Archived from the original on November 4, 2020 . Retrieved June 17, 2015 .

; Emphasis on historiography Schulzinger, Robert D. (2003).

A Companion to American Foreign Relations . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4051-4986-0 .

Thompson, John B.

(2000).

Political Scandal: Power and Visibility in the Media Age . Cambridge: Polity Press.

ISBN 978-0-7456-2550-8 .

Tyler, Patrick (2010).

A World of Trouble: The White House and the Middle East—from the Cold War to the War on Terror . New York: Macmillan.

White, Theodore H.

(1973).

The Making of the President 1972 . New York: Antheneum.

ISBN 978-0-689-10553-1 .

Nixon Library "Childhood" .

The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

"A Student & Sailor" .

The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

"The Nixon Family" .

The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

"The Congressman" .

The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on June 15, 2013 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"The Senator" .

The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on February 16, 2013 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"The Vice President" .

The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on June 15, 2013 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"The President" .

The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"Post Presidency" .

The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013 . Retrieved March 5, 2012 .

Lee, Meghan (June 22, 2004).

"Guide to the Nixon Family Collection (1909–1967)" (PDF) . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 14, 2023 . Retrieved December 23, 2019 .

Other sources Bass, Gary J.

(2013).

The Blood Telegram: Nixon, Kissinger, and a Forgotten Genocide . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-307-70020-9 .

* Black, Conrad (2007).

Richard M. Nixon: A Life in Full . New York: PublicAffairs.

ISBN 9781586486747 .

"1972: President Nixon arrives in Moscow" . BBC. June 11, 2004.

Archived from the original on May 15, 2020 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"Reagan funeral: Schedule of events" . BBC. June 11, 2004.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2013 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

Delaney, Paul (July 20, 1970).

"Nixon Plan for Negro Construction Jobs Is Lagging" .

The New York Times . p. 1.

Archived from the original on November 3, 2013 . Retrieved January 29, 2012 .

"Mourners pay last respects to Nixon" .

The Deseret News . April 27, 1994. p. 1.

Archived from the original on June 7, 2020 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

Steel, Ronald (May 25, 2003).

"The World: New Chapter, Old Debate; Would Kennedy Have Quit Vietnam?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2012 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

Wicker, Tom (April 24, 1994).

"From afar: An indomitable man, an incurable loneliness" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2012 . Retrieved August 7, 2011 .

Kilpatrick, Carroll (November 18, 1973).

"Nixon tells editors, 'I'm not a crook' " .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2013 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"The Post Investigates" .

The Washington Post . The Watergate Story.

Archived from the original on October 16, 2012 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"The Government Acts" .

The Washington Post . The Watergate Story.

Archived from the original on May 13, 2011 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

"Nixon Resigns" .

The Washington Post . The Watergate Story.

Archived from the original on November 25, 2016 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

Weil, Martin; Randolph, Eleanor (April 23, 1994).

"Richard M. Nixon, 37th President, dies" .

The Washington Post . p. A01.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2011 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

Lardner, George Jr.; Dobbs, Michael (October 6, 1999).

"New tapes reveal depth of Nixon's anti-Semitism" .

The Washington Post . p. A31.

Archived from the original on January 23, 2011 . Retrieved April 4, 2011 .

Carlson, Peter (November 17, 2000). "Another Race to the Finish".

The Washington Post . p. A01.

"8,000 Move Into Cambodia" .

St. Petersburg Independent . AP (Saigon). May 1, 1970. p. 20–A.

"Nixon Up Early, See Protesters" .

Beaver County Times . Pennsylvania. UPI. May 9, 1970. p. one [presumably late edition].

Greene, Bob (April 8, 2002).

"What Nixon's best friend couldn't buy" .

Jewish World Review .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2012 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

Greider, William (November 10, 1983). "The McGovern factor".

Rolling Stone . p. 13.

Kiernan, Ben ; Owen, Taylor (October 2006).

"Bombs over Cambodia" (PDF) .

The Walrus .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 24, 2013 . Retrieved January 29, 2012 .

Noah, Timothy (October 7, 1999).

"Nixon: I Am Not an Anti-Semite" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2013 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

Sawhill, Ray (February 2011).

"The Fall and Rise of an American President" .

Opera News .

Archived from the original on October 17, 2013 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

"Again, the Credibility Gap?" .

Time . April 5, 1971. Archived from the original on December 21, 2008 . Retrieved July 29, 2011 .

"Behavior: Evaluating Eagleton" .

Time . August 14, 1972. Archived from the original on January 2, 2008 . Retrieved July 23, 2011 .

"Democrats: The long journey to disaster" .

Time . November 20, 1972. Archived from the original on April 21, 2008 . Retrieved July 23, 2011 .

Skidmore, Max J. (2001). "Ranking and Evaluating Presidents: The Case of Theodore Roosevelt".

White House Studies .

1 (4).

Stacks, John F. (May 2, 1994).

"Richard Nixon: Victory in Defeat" .

Time . Archived from the original on January 22, 2011 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

Morrow, Lance (September 30, 1996).

"Naysayer to the nattering nabobs" .

Time . Archived from the original on November 10, 2006 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

Allen, Erika Tyler.

"The Kennedy–Nixon Presidential Debates, 1960" . The Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on May 11, 2012 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

Auster, Albert.

"Smith, Howard K" . The Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on August 5, 2012 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

Evans, Thomas W. (1993).

"The All-Volunteer Army After Twenty Years: Recruiting in the Modern Era" . Sam Houston State University. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

Handlin, Daniel (November 28, 2005).

"Just another Apollo? Part two" .

The Space Review .

Archived from the original on May 9, 2013 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

"American President: Richard Milhous Nixon (1913–1994), Foreign Affairs" . Miller Center for Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"Richard M. Nixon Birthplace" .

National Park Service . Archived from the original on November 7, 2012 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

"Commander Richard M. Nixon, USNR" .

Naval Historical Center . United States Navy. August 7, 2006. Archived from the original on August 16, 2011 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

Nixon, Richard (August 8, 1974).

"President Nixon's Resignation Speech" .

Character Above All . Public Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011 . Retrieved July 15, 2011 .

"The Nixon Visit (February 21–28, 1972)" .

American Experience . Public Broadcasting Service.

Archived from the original on August 1, 2011 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"Richard M. Nixon, Domestic Politics" .

American Experience . Public Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on May 23, 2012 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

Sabia, Joseph J. (May 31, 2004).

"Why Richard Nixon Deserves to Be Remembered Along with Brown " . History News Network.

Archived from the original on January 27, 2012 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

"Kennedy Wins 1960 Presidential Election" .

1960 Year In Review . United Press International.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2013 . Retrieved July 17, 2011 .

"1968 Presidential Election" .

1968 Year in Review . United Press International.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2013 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

"Nixon Becomes President" .

1969 Year in Review . United Press International.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2013 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

"Postage rates for periodicals: A narrative history" (PDF) .

United States Postal Service . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 30, 2013 . Retrieved August 6, 2011 .

Office of the Federal Register (1999).

"New Actions To Prevent Illnesses And Accidents" .

Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Richard Nixon, 1971 . National Archives and Records Service.

ISBN 978-0-16-058863-1 .

"Statement on Signing the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act" .

The American Presidency Project . University of California, Santa Barbara. May 16, 1972.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2013 . Retrieved May 23, 2012 .

"Sickle Cell Research for Treatment and Cure" (PDF) . National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. September 2002. 02-5214. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 31, 2012.

Wailoo, Keith (2001).

Dying in the City of the Blues: Sickle Cell Anemia and the Politics of Race and Health . University of North Carolina Press. p.

165 .

ISBN 978-0-8078-4896-8 .

"Health insurance: hearings on new proposals".

Congressional Quarterly Almanac Plus .

27 . Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly: 541– 544. 1972.

ISSN 0095-6007 .

OCLC 1564784 .

"Limited experimental health bill enacted".

Congressional Quarterly Almanac Plus .

29 . Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly: 499– 508. 1974.

ISSN 0095-6007 .

OCLC 1564784 .

"National health insurance: no action in 1974".

Congressional Quarterly Almanac Plus .

30 . Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly: 386– 394. 1975.

ISSN 0095-6007 .

OCLC 1564784 .

Samson, William (2005).

"President Nixon's Troublesome Tax Returns" . TaxAnalysts.

Archived from the original on June 24, 2012 . Retrieved December 20, 2013 .

Grier, Peter (2011).

"Tax Day 2011: Why do presidents release tax returns?" .

The Christian Science Monitor .

Archived from the original on December 21, 2013 . Retrieved December 20, 2013 .

Further reading Li, Victor (2018).

Nixon in New York: How Wall Street Helped Richard Nixon Win the White House . Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.

ISBN 978-1-68393-000-6 .

Thomas, Evan (2015).

Being Nixon: A Man Divided . New York: Random House.

ISBN 978-0-8129-9536-7 .

OCLC 904756092 .

External links Richard Nixon at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Official websites White House biography Nixon Presidential Library and Museum Richard Nixon Foundation Media coverage Richard Nixon collected news and commentary at The New York Times Appearances on C-SPAN "Life Portrait of Richard M. Nixon" , from C-SPAN 's American Presidents: Life Portraits , November 19, 1999 Other United States Congress.

"Richard Nixon (id: N000116)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

Essays on Richard Nixon, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Richard Nixon: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress "The Presidents: Nixon" , an American Experience documentary Works by or about Richard Nixon at the Internet Archive Works by Richard Nixon at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Richard Nixon Personal Manuscripts Richard Nixon at IMDb Works by Richard Nixon at Project Gutenberg Offices and distinctions U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by Jerry Voorhis Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from California's 12th congressional district 1947–1950 Succeeded by Patrick J. Hillings U.S. Senate Preceded by Sheridan Downey United States Senator (Class 3) from California 1950–1953 Served alongside: William Knowland Succeeded by Thomas Kuchel Party political offices Preceded by Frederick F. Houser Republican nominee for U.S. Senator from California ( Class 3 ) 1950 Succeeded by Thomas Kuchel Preceded by Earl Warren Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States 1952 , 1956 Succeeded by Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

Preceded by Dwight D. Eisenhower Republican nominee for President of the United States 1960 Succeeded by Barry Goldwater Preceded by William F. Knowland Republican nominee for Governor of California 1962 Succeeded by Ronald Reagan Preceded by Barry Goldwater Republican nominee for President of the United States 1968 , 1972 Succeeded by Gerald Ford Political offices Preceded by Alben W. Barkley Vice President of the United States 1953–1961 Succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson Preceded by Lyndon B. Johnson President of the United States 1969–1974 Succeeded by Gerald Ford v t e Richard Nixon 37th President of the United States (1969–1974) 36th Vice President of the United States (1953–1961) U.S. Senator from California (1950–1953) U.S. Representative for CA–12 (1947–1950) Presidency Transition First inauguration Second inauguration Nixon Doctrine " Bring Us Together " Economic policies Nixon shock Tar Baby Option Environmental Protection Agency creation National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Space exploration 1971 National Cancer Act Vietnam War Cambodian bombing Paris Peace Accords " Peace with Honor " Vietnamization Silent majority Cold War period Linkage policy Drug  Abuse Prevention and Control Act 1970 Lincoln Memorial visit 1972 visit to China Shanghai Communiqué Détente 1972 Moscow Summit Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty SALT I Treaty Prevention of Nuclear War Agreement Threshold Test Ban Treaty Endangered Species Act National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse War on drugs Drug Enforcement Administration Cannabis policy Enemies List list of opponents Operation CHAOS Watergate timeline White House tapes United States v. Nixon Senate Watergate Committee impeachment process " I am not a crook " Resignation speech Pardon State of the Union Address 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 Wilson desk Judicial appointments Supreme Court controversies Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Life and politics Richard Nixon Foundation Presidential Library and Museum Birthplace and boyhood home Checkers speech 1958 motorcade attack Kitchen Debate Operation 40 "Last press conference" Florida White House " La Casa Pacifica " Nixon Center Nixon v. General Services Administration Death and state funeral Books Six Crises (1962) Bibliography Elections U.S. House of Representatives: 1946 1948 U.S. Senate: 1950 California gubernatorial election: 1962 GOP presidential primaries: 1960 1964 1968 1972 GOP national conventions: 1952 1956 1960 campaign 1968 campaign 1972 campaign Presidential elections: 1952 transition 1956 1960 debates Kennedy transition 1968 1972 Popular culture " Nixon goes to China " Millhouse (1971 film) An Evening with Richard Nixon (1972 play) Richard (1972 film) Another Nice Mess (1972 film) Four More Years (1972 film) Impeach the President (1973 song) The Werewolf of Washington (1973 film) White House Madness (1975 film) All the President's Men (1976 film) The Public Burning (1977 novel) Washington: Behind Closed Doors (1977 miniseries) Secret Honor (1984 film) Nixon in China (1987 opera) The Final Days (1989 film) Nixon (1995 film) Elvis Meets Nixon (1997 film) Futurama (1999 TV series) Dick (1999 film) Nixon's China Game (2000 film) Dark Side of the Moon (2002 film) The Assassination of Richard Nixon (2004 film) Frost–Nixon interviews ( 2006 play , 2008 film ) Black Dynamite (2009 film) " The Impossible Astronaut " (2011 TV episode) Our Nixon (2013 film) X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014 film) Crooked (2015 novel) Elvis & Nixon (2016 film) The Post (2017 film) Watergate (2019 board game) U.S. postage stamp Related Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act Presidential Townhouse Richard Nixon mask Nixon diamond Staff Jack Brennan (aide de camp) Murray Chotiner (early campaign manager) Manolo Sanchez (valet) Rose Mary Woods (secretary) Family Thelma "Pat" Ryan Nixon (wife) Tricia Nixon Cox (daughter) Julie Nixon Eisenhower (daughter) Christopher Nixon Cox (grandson) Jennie Eisenhower (granddaughter) Francis A. Nixon (father) Hannah Milhous Nixon (mother) Donald Nixon (brother) Edward Nixon (brother) ← Lyndon B. Johnson Gerald Ford → Category Articles related to Richard Nixon v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington ( 1789–1797 ) John Adams ( 1797–1801 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1801–1809 ) James Madison ( 1809–1817 ) James Monroe ( 1817–1825 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1825–1829 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1829–1837 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1837–1841 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1841 ) John Tyler ( 1841–1845 ) James K. Polk ( 1845–1849 ) Zachary Taylor ( 1849–1850 ) Millard Fillmore ( 1850–1853 ) Franklin Pierce ( 1853–1857 ) James Buchanan ( 1857–1861 ) Abraham Lincoln ( 1861–1865 ) Andrew Johnson ( 1865–1869 ) Ulysses S. Grant ( 1869–1877 ) Rutherford B. Hayes ( 1877–1881 ) James A. Garfield ( 1881 ) Chester A. Arthur ( 1881–1885 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1889–1893 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1893–1897 ) William McKinley ( 1897–1901 ) Theodore Roosevelt ( 1901–1909 ) William Howard Taft ( 1909–1913 ) Woodrow Wilson ( 1913–1921 ) Warren G. Harding ( 1921–1923 ) Calvin Coolidge ( 1923–1929 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1929–1933 ) Franklin D. Roosevelt ( 1933–1945 ) Harry S. Truman ( 1945–1953 ) Dwight D. Eisenhower ( 1953–1961 ) John F. Kennedy ( 1961–1963 ) Lyndon B. Johnson ( 1963–1969 ) Richard Nixon ( 1969–1974 ) Gerald Ford ( 1974–1977 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1977–1981 ) Ronald Reagan ( 1981–1989 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1989–1993 ) Bill Clinton ( 1993–2001 ) George W. Bush ( 2001–2009 ) Barack Obama ( 2009–2017 ) Donald Trump ( 2017–2021 ) Joe Biden ( 2021–2025 ) Donald Trump ( 2025–present ) Presidency timelines Washington J. Adams McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Vice Presidents of the United States John Adams ( 1789–1797 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1797–1801 ) Aaron Burr ( 1801–1805 ) George Clinton ( 1805–1812 ) Elbridge Gerry (1813–1814) Daniel D. Tompkins (1817–1825) John C. Calhoun (1825–1832) Martin Van Buren (1833–1837) Richard M. Johnson (1837–1841) John Tyler (1841) George M. Dallas (1845–1849) Millard Fillmore (1849–1850) William R. King (1853) John C. Breckinridge (1857–1861) Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865) Andrew Johnson (1865) Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873) Henry Wilson (1873–1875) William A. Wheeler (1877–1881) Chester A. Arthur (1881) Thomas A. Hendricks (1885) Levi P. Morton (1889–1893) Adlai Stevenson (1893–1897) Garret Hobart (1897–1899) Theodore Roosevelt (1901) Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909) James S. Sherman (1909–1912) Thomas R. Marshall (1913–1921) Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923) Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929) Charles Curtis (1929–1933) John N. Garner (1933–1941) Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945) Harry S. Truman (1945) Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953) Richard Nixon (1953–1961) Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963) Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969) Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977) Walter Mondale (1977–1981) George H. W. Bush (1981–1989) Dan Quayle ( 1989–1993 ) Al Gore ( 1993–2001 ) Dick Cheney ( 2001–2009 ) Joe Biden ( 2009–2017 ) Mike Pence ( 2017–2021 ) Kamala Harris ( 2021–2025 ) JD Vance ( 2025–present ) Category List v t e Unsuccessful major party candidates for President of the United States Thomas Jefferson ( 1796 ) John Adams ( 1800 ) Charles C. Pinckney ( 1804 , 1808 ) DeWitt Clinton ( 1812 ) Rufus King ( 1816 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1824 ) William H. Crawford ( 1824 ) Henry Clay ( 1824 , 1832 , 1844 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1828 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1836 ) Hugh Lawson White ( 1836 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1840 ) Lewis Cass ( 1848 ) Winfield Scott ( 1852 ) John C. Frémont ( 1856 ) Stephen A. Douglas ( 1860 ) George B. McClellan ( 1864 ) Horatio Seymour ( 1868 ) Horace Greeley ( 1872 ) Samuel J. Tilden ( 1876 ) Winfield Scott Hancock ( 1880 ) James G. Blaine ( 1884 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1888 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1892 ) William J. Bryan ( 1896 , 1900 , 1908 ) Alton B. Parker ( 1904 ) William Howard Taft ( 1912 ) Charles Evans Hughes ( 1916 ) James M. Cox ( 1920 ) John W. Davis ( 1924 ) Al Smith ( 1928 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1932 ) Alf Landon ( 1936 ) Wendell Willkie ( 1940 ) Thomas E. Dewey ( 1944 , 1948 ) Adlai Stevenson ( 1952 , 1956 ) Richard Nixon ( 1960 ) Barry Goldwater ( 1964 ) Hubert Humphrey ( 1968 ) George McGovern ( 1972 ) Gerald Ford ( 1976 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1980 ) Walter Mondale ( 1984 ) Michael Dukakis ( 1988 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1992 ) Bob Dole ( 1996 ) Al Gore ( 2000 ) John Kerry ( 2004 ) John McCain ( 2008 ) Mitt Romney ( 2012 ) Hillary Clinton ( 2016 ) Donald Trump ( 2020 ) Kamala Harris ( 2024 ) All presidential candidates Presidents Third-party candidates v t e Cabinet of President Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961) Cabinet Vice President Richard Nixon (1953–1961) Secretary of State John Foster Dulles (1953–1959) Christian Herter (1959–1961) Secretary of the Treasury George M. Humphrey (1953–1957) Robert B. Anderson (1957–1961) Secretary of Defense Charles Erwin Wilson (1953–1957) Neil H. McElroy (1957–1959) Thomas S. Gates Jr.

(1959–1961) Attorney General Herbert Brownell Jr.

(1953–1957) William P. Rogers (1957–1961) Postmaster General Arthur Summerfield (1953–1961) Secretary of the Interior Douglas McKay (1953–1956) Fred A. Seaton (1956–1961) Secretary of Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson (1953–1961) Secretary of Commerce Sinclair Weeks (1953–1958) Frederick H. Mueller (1959–1961) Secretary of Labor Martin Patrick Durkin (1953) James P. Mitchell (1953–1961) Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Oveta Culp Hobby (1953–1955) Marion B. Folsom (1955–1958) Arthur Flemming (1958–1961) Cabinet-level Director of the Bureau of the Budget Joseph Dodge (1953–1954) Rowland Hughes (1954–1956) Percival Brundage (1956–1958) Maurice Stans (1958–1961) Ambassador to the United Nations Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

(1953–1960) James Jeremiah Wadsworth (1960–1961) Director of the Mutual Security Agency Harold Stassen (1953) Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization Arthur Flemming (1953–1957) Gordon Gray (1957–1958) Administrator of the Federal Civil Defense Administration Val Peterson (1953–1957) Leo Hoegh (1957–1958) Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization Leo Hoegh (1958–1961) Chair of the Atomic Energy Commission John A. McCone (1958–1961) White House Chief of Staff Sherman Adams (1953–1958) Wilton Persons (1958–1961) White House Deputy Chief of Staff Wilton Persons (1953–1958) Gerald D. Morgan (1958–1961) White House Cabinet Secretary Maxwell M. Rabb (1954–1958) Robert Keith Gray (1958–1961) v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e United States senators from California Class 1 Frémont Weller Broderick Haun Latham Conness Casserly Hager Booth Miller Hearst Williams Hearst Felton White Bard Flint Works Johnson Knowland Engle Salinger Murphy Tunney Hayakawa Wilson Seymour Feinstein Butler Schiff Class 3 Gwin McDougall Cole Sargent Farley Stanford Perkins Phelan Shortridge McAdoo Storke Downey Nixon Kuchel Cranston Boxer Harris Padilla v t e California 's delegation(s) to the 80th–82nd United States Congress (ordered by seniority) 80th Senate : ▌ S. Downey (D) ▌ W. Knowland (R) House : ▌ C. Lea (D) ▌ R. Welch (R) ▌ B. Gearhart (R) ▌ A. Elliott (D) ▌ F. Havenner (D) ▌ H. Sheppard (D) ▌ J. Anderson (R) ▌ J. Hinshaw (R) ▌ C. King (D) ▌ J. L. Johnson (R) ▌ C. Holifield (D) ▌ J. Phillips (R) ▌ C. Engle (D) ▌ W. Bradley (R) ▌ H. Gahagan Douglas (D) ▌ G. McDonough (R) ▌ G. P. Miller (D) ▌ J. Allen (R) ▌ E. Bramblett (R) ▌ D. Jackson (R) ▌ R. Nixon (R) ▌ N. Poulson (R) ▌ C. Fletcher (R) 81st Senate : ▌ S. Downey (D) ▌ W. Knowland (R) ▌ R. Nixon (R) House : ▌ R. Welch (R) ▌ F. Havenner (D) ▌ H. Sheppard (D) ▌ J. Anderson (R) ▌ J. Hinshaw (R) ▌ C. King (D) ▌ J. L. Johnson (R) ▌ C. Holifield (D) ▌ J. Phillips (R) ▌ C. Engle (D) ▌ H. Gahagan Douglas (D) ▌ G. McDonough (R) ▌ G. P. Miller (D) ▌ J. Allen (R) ▌ E. Bramblett (R) ▌ D. Jackson (R) ▌ R. Nixon (R) ▌ N. Poulson (R) ▌ C. Doyle (D) ▌ C. McKinnon (D) ▌ H. Scudder (R) ▌ T. Werdel (R) ▌ C. White (D) ▌ J. Shelley (D) 82nd Senate : ▌ W. Knowland (R) ▌ R. Nixon (R) ▌ T. Kuchel (R) House : ▌ F. Havenner (D) ▌ H. Sheppard (D) ▌ J. Anderson (R) ▌ J. Hinshaw (R) ▌ C. King (D) ▌ J. L. Johnson (R) ▌ C. Holifield (D) ▌ J. Phillips (R) ▌ C. Engle (D) ▌ G. McDonough (R) ▌ G. P. Miller (D) ▌ J. Allen (R) ▌ E. Bramblett (R) ▌ D. Jackson (R) ▌ N. Poulson (R) ▌ C. Doyle (D) ▌ C. McKinnon (D) ▌ H. Scudder (R) ▌ T. Werdel (R) ▌ J. Shelley (D) ▌ P. Hillings (R) ▌ A. Hunter (R) ▌ S. Yorty (D) v t e ( ← 1948 ) 1952 United States presidential election ( → 1956 ) Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower VP nominee: Richard Nixon Other candidates: Riley A. Bender George T. Mickelson Harold Stassen Robert Taft Earl Warren Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II VP nominee: John Sparkman Other candidates: Alben W. Barkley Paul A. Dever W. Averell Harriman Hubert Humphrey Estes Kefauver Robert S. Kerr Richard Russell Jr.

Third-party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee: Stuart Hamblen VP nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick Progressive Party Convention Nominee: Vincent Hallinan VP nominee: Charlotta Bass Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Eric Hass Socialist Party Nominee: Darlington Hoopes VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Farrell Dobbs VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates Edward Longstreet Bodin Henry B. Krajewski Homer Aubrey Tomlinson Other 1952 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1952 ) 1956 United States presidential election ( → 1960 ) Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Incumbent nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower Incumbent VP nominee: Richard Nixon Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II VP nominee: Estes Kefauver Other candidates: John S. Battle Happy Chandler James C. Davis John F. Kennedy W. Averell Harriman Lyndon B. Johnson Frank Lausche George Bell Timmerman Jr.

Third-party and independent candidates American Vegetarian Party Nominee: Herbert M. Shelton VP nominee: Symon Gould Prohibition Party Nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick VP nominee: Herbert C. Holdridge Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Eric Hass VP nominee: Georgia Cozzini Socialist Party Nominee: Darlington Hoopes VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Farrell Dobbs VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates T. Coleman Andrews Gerald L. K. Smith Other 1956 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1956 ) 1960 United States presidential election ( → 1964 ) Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: John F. Kennedy campaign VP nominee: Lyndon B. Johnson Other candidates Ross Barnett Pat Brown Michael DiSalle Paul C. Fisher Hubert Humphrey Lyndon B. Johnson George H. McLain Robert B. Meyner Wayne Morse Albert S. Porter Adlai Stevenson II George Smathers Stuart Symington Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Richard Nixon campaign VP nominee: Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

Other candidates Barry Goldwater Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

James M. Lloyd Nelson Rockefeller Third-party and independent candidates American Vegetarian Party Nominee Symon Gould National States' Rights Party Nominee Orval Faubus VP nominee J. B. Stoner Prohibition Party Nominee Rutherford Decker VP nominee E. Harold Munn Socialist Labor Party Nominee Eric Hass VP nominee Georgia Cozzini Socialist Workers Party Nominee Farrell Dobbs VP nominee Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates Harry F. Byrd Merritt B. Curtis Lar Daly George Lincoln Rockwell Charles L. Sullivan Gabriel Green Other 1960 elections: House Senate v t e ( ← 1964 ) 1968 United States presidential election ( 1972 → ) Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Richard Nixon campaign VP nominee: Spiro Agnew Other candidates: Frank Carlson Clifford P. Case Hiram Fong John Lindsay Ronald Reagan Jim Rhodes Nelson Rockefeller Winthrop Rockefeller George W. Romney campaign Harold Stassen John A. Volpe Democratic Party Convention protests Primaries Candidates Nominee: Hubert Humphrey campaign VP nominee: Edmund Muskie Other candidates: Roger D. Branigin John G. Crommelin Paul C. Fisher Lyndon B. Johnson withdrawal Robert F. Kennedy campaign Thomas C. Lynch Eugene McCarthy campaign George McGovern Dan K. Moore Channing E. Phillips George Smathers Stephen M. Young American Independent Party Candidates Nominee: George Wallace campaign VP nominee: Curtis LeMay Other third party and independent candidates Communist Party Nominee: Charlene Mitchell VP nominee: Michael Zagarell Peace and Freedom Party Nominee: Eldridge Cleaver VP nominee: Douglas Fitzgerald Dowd Prohibition Party Nominee: E. Harold Munn Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Henning A. Blomen Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Fred Halstead VP nominee: Paul Boutelle Independents and other candidates Dick Gregory Pat Paulsen Pigasus Other 1968 elections : House Senate Gubernatorial v t e ( ← 1968 ) 1972 United States presidential election ( 1976 → ) Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Incumbent nominee: Richard Nixon campaign Incumbent VP nominee: Spiro Agnew Other candidates: John M. Ashbrook Pete McCloskey Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: George McGovern campaign VP nominee: Sargent Shriver replacing Thomas Eagleton Other candidates: Shirley Chisholm Walter Fauntroy Fred R. Harris Vance Hartke Wayne Hays Hubert Humphrey Henry M. Jackson John Lindsay Eugene McCarthy Wilbur Mills Patsy Mink Edmund Muskie Terry Sanford George Wallace Sam Yorty Third-party and independent candidates American Independent Party Nominee: John G. Schmitz VP nominee: Thomas J. Anderson Communist Party Nominee: Gus Hall VP nominee: Jarvis Tyner Libertarian Party Nominee: John Hospers VP nominee: Tonie Nathan People's Party Nominee: Benjamin Spock VP nominee: Julius Hobson Prohibition Party Nominee: E. Harold Munn Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Louis Fisher Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Linda Jenness Alternate nominee: Evelyn Reed VP nominee: Andrew Pulley Independent Candidates: Gabriel Green Other 1972 elections : House Senate Gubernatorial v t e Time Persons of the Year 1927–1950 Charles Lindbergh (1927) Walter Chrysler (1928) Owen D. Young (1929) Mohandas Gandhi (1930) Pierre Laval (1931) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) Hugh S. Johnson (1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Haile Selassie (1935) Wallis Simpson (1936) Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937) Adolf Hitler (1938) Joseph Stalin (1939) Winston Churchill (1940) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Joseph Stalin (1942) George Marshall (1943) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Harry S. Truman (1945) James F. Byrnes (1946) George Marshall (1947) Harry S. Truman (1948) Winston Churchill (1949) The American Fighting-Man (1950) 1951–1975 Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King Jr.

(1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975) 1976–2000 Jimmy Carter (1976) Anwar Sadat (1977) Deng Xiaoping (1978) Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) Ronald Reagan (1980) Lech Wałęsa (1981) The Computer (1982) Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Peter Ueberroth (1984) Deng Xiaoping (1985) Corazon Aquino (1986) Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) The Endangered Earth (1988) Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) George H. W. Bush (1990) Ted Turner (1991) Bill Clinton (1992) The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Pope John Paul II (1994) Newt Gingrich (1995) David Ho (1996) Andrew Grove (1997) Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998) Jeff Bezos (1999) George W. Bush (2000) 2001–present Rudolph Giuliani (2001) The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) The American Soldier (2003) George W. Bush (2004) The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) You (2006) Vladimir Putin (2007) Barack Obama (2008) Ben Bernanke (2009) Mark Zuckerberg (2010) The Protester (2011) Barack Obama (2012) Pope Francis (2013) Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr.

Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014) Angela Merkel (2015) Donald Trump (2016) The Silence Breakers (2017) The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital (2018) Greta Thunberg (2019) Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020) Elon Musk (2021) Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022) Taylor Swift (2023) Donald Trump (2024) v t e National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners 1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959: Douglas MacArthur 1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg 1961: John F. Kennedy 1962: Byron "Whizzer" White 1963: Roger Blough 1964: Donold B. Lourie 1965: Juan T. Trippe 1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik 1967: Frederick L. Hovde 1968: Chester J. LaRoche 1969: Richard Nixon 1970: Thomas J. Hamilton 1971: Ronald Reagan 1972: Gerald Ford 1973: John Wayne 1974: Gerald B. Zornow 1975: David Packard 1976: Edgar B. Speer 1977: Louis H. Wilson 1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy 1979: William P. Lawrence 1980: Walter J. Zable 1981: Justin W. Dart 1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown , Willie Davis , Jack Kemp , Ron Kramer , Jim Swink 1983: Jack Kemp 1984: John F. McGillicuddy 1985: William I. Spencer 1986: William H. Morton 1987: Charles R. Meyer 1988: Clinton E. Frank 1989: Paul Brown 1990: Thomas H. Moorer 1991: George H. W. Bush 1992: Donald R. Keough 1993: Norman Schwarzkopf 1994: Thomas S. Murphy 1995: Harold Alfond 1996: Gene Corrigan 1997: Jackie Robinson 1998: John H. McConnell 1999: Keith Jackson 2000: Fred M. Kirby II 2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs 2002: George Steinbrenner 2003: Tommy Franks 2004: William V. Campbell 2005: Jon F. Hanson 2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden 2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach 2008: John Glenn 2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman 2010: Bill Cosby 2011: Robert Gates 2012: Roscoe Brown 2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell 2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss 2015: Condoleezza Rice 2016: Archie Manning 2017: None awarded 2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman 2019: Mark Harmon v t e Cabinet of President Richard Nixon (1969–1974) Cabinet Vice President Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) None (1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Secretary of State William P. Rogers (1969–1973) Henry Kissinger (1973–1974) Secretary of the Treasury David M. Kennedy (1969–1971) John Connally (1971–1972) George Shultz (1972–1974) William E. Simon (1974) Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird (1969–1973) Elliot Richardson (1973) James R. Schlesinger (1973–1974) Attorney General John N. Mitchell (1969–1972) Richard Kleindienst (1972–1973) Elliot Richardson (1973) William B. Saxbe (1974) Postmaster General Winton M. Blount (1969–1971) Secretary of the Interior Wally Hickel (1969–1970) Rogers Morton (1971–1974) Secretary of Agriculture Clifford M. Hardin (1969–1971) Earl Butz (1971–1974) Secretary of Commerce Maurice Stans (1969–1972) Peter G. Peterson (1972–1973) Frederick B. Dent (1973–1974) Secretary of Labor George Shultz (1969–1970) James Day Hodgson (1970–1973) Peter J. Brennan (1973–1974) Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Robert Finch (1969–1970) Elliot Richardson (1970–1973) Caspar Weinberger (1973–1974) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development George W. Romney (1969–1973) James Thomas Lynn (1973–1974) Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe (1969–1973) Claude Brinegar (1973–1974) Cabinet-level Director of the Bureau of the Budget Robert P. Mayo (1969–1970) Director of the Office of Management and Budget George Shultz (1970–1972) Caspar Weinberger (1972–1973) Roy Ash (1973–1974) Ambassador to the United Nations Charles Yost (1969–1971) George H. W. Bush (1971–1973) John A. Scali (1973–1974) Counselor to the President Arthur F. Burns (1969) Daniel Patrick Moynihan (1969–1970) Bryce Harlow (1969–1970) Robert Finch (1970–1972) Donald Rumsfeld (1970–1971) Anne L. Armstrong (1973–1974) Dean Burch (1974) Kenneth Rush (1974) Portals : 1960s 1970s Biography California Conservatism Politics United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii 2 Artists ULAN MusicBrainz Grammy Awards FID People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Nixon&oldid=1306490169 " Categories : Richard Nixon 1913 births 1960s in the United States 1994 deaths 1952 United States vice-presidential candidates 1956 United States vice-presidential candidates 20th-century American lawyers 20th-century American memoirists 20th-century American naval officers 20th-century members of the United States House of Representatives 20th-century presidents of the United States 20th-century Quakers 20th-century United States senators 20th-century vice presidents of the United States Antisemitism in the United States American anti-communists American Quakers California lawyers California Republicans Candidates in the 1960 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1968 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1972 United States presidential election Cannabis law reform in the United States Cornell family Disbarred New York (state) lawyers Duke University School of Law alumni Eisenhower administration cabinet members Fullerton Union High School alumni Lawyers disbarred in the Watergate scandal Lawyers from New York City Military personnel from California Nixon administration personnel involved in the Watergate scandal Nixon family People from Saddle River, New Jersey People from San Clemente, California People from Whittier, California People from Yorba Linda, California People of the Cold War People of the Laotian Civil War People of the Yom Kippur War Politicians from Greater Los Angeles Presidents of the United States People pardoned by Gerald Ford Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives from California Republican Party (United States) presidential nominees Republican Party presidents of the United States Republican Party United States senators from California Republican Party (United States) vice presidential nominees Republican Party vice presidents of the United States United States government officials of the Vietnam War United States Navy personnel of World War II United States Navy reservists Vice presidents of the United States Whittier High School alumni Whittier Poets football players Members of the House Un-American Activities Committee Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Featured articles Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2025 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using Sister project links with default search New York Times topic template using Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 00:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Richard Nixon 152 languages Add topic

