Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope of work 2 Qualifications 3 Cultural practices 4 Legal issues 5 Organizations 6 In literature 7 Notable arborists 8 Gallery 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Arborist 18 languages Беларуская Български Čeština Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Occupation concerning the care of perennial woody plants The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( January 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An arborist using a chainsaw to cut a eucalyptus tree in a public park Two arborists climbing and dismantling a Norway Maple in Ontario, Canada An arborist , or (less commonly) arboriculturist , is a professional in the practice of arboriculture , which is the cultivation , management, and study of individual trees , shrubs , vines , and other perennial woody plants in dendrology and horticulture .

[ citation needed ] Arborists generally focus on the health and safety of individual plants and trees, rather than managing forests or harvesting wood ( silviculture or forestry ).  An arborist's scope of work is therefore distinct from that of either a forester or a logger .

[ citation needed ] Scope of work [ edit ] An ISA Certified municipal arborist examining a Japanese Hemlock at Hoyt Arboretum in Portland, Oregon In order for arborists to work near power wires, either additional training is required or they need to be certified as a Qualified Line Clearance Arborist or Utility Arborist (there may be different terminology for various countries). There is a variety of minimum distances that must be kept from power wires depending on voltage, however the common distance for low voltage lines in urban settings is 10 feet (about 3 metres).

[ 1 ] Arborists who climb (as not all do) can use a variety of techniques to ascend into the tree. The least invasive, and most popular technique used is to ascend on rope. There are two common methods of climbing, Stationary Rope System (SRS) and Moving Rope System (MRS). When personal safety is an issue, or the tree is being removed, arborists may use 'spikes', (also known as 'gaffs' or 'spurs') attached to their chainsaw boots with straps to ascend and work. Spikes wound the tree, leaving small holes where each step has been.

[ citation needed ] An arborist's work may involve very large and complex trees, or ecological communities and their abiotic components in the context of the landscape ecosystem .  These may require monitoring and treatment to ensure they are healthy, safe, and suitable to property owners or community standards. This work may include some or all of the following: planting; transplanting; pruning; structural support; preventing, or diagnosing and treating phytopathology or parasitism ; preventing or interrupting grazing or predation ; installing lightning protection ; and removing vegetation deemed as hazardous , an invasive species , a disease vector , or a weed .

[ citation needed ] Arborists may also plan, consult, write reports and give legal testimony. While some aspects of this work are done on the ground or in an office, much of it is done by arborists who perform tree services and who climb the trees with ropes, harnesses and other equipment. Lifts and cranes may be used too. The work of all arborists is not the same. Some may just provide a consulting service; others may perform climbing, pruning and planting: whilst others may provide a combination of all of these services.

[ 2 ] Qualifications [ edit ] An arborist disassembling a tree using a crane and bucket Arborists gain qualifications to practice arboriculture in a variety of ways and some arborists are more qualified than others.  Experience working safely and effectively in and around trees is essential.  Arborists tend to specialize in one or more disciplines of arboriculture, such as diagnosis and treatment of pests, diseases and nutritional deficiencies in trees, climbing and pruning, cabling and lightning protection, or consultation and report writing.  All these disciplines are related to one another and some arborists are very well experienced in all areas of tree work, however not all arborists have the training or experience to properly practice every discipline.

[ citation needed ] Arborists choose to pursue formal certification, which is available in some countries and varies somewhat by location.  An arborist who holds certification in one or more disciplines may be expected to participate in rigorous continuing education requirements to ensure constant improvement of skills and techniques.

[ citation needed ] In Australia, arboricultural education and training are streamlined countrywide through a multi-disciplinary vocational education, training, and qualification authority called the Australian Qualifications Framework , which offers varying levels of professional qualification. Government institutions including Technical and Further Education (TAFE) offer Certificate III or a diploma in arboriculture as well as some universities.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] There are also many private institutions covering similar educational framework in each state. Recognition of prior learning is also an option for practicing arborists with 10 or more years of experience with no prior formal training. It allows them to be assessed and fast track their certification.

[ citation needed ] In France, a qualified arborist must hold a Management of Ornamental Trees certificate, and a qualified arborist climber must hold a Pruning and Care of Trees certificate; both delivered by the French Ministry of Agriculture.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In the UK, an arborist can gain qualifications up to and including a master's degree. College-based courses include further education qualifications, such as national certificate , national diploma , while higher education courses in arboriculture include foundation degree , bachelor's degree and master's degree .

[ citation needed ] In the US, a Certified Arborist (CA) is a professional who has over three years of documented and verified experience and has passed a rigorous written test from the International Society of Arboriculture . Other designations include Municipal Specialist, Utility Specialist and Board Certified Master Arborist (BCMA). The USA and Canada additionally have college-based training which, if passed, will give the certificate of Qualified Arborist.  The Qualified Arborist can then be used to offset partial experience towards the Certified Arborist.

Tree Risk Assessment Qualified credential (TRAQ), designed by the International Society of Arboriculture, was launched in 2013. At that time people holding the TRACE credential were transferred over to the TRAQ credential.

[ citation needed ] In Canada, there are provincially governed apprenticeship programs that allow arborists' to work near power lines upon completion. These apprenticeship programs must meet the provincial reregulations (For example, in B.C. they must meet WorkSafeBC G19.30), and individuals must ensure they meet the requirements of the owner of the power system.

[ citation needed ] Cultural practices [ edit ] Arborists may use specialised vehicles to gain access to trees, such as this Unimog equipped with a power take-off driven woodchipper Trees in urban landscape settings are often subject to disturbances, whether human or natural, both above and below ground. They may require care to improve their chances of survival following damage from either biotic or abiotic causes.  Arborists can provide appropriate solutions, such as pruning trees for health and good structure, for aesthetic reasons, and to permit people to walk under them (a technique often referred to as "crown raising"), or to keep them away from wires, fences and buildings (a technique referred to as "crown reduction").

[ 7 ] Timing and methods of treatment depend on the species of tree and the purpose of the work.  To determine the best practices, a thorough knowledge of local species and environments is essential.

[ citation needed ] There can be a vast difference between the techniques and practices of professional arborists and those of inadequately trained tree workers.  Some commonly offered "services" are considered unacceptable by modern arboricultural standards and may seriously damage, disfigure, weaken, or even kill trees.  One such example is tree topping , lopping , or "hat-racking", where entire tops of trees or main stems are removed, generally by cross-cutting the main stem(s) or leaders, leaving large unsightly stubs.  Trees that manage to survive such treatment are left prone to a spectrum of detrimental effects, including vigorous but weakly attached regrowth, pest susceptibility, pathogen intrusion, and internal decay.

[ 8 ] Pruning should only be done with a specific purpose in mind. Every cut is a wound, and every leaf lost is removal of photosynthetic potential. Proper pruning can be helpful in many ways, but should always be done with the minimum amount of live tissue removed.

[ 9 ] In recent years, research has proven that wound dressings such as paint, tar or other coverings are unnecessary and may harm trees. The coverings may encourage growth of decay-causing fungi . Proper pruning, by cutting through branches at the right location, can do more to limit decay than wound dressing [ 10 ] Chemicals can be applied to trees for insect or disease control through soil application, stem injections or spraying. Compacted or disturbed soils can be improved in various ways.

[ citation needed ] Arborists can also assess trees to determine the health, structure, safety or feasibility within a landscape and in proximity to humans. Modern arboriculture has progressed in technology and sophistication from practices of the past.  Many current practices are based on knowledge gained through recent research, including that of Alex Shigo , considered one "father" of modern arboriculture.

[ 11 ] Legal issues [ edit ] Depending on the jurisdiction, there may be a number of legal issues surrounding the practices of arborists, including boundary issues, public safety issues, "heritage" trees of community value, and "neighbour" issues such as ownership, obstruction of views, impacts of roots crossing boundaries, nuisance problems, disease or insect quarantines , and safety of nearby trees or plants that may be affected.

[ citation needed ] Arborists are frequently consulted to establish the factual basis of disputes involving trees, or by private property owners seeking to avoid legal liability through the duty of care .

[ 12 ] Arborists may be asked to assess the value of a tree [ 13 ] in the process of an insurance claim for trees damaged or destroyed, [ 14 ] or to recover damages resulting from tree theft or vandalism .

[ 15 ] In cities with tree preservation orders an arborist's evaluation of tree hazard may be required before a property owner may remove a tree, or to assure the protection of trees in development plans and during construction operations. Carrying out work on protected trees and hedges is illegal without express permission from local authorities, [ 16 ] and can result in legal action including fines.

[ 17 ] Homeowners who have entered into contracts with a Homeowner's association (see also Restrictive covenants ) may need an arborists' professional opinion of a hazardous condition prior to removing a tree, or may be obligated to assure the protection of the views of neighboring properties prior to planting a tree or in the course of pruning.

[ 18 ] Arborists may be consulted in forensic investigations where the evidence of a crime can be determined within the growth rings of a tree, for example.  Arborists may be engaged by one member of a dispute in order to identify factual information about trees useful to that member of the dispute, or they can be engaged as an expert witness providing unbiased scientific knowledge in a court case.  Homeowners associations seeking to write restrictive covenants, or legislative bodies seeking to write laws involving trees, may seek the counsel of arborists in order to avoid future difficulties.

[ 19 ] Before undertaking works in the UK, arborists have a legal responsibility to survey trees for wildlife, especially bats, which are given particular legal protection.  In addition, any tree in the UK can be covered by a tree preservation order and it is illegal to conduct any work on a tree, including deadwooding or pruning, before permission has been sought from the local council.

[ citation needed ] Organizations [ edit ] Australia Limited, a non-profit organisation, is a national organisation promoting and representing tree workers, arborists, professional tree management and urban forestry throughout Australia and the Asia-Pacific region.

[ 20 ] The Tree Care Industry Association (formerly the National Arborist Association) is a public and professional non-profit organization for the arboriculture field. It has more than 2,000 member companies representing over a dozen countries. TCIA's Accreditation program certifies that tree care companies that have been inspected and accredited based on adherence to industry standards for performance and safety; maintenance of trained, professional staff; and dedication to ethics and quality in business practices.  In addition, they provide safety and educational programs, guidelines for tree service operations, ANSI A300 tree pruning standards, and consumer resources.

[ citation needed ] The International Society of Arboriculture , a non-profit organization, maintains a list of ISA Certified Arborists who have passed a written exam and demonstrated a basic level of knowledge in arboriculture.

[ 21 ] There are also additional classifications of certified arborists with Certified Arborist/Utility Specialist for those who work near power lines, and Certified Arborist/Municipal Specialist for those who deal mostly with community trees. Other certifications exist for Certified Tree Workers, and the highest level of certification, the Board Certified Master Arborist.

[ citation needed ] The American Society of Consulting Arborists is an organization whose membership is exclusive to those with a certain level of industry experience, plus higher educational experience or continuing education; some members may achieve a higher status by fulfilling the requirements to become a Registered Consulting Arborist.

[ 22 ] Consulting arborists generally specialize in the areas of ethics, law, land planning and development, and tree valuation, among others. Consulting arborists are often called on for legal testimony and report writing in various instances where a particular authority on trees is necessary for consequent actions.

In the UK, the professional body representing the sector is the Institute of Chartered Foresters . The trade body representing arborists is the Arboricultural Association. The association maintains a register of consultants who have demonstrated a high level of technical arboricultural knowledge, and operate an Approved Contractor scheme. This scheme assesses both the technical competence and business practices of arboricultural contractors.

The European Arboricultural Council is a European group of multiple arboriculture organizations from various countries.

Plant Amnesty is a public education and advocacy group, based in Seattle, dedicated to promoting proper pruning methods. Founded in 1987, Plant Amnesty became an international resource for arborists and their clients in the mid-1990s.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] In literature [ edit ] The protagonist in Italo Calvino 's novel The Baron in the Trees lives life on the ground as a boy and spends the rest of his life swinging from tree to tree in the Italian countryside.  As a young man he helps the local fruit farmers by pruning their trees.

[ citation needed ] Notable arborists [ edit ] Some noteworthy arborists include: Francis A. Bartlett – founded The Bartlett Tree Experts Co., the world's leading scientific tree and shrub care company in 1907.

John Chapman – pioneering U.S. frontier nurseryman and orchardist, commonly known as Johnny Appleseed.

Canopy Cat Rescue [ 25 ] – rescues domestic cats from tall trees; appears on Treetop Cat Rescue .

Sebastian Junger – author of Perfect Storm and War.

Previous to becoming a journalist, Sebastian was an arborist in Massachusetts.

Chuck Leavell – two-time recipient of the Georgia Tree Farmer of the Year award, and author of the children's book, The Tree Farmer.

In 2006 Leavell was appointed by Governor Sonny Perdue to the Georgia Land Conservation Council.  He is also an accomplished jazz pianist and keyboardist for the Rolling Stones .

[ 26 ] Alex Shigo – considered the father of modern arboriculture.

Gallery [ edit ] An arborist blocking down a section in Victoria , Australia Large tree transplant in Townsville , Australia An arborist spurless climbing to prune a tree Australia An Oregon arborist providing a slideshow presentation about tree care and pruning at a garden show in Portland, Oregon A crew of arborists felling a tree in sections at Kallista, Victoria Friendship Oak on the campus of Southeastern Louisiana University is hundreds of years old. Like other mature spreading oaks, Friendship Oak is maintained by arborists to prevent the limbs from growing into the ground.

An arborist pruning a tree near the Statue of Liberty An Arborist Tree Trimming In Denver, Colorado See also [ edit ] Trees portal Chainsaw safety clothing Lumberjack Master arborist Tree shaping References [ edit ] ^ American National Standards Institute Z.133- and International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers .

^ Harris, Richard W., James R. Clark, and Nelda P. Matheny:  Arboriculture Integrated Management of Landscape Trees, Shrubs, and Vines, third edition; Prentice-Hall, Inc. 1999.

^ "Becoming an Arborist" .

Victorian Skills Gateway . Archived from the original on 2018-03-16 . Retrieved 2018-03-15 .

^ "Graduate Certificate in Arboriculture" .

University of Melbourne . Retrieved 2018-03-15 .

^ "Les formations qualifiantes des arboristes : certificat de spécialisation CS " taille et soin des arbres " " .

Copalme (in French) . Retrieved 2018-03-15 .

^ "Le CFPPA à l'action sur le domaine Paul-Riquet - Enseignement et formation - Un vrai chantier pour les lycéens" .

La Dépêche (in French). February 23, 2017 . Retrieved 2018-03-15 .

^ "Pruning Standards to Maintain Landscape Trees (3)" . E. Thomas Smiley, Ph. D., Plant Pathologist and Bruce R. Fraedrich, Ph. D., Plant Pathologist; Bartlett Tree Research Laboratory.

^ "Follow Proper Pruning Techniques | Earth-Kind® Landscaping" .

aggie-horticulture.tamu.edu .

^ "Access Trees Home" .

treesaccess.com . Archived from the original on 2022-03-22 . Retrieved 2022-03-30 .

^ https://joa.isa-arbor.com/request.asp?JournalID=1&ArticleID=1923&Type=2 , Wound dressings results of studies over 13 years ^ Alex Shigo pioneered tree-friendly pruning by Ron Sullivan; San Francisco Chronicle November 15, 2006.

^ Common Law Branches Off Into New Directions ; by Victor D. Merullo; Journal of Arboriculture 20(6): November 1994.

^ Landscape Tree Appraisal by David P. Mooter, et al.; University of Nebraska–Lincoln Extension; March 2004.

^ Guide for Plant Appraisal , 9th ed; by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers; International Society of Arboriculture; 2000.

^ See also specific legal provisions for "tree theft" such as, for example, the Revised Code of Washington title 64.12.030 for Washington (State, USA) or similar state, provincial, or local statutes.

^ "A Guide To The Laws Of Arboriculture & Tree Legislations" . Surrey Tree Surgery. Archived from the original on 4 April 2014 . Retrieved 4 April 2014 .

^ "Businessman fined £28,000 for felling protected yew tree" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. 3 June 2013. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013 . Retrieved 4 April 2014 .

^ Arboriculture and the Law in Canada by Julian Dunster and Susan Murray; International Society of Arboriculture; 1997.

^ Arboriculture and the Law by Victor D. Merrullo; International Society of Arboriculture; 1992.

^ "About Us" .

arboriculture.org.au . Archived from the original on 2016-08-08 . Retrieved 2016-07-22 .

^ "Verify an ISA Certification / Find a Tree Care Service" . International Society of Arboriculture. Archived from the original on 27 March 2014 . Retrieved 4 April 2014 .

^ "American Society of Consulting Arborists – Registered Consulting Arborist" . Archived from the original on 2003-02-28 . Retrieved 2008-04-29 .

^ "The Seattle Times: Pacific Northwest Magazine" .

The Seattle Times .

^ Young, Paul.

"Bakersfield CA Local Online Stock Brokerage Firms | Berkeley Daily" . Archived from the original on 2020-08-09 . Retrieved 2019-11-08 .

^ "Cat stuck in a tree in Washington" .

Canopy Cat Rescue . Archived from the original on 2019-11-08 . Retrieved 2019-11-08 .

^ "Chuck Leavell - Trees" .

chuckleavell.com . Archived from the original on 2007-07-03 . Retrieved 2007-07-21 .

External links [ edit ] Look up arborist or arboricide in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Authority control databases : National Czech Republic 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arborist&oldid=1298577320 " Categories : Arborists Botanists by field of research Dendrologists Forestry occupations Forest management Trees Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2009 This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 10:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arborist 18 languages Add topic

