Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Rise to power (508–448 BC) 1.2 Athenian hegemony (448–430 BC) 1.3 Peloponnesian War (431–404 BC) 1.4 Corinthian War and the Second Athenian League (395–355 BC) 1.5 Athens and Macedon (355–322 BC) 2 The city Toggle The city subsection 2.1 Overview 2.2 City walls 2.3 Gates 2.4 Acropolis (upper city) 2.5 Agora (lower city) 2.6 Districts 2.7 Hills 2.8 Streets 2.9 Public buildings 2.10 Suburbs 3 Culture 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Classical Athens 50 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 37°58′N 23°43′E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.97°N 23.72°E ﻿ / 37.97; 23.72 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia City-state in ancient Greece Athens Ἀθῆναι ( Ancient Greek ) 508 BC–322 BC Owl of Athena , patron of  Athens Delian League ("Athenian Empire") shown in yellow, Athenian territory shown in red, situation in 431 BC, before the Peloponnesian War .

Capital Athens Common languages Attic Greek Religion Greek Polytheism Government Athenian direct democracy Eponymous archon • 508–507 BC Isagoras • 322–321 BC Philocles Legislature Boule Ecclesia Historical era Classical antiquity Classical Greece • Cleisthenes establishes Athenian democracy 508 BC • Delian League 478–404 BC • Thirty tyrants 404–403 BC • Second Athenian League 378–355 BC • Lamian War 322 BC Population • 5th century BC 1 ~250,000 (men with civil rights: ~30,000) Currency Drachma Preceded by Succeeded by Peisistratids League of Corinth 1 BBC History Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Classical Athens , known contemporaneously simply as Athens ( Ancient Greek : Ἀθῆναι , Athênai [atʰɛ̂ːnai̯] ; Modern Greek : Αθήναι, Athine [aˈθine] ), was the major urban centre of the notable polis ( city-state ) of the same name during the classical period (480–323 BC) [ 1 ] of ancient Greece , located in Attica , Greece , leading the Delian League in the Peloponnesian War against Sparta and the Peloponnesian League .

Athenian democracy was established in 508 BC under Cleisthenes following the tyranny of Isagoras . This system remained remarkably stable, and with a few brief interruptions, it remained in place for 180 years, until 322 BC (amid the aftermath of the Lamian War ). The peak of Athenian hegemony was achieved during the Age of Pericles in the 440s and 430s BC.

In the classical period, Athens was a centre for the arts, learning, and philosophy , and it was the home of Plato 's Academy and Aristotle 's Lyceum .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Athens was also the birthplace of Socrates , Plato, Pericles , Aristophanes , Sophocles , and many other prominent philosophers, writers, and politicians of the ancient world. It is widely referred to as the cradle of Western civilization and as the birthplace of democracy , [ 4 ] largely due to the impact of its cultural and political achievements during the 5th and 4th centuries BC on the rest of the then-known European continent.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Rise to power (508–448 BC) [ edit ] Main articles: Greco-Persian Wars , Athenian Revolution , and First Peloponnesian War Hippias , son of Peisistratus , had ruled Athens jointly with his brother, Hipparchus, from the death of Peisistratus in about 527. Following the assassination of Hipparchus in about 514, Hippias took on sole rule, and in response to the loss of his brother, became a worse leader who was increasingly disliked. Hippias exiled 700 of the Athenian noble families, amongst them Cleisthenes ' family, the Alchmaeonids. Upon their exile, they went to Delphi, and Herodotus [ 6 ] says they bribed the Pythia always to tell visiting Spartans that they should invade Attica and overthrow Hippias. That supposedly worked after a number of times, and Cleomenes I led a Spartan force to overthrow Hippias, which succeeded, and instated an oligarchy. Cleisthenes disliked the Spartan rule, along with many other Athenians, and so made his own bid for power. The result was democracy in Athens , but considering Cleisthenes' motivation for using the people to gain power, as without their support, he would have been defeated, and so Athenian democracy may be tainted by the fact its creation served greatly the man who created it. The reforms of Cleisthenes replaced the traditional four Ionic "tribes" ( phyle ) with ten new ones, named after legendary heroes of Greece and having no class basis, which acted as electorates. Each tribe was in turn divided into three trittyes (one from the coast; one from the city and one from the inland divisions), while each trittys had one or more demes , depending on their population, which became the basis of local government.

The tribes each selected fifty members by lot for the Boule , the council that governed Athens on a day-to-day basis. The public opinion of voters could be influenced by the political satires written by the comic poets and performed in the city theaters .

[ 7 ] The Assembly or Ecclesia was open to all full citizens and was both a legislature and a supreme court, except in murder cases and religious matters, which became the only remaining functions of the Areopagus. Most offices were filled by lot, although the ten strategoi (generals) were elected.

Early Athenian coin, 5th century BC.

British Museum .

The silver mines of Laurion contributed significantly to the development of Athens in the 5th century BC, when the Athenians learned to prospect, treat, and refine the ore and used the proceeds to build a massive fleet, at the instigation of Themistocles .

[ 8 ] In 499 BC, Athens sent troops to aid the Ionian Greeks of Asia Minor , who were rebelling against the Persian Empire (see Ionian Revolt ). That provoked two Persian invasions of Greece, both of which were repelled under the leadership of the soldier-statesmen Miltiades and Themistocles (see Persian Wars ). In 490 the Athenians, led by Miltiades , prevented the first invasion of the Persians, guided by king Darius I , at the Battle of Marathon . In 480 the Persians returned under a new ruler, Xerxes I . The Hellenic League led by the Spartan King Leonidas led 7,000 men to hold the narrow passageway of Thermopylae against the 100,000–250,000 army of Xerxes, during which Leonidas and 300 other Spartan elites were killed. Simultaneously the Athenians led an indecisive naval battle off Artemisium . However, that delaying action was not enough to discourage the Persian advance,  which soon marched through Boeotia , setting up Thebes as their base of operations, and entered southern Greece. That forced the Athenians to evacuate Athens, which was taken by the Persians, and seek the protection of their fleet. Subsequently, the Athenians and their allies, led by Themistocles , defeated the Persian navy at sea in the Battle of Salamis . Xerxes had built himself a throne on the coast in order to see the Greeks defeated. Instead, the Persians were routed. Sparta's hegemony was passing to Athens, and it was Athens that took the war to Asia Minor. The victories enabled it to bring most of the Aegean and many other parts of Greece together in the Delian League , an Athenian-dominated alliance.

Athenian hegemony (448–430 BC) [ edit ] Main article: Age of Pericles Pericles – an Athenian general, politician and orator – distinguished himself above the other personalities of the era, men who excelled in politics , philosophy , architecture , sculpture , history and literature . He fostered arts and literature and gave to Athens a splendor which would never return throughout its history. He executed a large number of public works projects and improved the life of the citizens. Hence, this period is often referred to as "Age of Pericles." [ 9 ] Silver mined in Laurium in southeastern Attica contributed greatly to the prosperity of this Athenian Golden Age.

During the time of the ascendancy of Ephialtes as leader of the democratic faction, Pericles was his deputy. When Ephialtes was assassinated by personal enemies, Pericles stepped in and was elected general, or strategos , in 445 BC; a post he held continuously until his death in 429 BC, always by election of the Athenian Assembly . The Parthenon , a lavishly decorated temple to the goddess Athena , was constructed under the administration of Pericles.

[ 10 ] Peloponnesian War (431–404 BC) [ edit ] Main article: Peloponnesian War Further information: Athenian coup of 411 BC The modern National Academy in Athens, with Apollo and Athena on their columns, and Socrates and Plato seated in front.

Resentment by other cities at the hegemony of Athens led to the Peloponnesian War in 431, which pitted Athens and her increasingly rebellious sea empire against a coalition of land-based states led by Sparta . The conflict marked the end of Athenian command of the sea . The war between Athens and the city-state Sparta ended with an Athenian defeat after Sparta started its own navy.

Athenian democracy was briefly overthrown by the coup of 411 , brought about because of its poor handling of the war, but it was quickly restored. The war ended with the complete defeat of Athens in 404. Since the defeat was largely blamed on democratic politicians such as Cleon and Cleophon , there was a brief reaction against democracy, aided by the Spartan army (the rule of the Thirty Tyrants ). In 403, democracy was restored by Thrasybulus and an amnesty declared.

Corinthian War and the Second Athenian League (395–355 BC) [ edit ] Sparta's former allies soon turned against her due to her imperialist policies, and Athens's former enemies, Thebes and Corinth , became her allies.

Argos , Thebes and Corinth, allied with Athens, fought against Sparta in the Corinthian War of 395–387 BC. In 378, the attempt of the Spartan commander Sphodrias to capture Piraeus by surprise triggered Athens to establish the Second Athenian League . Finally Thebes defeated Sparta in 371 in the Battle of Leuctra . However, other Greek cities, including Athens, turned against Thebes , and its dominance was brought to an end at the Battle of Mantinea (362 BC) with the death of its leader, the military genius Epaminondas .

Athens and Macedon (355–322 BC) [ edit ] Further information: League of Corinth , Alexander the Great , Antipatrid dynasty , and Antigonid dynasty By mid century, however, the northern Greek kingdom of Macedon was becoming dominant in Athenian affairs. In 338 BC the armies of Philip II defeated Athens at the Battle of Chaeronea , effectively  limiting Athenian independence. During the winter of 338–37 BC Macedonia, Athens and other Greek states became part of the League of Corinth . Further, the conquests of his son, Alexander the Great , widened Greek horizons and made the traditional Greek city state obsolete.

Antipater dissolved the Athenian government and established a plutocratic system in 322 BC (see Lamian War and Demetrius Phalereus ).  Athens remained a wealthy city with a brilliant cultural life, but ceased to be an independent power.

The city [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Map of ancient Athens showing the Acropolis in middle, the Agora to the northwest, and the city walls.

Athens was in Attica , about 30 stadia from the sea, on the southwest slope of Mount Lycabettus , between the small rivers Cephissus to the west, Ilissos to the south, and the Eridanos to the north, the latter of which flowed through the town. The walled city measured about 1.5 km (0.93 mi) in diameter, although at its peak the city had suburbs extending well beyond these walls. The Acropolis was just south of the centre of this walled area. The city was burnt by Xerxes in 480 BC, but was soon rebuilt under the administration of Themistocles , and was adorned with public buildings by Cimon and especially by Pericles , in whose time (461–429 BC) it reached its greatest splendour. Its beauty was chiefly due to its public buildings, for the private houses were mostly insignificant, and its streets badly laid out. Towards the end of the Peloponnesian War , it contained more than 10,000 houses, [ 11 ] which at a rate of 12 inhabitants to a house would give a population of 120,000, though some writers make the inhabitants as many as 180,000. Athens consisted of two distinct parts: The City , properly so called, divided into The Upper City or Acropolis , and The Lower City, surrounded with walls by Themistocles.

The port city of Piraeus , also surrounded with walls by Themistocles and connected to the city with the Long Walls , built under Conon and Pericles .

City walls [ edit ] Main article: City walls of Athens Main article: Long Walls Map of the environs of Athens showing Piraeus , Phalerum , and the Long Walls The city was surrounded by defensive walls from the Bronze Age and they were rebuilt and extended over the centuries.

In addition the Long Walls consisted of two parallel walls leading to Piraeus , 40 stadia long (4.5 miles, 7 km), running parallel to each other, with a narrow passage between them and, furthermore, a wall to Phalerum on the east, 35 stadia long (4 miles, 6.5 km). There were therefore three long walls in all; but the name Long Walls seems to have been confined to the two leading to the Piraeus, while the one leading to Phalerum was called the Phalerian Wall . The entire circuit of the walls was 174.5 stadia (nearly 22 miles, 35 km), of which 43 stadia (5.5 miles, 9 km) belonged to the city, 75 stadia (9.5 miles, 15 km) to the long walls, and 56.5 stadia (7 miles, 11 km) to Piraeus, Munichia, and Phalerum.

Gates [ edit ] There were many gates, among the more important there were: On the West side: the Dipylon , the most frequented gate of the city, leading from the inner Kerameikos to the outer Kerameikos, and to the Academy . The Sacred Gate , where the sacred road to Eleusis began. The Knight's Gate, probably between the Hill of the Nymphs and the Pnyx . The Piraean Gate, between the Pnyx and the Mouseion, leading to the carriage road between the Long Walls to the Piraeus. The Melitian Gate, so called because it led to the deme Melite, within the city.

On the South side: the Gate of the Dead in the neighbourhood of the Mouseion. The Itonian Gate, near the Ilissos, where the road to Phalerum began.

On the East side: the Gate of Diochares, leading to the Lyceum . The Diomean Gate, leading to Cynosarges and the deme Diomea.

On the North side: the Acharnian Gate, leading to the deme Acharnai .

Acropolis (upper city) [ edit ] The Acropolis imagined in an 1846 painting by Leo von Klenze The Acropolis , also called Cecropia from its reputed founder, Cecrops , was a steep rock in the middle of the city, about 50 meters high, 350 meters long, and 150 meters wide; its sides were naturally scarped on all sides except the west end. It was originally surrounded by an ancient Cyclopean wall said to have been built by the Pelasgians . At the time of the Peloponnesian war only the north part of this wall remained, and this portion was still called the Pelasgic Wall ; while the south part which had been rebuilt by Cimon , was called the Cimonian Wall . On the west end of the Acropolis, where access is alone practicable, were the magnificent Propylaea , "the Entrances", built by Pericles , before the right wing of which was the small Temple of Athena Nike . The summit of the Acropolis was covered with temples, statues of bronze and marble, and various other works of art. Of the temples, the grandest was the Parthenon , sacred to the "Virgin" goddess Athena ; and north of the Parthenon was the magnificent Erechtheion , containing three separate temples, one to Athena Polias , or the "Protectress of the State", the Erechtheion proper, or sanctuary of Erechtheus , and the Pandroseion , or sanctuary of Pandrosos , the daughter of Cecrops. Between the Parthenon and Erechtheion was the colossal Statue of Athena Promachos , or the "Fighter in the Front", whose helmet and spear was the first object on the Acropolis visible from the sea.

Agora (lower city) [ edit ] The lower city was built in the plain around the Acropolis, but this plain also contained several hills, especially in the southwest part. On the west side the walls embraced the Hill of the Nymphs and the Pnyx , and to the southeast they ran along beside the Ilissos .

Districts [ edit ] The Inner Kerameikos , or "Potter's Quarter", in the west of the city, extending north as far as the Dipylon gate, by which it was separated from the outer Kerameikos; the Kerameikos contained the Agora , or "market-place", the only one in the city, lying northwest of the Acropolis, and north of the Areopagus .

The deme Melite , in the west of the city, south of the inner Kerameikos.

The deme Skambonidai , in the northern part of the city, east of the inner Kerameikos.

The Kollytos , in the southern part of the city, south and southwest of the Acropolis.

Koele , a district in the southwest of the city.

Limnai, a district east of Melite and Kollytos, between the Acropolis and the Ilissos.

Diomea , a district in the east of the city, near the gate of the same name and the Cynosarges .

Agrai, a district south of Diomea.

Hills [ edit ] The Areopagus , the "Hill of Ares ", west of the Acropolis, which gave its name to the celebrated council that held its sittings there, was accessible on the south side by a flight of steps cut out of the rock.

The Hill of the Nymphs, northwest of the Areopagus.

The Pnyx , a semicircular hill, southwest of the Areopagus, where the ekklesia (assemblies) of the people were held in earlier times, for afterwards the people usually met in the Theatre of Dionysus .

The Mouseion, "the Hill of the Muses", south of the Pnyx and the Areopagus.

Streets [ edit ] Among the more important streets, there were: The Piraean Street, which led from the Piraean gate to the Agora .

The Panathenaic Way, which led from the Dipylon gate to the Acropolis via the Agora , along which a solemn procession was made during the Panathenaic Festival .

The Street of the Tripods, on the east side of the Acropolis.

The streets formed an important space for the social interaction of the Athenians of the classical age.

[ 12 ] Public buildings [ edit ] The Temple of Hephaestus in modern-day Athens Temples: of these the most important was the Temple of Olympian Zeus , southeast of the Acropolis, near the Ilissos and the fountain Callirrhoë, which was long unfinished, and was first completed by Hadrian . The Temple of Hephaestus , located to the west of the Agora . The Temple of Ares , to the north of the Agora.

Metroon , or temple of the mother of the gods, on the west side of the Agora. Besides these, there was a vast number of other temples in all parts of the city.

The Bouleuterion (Senate House), at the west side of the Agora.

The Prytaneion , a round building close to the Bouleuterion, built c. 470 BC by Cimon , which served as the Prytaneion , in which the Prytaneis took their meals and offered their sacrifices.

Plan Roman Agora at Athens Stoae : or Colonnades, supported by pillars, and used as places of resort in the heat of the day, of which there were several in Athens. In the Agora there were: the Stoa Basileios , the court of the King-Archon , on the west side of the Agora; the Stoa Eleutherios , or Colonnade of Zeus Eleutherios, on the west side of the Agora; the Stoa Poikile , so called because it was adorned with fresco painting of the Battle of Marathon by Polygnotus , on the north side of the Agora.

Artist's impression of the Theatre of Dionysus Theatres: the Theatre of Dionysus , on the southeast slope of the Acropolis, was the great theatre of the state. Besides this there were Odeons , for contests in vocal and instrumental music, an ancient one near the fountain Callirrhoë, and a second built by Pericles , close to the theatre of Dionysius, on the southeast slope of the Acropolis. The large odeon surviving today, the Odeon of Herodes Atticus was built in Roman times .

Panathenaic Stadium , south of the Ilissos, in the district Agrai, where the athletic portion of the Panathenaic Games were held.

The Argyrocopeum (mint) appears to have been in or adjoining the chapel ( heroon ) of a hero named Stephanephorus.

Suburbs [ edit ] The Outer Kerameikos , northwest of the city, was the finest suburb of Athens; here were buried the Athenians who had fallen in war, and at the further end of it was the Academy , six stadia from the city.

Cynosarges , east of the city, across the Ilissos, reached from the Diomea gate, a gymnasium sacred to Heracles , where the Cynic Antisthenes taught.

Lyceum , east of the city, a gymnasium sacred to Apollo Lyceus , where Aristotle taught.

Culture [ edit ] Main articles: Age of Pericles , Ancient Greek philosophy , Athenian festivals , and Greek theatre The Karyatides statues of the Erechtheion on its Acropolis.

The period from the end of the Persian Wars to the Macedonian conquest marked the zenith of Athens as a center of literature, philosophy (see Greek philosophy ) and the arts (see Greek theatre ). Some of the most important figures of Western cultural and intellectual history lived in Athens during this period: the dramatists Aeschylus , Aristophanes , Euripides and Sophocles , the philosophers Aristotle , Plato , and Socrates , the historians Herodotus , Thucydides and Xenophon , the poet Simonides and the sculptor Phidias . The leading statesman of this period was Pericles , who used the tribute paid by the members of the Delian League to build the Parthenon and other great monuments of classical Athens. The city became, in Pericles's words, an education for Hellas (usually quoted as "the school of Hellas [Greece].") [ 13 ] See also [ edit ] History portal Greece portal Politics Archon basileus Episkopoi Eponymous archon Solonian Constitution Seisachtheia Society Women in classical Athens Ancient Greek crafts Class Aristoi Banausos Ephebos Eupatridae Geomori Metic Seisachtheia Education Ephebic Oath Taxation Liturgy Trierarchy Athenian Army References [ edit ] ^ Democracy and knowledge: innovation and learning in classical Athens by Josiah Ober p. 40 ISBN 0-691-13347-6 (2008) ^ "Plato's Academy" .

Hellenic Ministry of Culture . Archived from the original on 2007-03-21 . Retrieved 2007-03-28 .

^ "Greece uncovers 'holy grail' of Greek archeology" . CNN. 1997-01-16. Archived from the original on April 4, 2005 . Retrieved 2007-03-28 .

^ Cartledge, Paul.

"Ancient History in depth: The Democratic Experiment" . BBC . Retrieved 2007-12-26 .

^ "Ancient Greece" .

MSN Encarta . Archived from the original on 2009-10-28 . Retrieved 26 January 2007 .

^ Translated Robin Waterfield, Herodotus (1998).

The Histories . Oxford University Press.

^ Henderson, J. (1993) Comic Hero versus Political Elite pp. 307–319 in Sommerstein, A.H.; S. Halliwell; J. Henderson; B. Zimmerman, eds. (1993).

Tragedy, Comedy and the Polis . Bari: Levante Editori.

^ "Lavrion Ancient Silver Mines" .

ancient-greece.org . Retrieved 2020-11-17 .

^ Samons II, Loren (2007).

The Cambridge companion to the Age of Pericles . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521003896 .

^ Camp, John (2001).

The Archaeology of Athens . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0300081978 .

^ Xenophon, Mem.

iii. 6.14 ^ Matuszewski, Rafał (2019).

Räume der Reputation. Zur bürgerlichen Kommunikation im Athen des 4. Jahrhunderts v. Chr.

[Spaces of reputation. On civic communication in Athens in the 4th century BC].

Historia Einzelschriften, vol. 257. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, ISBN 978-3-515-12233-7 , pp. 27–47.

^ Thucydides, 2.41.1 v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Ancient Athenian politicians Aeschines Agyrrhius Alcibiades Andocides Archinus Aristides Aristogeiton Aristophon Autocles Callistratus Charmides Chremonides Cimon Cleisthenes Cleophon Cleon Critias Demades Demetrius of Phalerum Demochares Democles Demosthenes Draco Echedemos Ephialtes Eratosthenes Eubulus Hagnon Hyperbolus Hypereides Laches Lycurgus Lysicles Miltiades Moerocles Nicias Pericles Philinus Phocion Pisistratus Solon Themistocles Theramenes Thrasybulus Thucydides Timoleon Timotheus Xanthippus v t e Ancient Greek wars Archaic First Messenian War Lelantine War Second Messenian War Lydian–Milesian War First Sacred War Sicilian Wars Classical Greco-Persian Wars Aeginetan War Wars of the Delian League Third Messenian War First Peloponnesian War Second Sacred War Samian War Second Peloponnesian War Phyle Campaign Corinthian War Bosporan–Heracleote War Boeotian War Wars of the Theban hegemony Theban–Spartan War Social War (357–355 BC) Third Sacred War Foreign War Expansion of Macedonia Wars of Alexander the Great Hellenistic Lamian War Wars of the Diadochi Antigonid–Nabataean confrontations Seleucid–Mauryan war Pyrrhic War Syrian Wars Pyrrhus' invasion of the Peloponnese Chremonidean War Seleucid–Parthian Wars Cleomenean War Lyttian War Social War (220–217 BC) Macedonian Wars ( First , Second , Third , Fourth ) Cretan War Roman–Seleucid War Aetolian War War against Nabis Galatian War Maccabean Revolt Seleucid Dynastic Wars Achaean War Mithridatic Wars ( First , Second , Third ) War of Actium Military history Authority control databases National Czech Republic Geographic Pleiades 37°58′N 23°43′E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.97°N 23.72°E ﻿ / 37.97; 23.72 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐w4h7b
Cached time: 20250817045220
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.849 seconds
Real time usage: 1.067 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6032/1000000
Revision size: 28687/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 260409/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14877/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 98865/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.465/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17386528/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  779.356      1 -total
 27.01%  210.478      1 Template:Infobox_country
 16.60%  129.358      1 Template:Reflist
 13.93%  108.540      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
 13.58%  105.850      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 13.32%  103.815      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.84%  100.105      1 Template:Lang
 10.36%   80.713      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
  9.90%   77.140      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.28%   64.564      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13517898:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045220 and revision id 1305636451. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classical_Athens&oldid=1305636451 " Categories : Classical Athens 508 BC 6th-century BC establishments in Greece 322 BC 4th-century BC disestablishments in Greece Ancient Athens Greek city-states Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Pages with Ancient Greek (to 1453) IPA Pages with Greek IPA Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 06:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Classical Athens 50 languages Add topic

