Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Research 3 Achievements 4 Awards 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Mei-Po Kwan 2 languages Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geographer Mei-Po Kwan Choh-Ming Li Professor of Geography and Resource Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) Incumbent Assumed office August 2019 Director, Institute of Space and Earth Information Science, CUHK Incumbent Assumed office August 2019 Head, Chung Chi College, CUHK Incumbent Assumed office 1 August 2023 Director, Institute of Future Cities Incumbent Assumed office 2023 Personal details Alma mater The Chinese University of Hong Kong ( BSSc ) The University of California, Los Angeles (MA) The University of California, Santa Barbara ( PhD ) Occupation The Ohio State University University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign The Chinese University of Hong Kong Mei-Po Kwan ( Chinese : 關美寶 ) is a geographer known for her research contributions in Geographic Information Science , and human geography , particularly as they apply to time geography and human mobility. She is the Choh-Ming Li Professor of Geography and Resource Management at The Chinese University of Hong Kong ( CUHK ), Director of the Institute of Space and Earth Information Science (ISEIS) of CUHK, Director of the Institute of Future Cities of CUHK, and Head of Chung Chi College of CUHK.

Biography [ edit ] Kwan was born in Hong Kong. Her favorite subject in secondary school was geography. When she entered CUHK, she picked nothing but geography as her major.

[ 1 ] She lived in the Theology Building, a Chung Chi College student hostel. During year 2 of her undergraduate study, she went on exchange at the International Christian University in Tokyo, Japan, for a year.

Kwan obtained her Bachelor of Social Science degree with first-class honors from CUHK in 1985; her Master’s degree in Urban Planning from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) in 1989; and her Doctor of Philosophy degree in Geography from the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) in 1994. She developed her teaching and research career at the Ohio State University in 1995, and became a Distinguished Professor of Social and Behavioural Sciences at the University.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Between 2013 and 2019, she served as a Professor of Geography and Geographic Information Science at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Since 2019, she has been the Choh-Ming Li Professor of Geography and Resource Management and Director of ISEIS of CUHK.

[ 1 ] Since 2023, she has been the Head of Chung Chi College, CUHK, and Director of the Institute of Future Cities of CUHK.

[ 2 ] Led by Kwan, ISEIS held a ceremony in 2023 to launch a remote sensing satellite construction project, the first earth observation satellite construction project funded by the HKSAR Government. The research team will develop and launch the first CUHK satellite, which will participate in natural disaster monitoring, carbon neutrality, and sustainable development research.

[ 3 ] Research [ edit ] Kwan has made groundbreaking contributions to diverse research areas, covering environmental health, urban travel and health issues in cities, sustainability, human mobility, and geographic information science (GIScience), among others. She discovered the uncertain geographic context problem (UGCoP) and the neighborhood effect averaging problem (NEAP). She is a leading worldwide researcher having developed and deployed real-time GPS tracking and mobile sensing, such as air quality sensors, to collect individual-level data for environmental health research. She is also the first scientist who deploys remote sensing technologies for vehicle detection, and develops Hong Kong’s first low Earth orbit satellite.

Kwan emphasises the application of GIS in the research on health and urban geography, paying particular attention to the spatial and temporal characteristics of human daily activities, as well as the impact of the built environment and social environment on individual daily life experiences and well-being. Projects include the study of green space, women in sex work and the risk environment, youth and adult drug abuse, privacy issues caused by anti-epidemic measures, and the protection of geoprivacy via the development of a Geospatial Virtual Data Enclave (GVDE), among others.

[ 4 ] In 2023, severe flooding was caused by Typhoon Haikui . The research team led by Kwan and Professor Ma Peifeng, Vice-Chancellor Assistant Professor of the Department of Geography and Resource Management, used the satellite’s images to monitor and analyse the flooded areas and further evaluate the impact of the flooding.

[ 5 ] Achievements [ edit ] Kwan has made pioneering and innovative contributions to multiple research areas, including environmental health, transport, social issues in cities, sustainability, human mobility, and GIScience, among others. Kwan has published over 470 books, journal articles, and book chapters; hosted and co-hosted over 50 researches funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation, the U.S. National Institutes of Health, the European Research Council, the National Natural Science Foundation of China, and the Hong Kong Research Grants Council. She is named Fellow of the U.K. Academy of Social Sciences; Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society (UK); Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS); Fellow of the American Association of Geographers; and Fellow of the International Society for Urban Informatics.

[ 6 ] Kwan has delivered keynote speeches at renowned universities and institutes worldwide, including Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), University of Oxford, Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, and Chinese Academy of Sciences. She has delivered over 400 keynote addresses, invited lectures, and other invited presentations in more than 20 countries. Kwan was listed as a Highly Cited Researcher by Clarivate in 2019 and 2021, and ranked fourth internationally in the field of Geography by Standford University in 2022, and first nationally in the field of Geography by globalauthorid.com.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Kwan has served as an editor of Annals of the American Association of Geographers for 12 years, an editor of Regional Studies , an associate editor of Geographical Analysis , a National Councillor of the Association of American Geographers (AAG), a Member of the Board of Directors of the University Consortium for Geographic Information Science (UCGIS), General Chair of GIScience 2012 International Conference, President of the International Association of Chinese Professionals in Geographic Information Sciences (CPGIS), and Chair of AAG Health and Medical Geography Specialty Group and AAG GIS Specialty Group. She has also been an advisory panellist or reviewer of grant proposals of numerous science foundations and institutions, including the U.S. National Science Foundation, U.S. National Institutes of Health, European Research Council, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Austrian Science Fund, Australian Research Council, Royal Geographical Society (U.K.), Research Foundation of Flanders, Research Grants Council of Hong Kong, and Swiss National Science Foundation. Kwan has been on the editorial boards for over 100 journals.

Awards [ edit ] Anderson Medal of Honor 2004, Fellow, Royal Geographical Society [ 4 ] 2005, University Consortium for Geographic Information Science (UCGIS) Research Award [ 4 ] 2005, Edward L. Ullman Award, AAG Transportation Geography Specialty Group [ 9 ] 2009, Fellow, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) [ 4 ] 2011, Distinguished Scholarship Honors, Association of American Geographers (AAG), being the first female Asian recipient since the establishment of the Association [ 10 ] 2016, E. Willard and Ruby S. Miller Award, American Association of Geographers [ 11 ] 2016, Melinda S. Meade Distinguished Scholarship Award, AAG Health and Medical Geography Specialty Group [ 4 ] 2016, Guggenheim Fellow [ 12 ] 2017, Distinguished Scholar Award, International Association of Chinese Professionals in Geographic Information Sciences (CPGIS) [ 13 ] 2017, Alan Hay Award in Transport Geography, Transport Geography Research Group of the Royal Geographical Society with the Institute of British Geographers (RGS-IBG) [ 14 ] 2018, Stanley Brunn Award for Creativity in Geography, American Association of Geographers [ 15 ] 2018, Fellow, U.K. Academy of Social Sciences [ 16 ] 2019, Highly Cited Researcher 2019, Web of Science, Clarivate [ 17 ] 2020, Fellow, American Association of Geographers 2021, Wilbanks Prize for Transformational Research in Geography, American Association of Geographers [ 18 ] 2021, ranked third nationally in Social Sciences and Humanities according to Research.com 2021, Highly Cited Researcher 2021, Web of Science, Clarivate [ 19 ] 2022, James R. Anderson Medal of Honor in Applied Geography, AAG Applied Geography Specialty Group [ 20 ] 2022, ranked the world’s No. 4 in the field of Geography according to the list of the World’s Top 2% Scientists by Stanford University 2023, Outstanding Achievement Award in Modeling Geographical Systems, Modeling Geographical Systems Commission (MGSC) of the International Geographical Union (IGU) [ 21 ] 2023, ranked first nationally in Geography according to the “2023 Global Scholar Academic Impact Rankings” of globalauthorid.com.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] 2024, Lifetime Achievement Award, International Association of Chinese Professionals in Geographic Information Sciences (CPGIS) [ citation needed ] 2024, Fellow, Geographical Society of China [ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Cynthia Brewer – American geographer Duane Marble – American geographer George F. Jenks – American geographer and cartographer Michael Dacey – American geographer and spatial statistician Quantitative geography – Subfield of geographic methods Stewart Fotheringham – British-American geographer Technical geography – Study of spatial information Torsten Hägerstrand – Swedish geographer (1916–2004) Waldo R. Tobler – American geographer Yi-Fu Tuan – Chinese-American geographer (1930–2022) References [ edit ] ^ a b c "崇基校友關美寶 推動科研創新天" (PDF) .

《中大校友》99 . September 2019.

^ a b "以生命影響生命" (PDF) .

崇基校友 . December 2023.

^ "CUHK ISEIS receives HK$33 million research grants to promote smart traffic and satellite remote sensing in Hong Kong" .

The Chinese University of Hong Kong Press Release . 1 June 2023.

^ a b c d e "Mei-Po Kwan" . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "Satellite technologies for flooding monitoring (Chinese version only)" .

The Chinese University of Hong Kong Press Release . 12 September 2023.

^ "Our Fellows" .

The International Society for Urban Informatics . 29 January 2024.

^ a b "2023全球學者學術影響力排名" . 12 January 2024.

^ a b "重磅！2023全球學者學術影響力排名，各學科中國排名前200學者名單，看看都有誰" .

微信公眾號經管世界 . 30 January 2024.

^ "Mei-Po Kwan" .

Department of Geography & Geographic Information Science, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "AAG Honors Recipients" .

The American Association of Geographers . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "AAG E. Willard and Ruby S. Miller Award Recipients" .

The American Association of Geographers . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "Fellows Search: Mei-Po Kwan" .

John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "CPGIS Award: Distinguished Scholar Award in 2017" .

The International Association of Chinese Professionals in Geographic Information Sciences . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "Hey Award" .

Transport Geography Research Group . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "AAG Stanley Brunn Award for Creativity in Geography Recipients" .

The American Association of Geographers . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "Fellows" .

Academy of Social Science . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "Eight Illinois researchers rank among world's most influential" .

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "AAG Wilbanks Prize for Transformational Research in Geography Recipients" .

The American Association of Geographers . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "Mei-Po Kwan" .

Web of Science . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "Previous Anderson Medal of Honor Recipients" .

The American Association of Geographers . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "Announcement of IGU MGSC Awards 2023" .

Modeling Geographical Systems Commission (MGSC) International Geographical Union (IGU) . Retrieved 11 March 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Wikiquote has quotations related to Mei-Po Kwan .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Academics ORCID ResearcherID Scopus Google Scholar DBLP Publons People DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mei-Po_Kwan&oldid=1282565345 " Categories : American people of Chinese descent 1962 births Living people Academic staff of the Chinese University of Hong Kong American geographers Women geographers Geographic information scientists University of California, Santa Barbara alumni Alumni of the Chinese University of Hong Kong University of California, Los Angeles alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 This page was last edited on 27 March 2025, at 05:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mei-Po Kwan 2 languages Add topic

