Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Overview 3 Employments and salaries 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Chemical engineer 15 languages العربية Bikol Central Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano 日本語 Português Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Professional in the field of chemical engineering Chemical engineers design, construct and operate plants.

Part of a series on Chemical engineering Outline History Index Fundamentals Industry Engineer Process Unit operations Kinetics Transport phenomena Unit processes Chemical plant Chemical reactor Separation processes Aspects Heat transfer Mass transfer Fluid dynamics Process design Process control Chemical thermodynamics Reaction engineering Process safety Glossaries Glossary of chemistry Glossary of engineering A–L M–Z Category v t e A chemical engineer is a professional equipped with the knowledge of chemistry and  other basic sciences who works principally in the chemical industry to convert basic raw materials into a variety of products and deals with the design and operation of plants and equipment.

[ 1 ] This person applies the principles of chemical engineering in any of its various practical applications, such as Design, manufacture, and operation of plants and machinery in industrial chemical and related processes ("chemical process engineers"); Development of new or adapted substances for products ranging from foods and beverages to cosmetics to cleaners to pharmaceutical ingredients, among many other products ("chemical product engineers"); Development of new technologies such as fuel cells , hydrogen power and nanotechnology , as well as working in fields wholly or partially derived from chemical engineering such as materials science , polymer engineering , and biomedical engineering . This can include working of geophysical projects such as rivers, stones, and signs.

History [ edit ] Portrait of Johann Rudolf Glauber The president of the Institution of Chemical Engineers said in his presidential address "I believe most of us would be willing to regard Edward Charles Howard (1774–1816) as the first chemical engineer of any eminence".

[ 2 ] Others have suggested Johann Rudolf Glauber (1604–1670) for his development of processes for the manufacture of the major industrial acids.

[ 3 ] The term appeared in print in 1839, though from the context it suggests a person with mechanical engineering knowledge working in the chemical industry .

[ 4 ] In 1880, George E. Davis wrote in a letter to Chemical News "A Chemical Engineer is a person who possesses chemical and mechanical knowledge, and who applies that knowledge to the utilisation, on a manufacturing scale, of chemical action."  He proposed the name Society of Chemical Engineers, for what was in fact constituted as the Society of Chemical Industry . At the first General Meeting of the Society in 1882, some 15 of the 300 members described themselves as chemical engineers, but the Society's formation of a Chemical Engineering Group in 1918 attracted about 400 members.

[ 5 ] In 1905 a publication called The Chemical Engineer was founded in the US, [ 6 ] and in 1908 the American Institute of Chemical Engineers was established.

[ 7 ] In 1924 the Institution of Chemical Engineers adopted the following definition: "A chemical engineer is a professional man experienced in the design, construction and operation of plant and works in which matter undergoes a change of state and composition." [ 8 ] As can be seen from the later definition, the occupation is not limited to the chemical industry , but more generally the process industries, or other situations in which complex physical and/or chemical processes are to be managed.

The UK journal The Chemical Engineer (began 1956) has a series of biographies available online entitled “Chemical Engineers who Changed the World”, [ 9 ] Overview [ edit ] Chemical engineers use computers to manage automated systems in production plants.

Historically, the chemical engineer has been primarily concerned with process engineering , which can generally be divided into two complementary areas: chemical reaction engineering and separation processes . The modern discipline of chemical engineering, however, encompasses much more than just process engineering.  Chemical engineers are now engaged in the development and production of a diverse range of products, as well as in commodity and specialty chemicals . These products include high-performance materials needed for aerospace , automotive , biomedical , electronic , environmental and military applications. Examples include ultra-strong fibers, fabrics , adhesives and composites for vehicles, bio-compatible materials for implants and prosthetics, gels for medical applications, pharmaceuticals , and films with special dielectric, optical or spectroscopic properties for opto-electronic devices. Additionally, chemical engineering is often intertwined with biology and biomedical engineering .  Many chemical engineers work on biological projects such as understanding biopolymers ( proteins ) and mapping the human genome .

Employments and salaries [ edit ] According to a 2015 salary survey by the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, the median annual salary for a chemical engineer was approximately $127,000.

[ 10 ] The survey was repeated in 2017 and the median annual salary dropped slightly to $124,000. The decrease in median salary was unexpected. A factor contributing to the decline may be that 2017's survey was conducted by a different research and analysis firm. Median salaries ranged from $70,450 for chemical engineers with fewer than three years of experience to $156,000 for those with more than 40 years in the workforce.

[ 11 ] In the UK , the IChemE 2016 Salary Survey reported a median salary of approximately £57,000, with a starting salary for a graduate averaging £28,350.

[ 12 ] Chemical engineering in the USA is one of the engineering disciplines with the highest participation of women, with 35% of students compared with 20% in engineering.

[ 13 ] In the UK in 2014, students starting degrees were 25% female, compared with 15% in engineering.

[ 14 ] US graduates who responded to a 2015 salary survey were 18.8% female.

[ 10 ] According to the latest 2023 figures, Bayes Business School graduates get an average of £51,921 within 5 years of graduation, which is the most among UK universities. This was followed by the University of Oxford at £49,086 and the University of Warwick at £47,446.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Chemistry portal Engineering portal American Institute of Chemical Engineers Distillation Fluid dynamics Heat transfer History of chemical engineering Institution of Chemical Engineers (IChemE) List of chemical engineering societies List of chemical engineers Mass transfer Process control Process design (chemical engineering) Process engineering Process miniaturization Unit operations Chemfluence References [ edit ] ^ MobyDick Dictionary of Engineering", McGraw-Hill, 2nd Ed.

^ Transactions of the IChemE (1951) Volume 29 page 163 ^ Herman Skolnik in W. F. Furter (ed) (1982) A Century of Chemical Engineering ISBN 0-306-40895-3 page 230 ^ Ure, Andrew (1839) A Dictionary of Arts Manufactures and Mines , London: Longman, Orme, Brown, Green & Longman, page 1220 ^ Colin Duvall and Sean F, Johnston (2000) Scaling Up: The Institution of Chemical Engineers and the Rise of a New Profession Kluwer Academic Publishers ^ The Cornell daily Sun Volume XXV, Number 25, 26 October 1904 ^ John C. Olsen (December 1932), Chemical Engineering As A Profession: Origin and Early Growth of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers Archived 2012-08-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Transactions of the Institution of Chemical Engineers volume 2 page 23 (1924) ^ www.thechemicalengineer.com Archived 2017-02-11 at the Wayback Machine Chemical engineers who changed the world ^ a b Chemical Engineering Progress June 2015 ^ "Announcing the 2017 AIChE Chemical Engineering Salary Survey" .

www.aiche.org . 2017-06-14 . Retrieved 2019-11-02 .

^ Institution of Chemical Engineers Annual Review 2016 ^ Brawner, C. E., Lord, S. M., Layton, R. A., Ohland, M. W., & Long, R. A., (2015) International Journal of Engineering Education Vol. 31, No. 6(A), 1431, "Factors Affecting Women’s Persistence in Chemical Engineering" ^ The Chemical Engineer , March 2015 p 20 ^ Bryan (2023-11-30).

"Average Graduate Salaries Among The Top Universities In The UK" .

Britannia UK . Retrieved 2023-12-06 .

External links [ edit ] American Institute of Chemical Engineers (USA) Institution of Chemical Engineers (UK) Canadian Society for Chemical Engineers Engineers Australia (AUS) v t e Chemical engineering topics History History of chemical engineering Concepts Unit operations Unit processes Chemical engineer Chemical process Unit operations Momentum transfer Heat transfer Mass transfer Unit process Chemical reaction engineering Chemical kinetics Chemical process modeling Branches Chemical thermodynamics Chemical plant design Fluid dynamics Process design Process safety Transport phenomena Others Outline of chemical engineering Index of chemical engineering articles Education for Chemical Engineers List of chemical engineers List of chemical engineering societies List of chemical process simulators Category Portal:Engineering Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chemical_engineer&oldid=1306375339 " Categories : Chemical engineers Engineering occupations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 11:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chemical engineer 15 languages Add topic

