Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Species–area relationship 9 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Species-area curve ) Relationship between the size of an area or habitat and the number of species it can support The species–area relationship for a contiguous habitat The species–area relationship or species–area curve describes the relationship between the area of a habitat , or of part of a habitat, and the number of species found within that area. Larger areas tend to contain larger numbers of species, and empirically, the relative numbers seem to follow systematic mathematical relationships.

[ 1 ] The species–area relationship is usually constructed for a single type of organism, such as all vascular plants or all species of a specific trophic level within a particular site. It is rarely if ever, constructed for all types of organisms if simply because of the prodigious data requirements. It is related but not identical to the species discovery curve .

Ecologists have proposed a wide range of factors determining the slope and elevation of the species–area relationship.

[ 2 ] These factors include the relative balance between immigration and extinction, [ 3 ] rate and magnitude of disturbance on small vs. large areas, [ 3 ] predator-prey dynamics, [ 4 ] and clustering of individuals of the same species as a result of dispersal limitation or habitat heterogeneity .

[ 5 ] The species–area relationship has been reputed to follow from the 2nd law of thermodynamics .

[ 6 ] In contrast to these "mechanistic" explanations, others assert the need to test whether the pattern is simply the result of a random sampling process.

[ 7 ] Species–area relationships are often evaluated in conservation science in order to predict extinction rates in the case of habitat loss and habitat fragmentation .

[ 8 ] Authors have classified the species–area relationship according to the type of habitats being sampled and the census design used.

Frank W. Preston , an early investigator of the theory of the species–area relationship, divided it into two types: samples (a census of a contiguous habitat that grows in the census area, also called "mainland" species–area relationships), and isolates (a census of discontiguous habitats, such as islands, also called "island" species–area relationships).

[ 1 ] Michael Rosenzweig also notes that species–area relationships for very large areas—those collecting different biogeographic provinces or continents—behave differently from species–area relationships from islands or smaller contiguous areas.

[ 2 ] It has been presumed that "island"-like species–area relationships have steeper slopes (in log–log space ) than "mainland" relationships, [ 2 ] but a 2006 metaanalysis of almost 700 species–area relationships found the former had lower slopes than the latter.

[ 9 ] Regardless of census design and habitat type, species–area relationships are often fitted with a simple function. Frank Preston advocated the power function based on his investigation of the lognormal species-abundance distribution .

[ 1 ] If S {\displaystyle S} is the number of species, A {\displaystyle A} is the habitat area, and z {\displaystyle z} is the slope of the species area relationship in log-log space, then the power function species–area relationship goes as: S = c A z {\displaystyle S=cA^{z}} Here c {\displaystyle c} is a constant which depends on the unit used for area measurement, and equals the number of species that would exist if the habitat area was confined to one square unit. The graph looks like a straight line on log–log axes , and can be linearized as: log ⁡ ⁡ ( S ) = log ⁡ ⁡ ( c A z ) = log ⁡ ⁡ ( c ) + z log ⁡ ⁡ ( A ) {\displaystyle \log(S)=\log(cA^{z})=\log(c)+z\log(A)} In contrast, Henry Gleason championed the semilog model: S = log ⁡ ⁡ ( c A z ) = log ⁡ ⁡ ( c ) + z log ⁡ ⁡ ( A ) {\displaystyle S=\log(cA^{z})=\log(c)+z\log(A)} which looks like a straight line on semilog axes , where the area is logged and the number of species is arithmetic. In either case, the species–area relationship is almost always decelerating (has a negative second derivative) when plotted arithmetically.

[ 10 ] Species–area relationships are often graphed for islands (or habitats that are otherwise isolated from one another, such as woodlots in an agricultural landscape) of different sizes.

[ 3 ] Although larger islands tend to have more species, a smaller island may have more than a larger one. In contrast, species–area relationships for contiguous habitats will always rise as areas increases, provided that the sample plots are nested within one another.

The species–area relationship for mainland areas (contiguous habitats) will differ according to the census design used to construct it.

[ 11 ] A common method is to use quadrats of successively larger size so that the area enclosed by each one includes the area enclosed by the smaller one (i.e. areas are nested).

In the first part of the 20th century, plant ecologists often used the species–area curve to estimate the minimum size of a quadrat necessary to adequately characterize a community. This is done by plotting the curve (usually on arithmetic axes, not log-log or semilog axes), and estimating the area after which using larger quadrats results in the addition of only a few more species. This is called the minimal area. A quadrat that encloses the minimal area is called a relevé , and using species–area curves in this way is called the relevé method. It was largely developed by the Swiss ecologist Josias Braun-Blanquet .

[ 12 ] Estimation of the minimal area from the curve is necessarily subjective, so some authors prefer to define the minimal area as the area enclosing at least 95 percent (or some other large proportion) of the total species found. The problem with this is that the species area curve does not usually approach an asymptote , so it is not obvious what should be taken as the total.

[ 12 ] the number of species always increases with area up to the point where the area of the entire world has been accumulated.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Scaling pattern of occupancy Species richness Storage effect Unified neutral theory of biodiversity (UNTB) References [ edit ] ^ a b c Preston, F.W. 1962. The canonical distribution of commonness and rarity: Part I. Ecology 43:185–215 and 410–432.

^ a b c Rosenzweig, M.L. 1995. Species Diversity in Space and Time. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

^ a b c MacArthur and Wilson. 1967.

The Theory of Island Biogeography.

Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.

^ Brose, U., A. Ostling, K. Harrison, and N.D. Martinez. 2004. Unified spatial scaling of species and their trophic interactions. Nature 428:167–171.

^ Green, J.L. and A. Ostling. 2003. Endemics-area relationships: The influence of species dominance and spatial aggregation. Ecology 84:3090–3097.

^ Würtz, P. & Annila, A. (2008).

"Roots of diversity relations" .

Journal of Biophysics .

2008 : 1– 8.

arXiv : 0906.0251 .

doi : 10.1155/2008/654672 .

PMC 2814133 .

PMID 20130809 .

^ Connor, E.F. and E.D. McCoy. 1979. The statistics and biology of the species–area relationship. American Naturalist 113:791–833.

^ Matthews, Thomas J.; Cottee-Jones, H. Eden; Whittaker, Robert J. (2014).

"Habitat fragmentation and the species–area relationship: A focus on total species richness obscures the impact of habitat loss on habitat specialists" (PDF) .

Diversity and Distributions .

20 (10): 1136– 1146.

Bibcode : 2014DivDi..20.1136M .

doi : 10.1111/ddi.12227 .

S2CID 43911618 .

^ Drakare S, Lennon J.L., Hillebrand H., 2006 The imprint of the geographical, evolutionary and ecological context on species–area relationships Ecology Letters 9 (2), 215–227 ^ Arrhenius, O. 1921. " Species and Area " J. Ecol. 9: 95–99 ^ Scheiner, S.M. 2003. Six types of species–area curves. Global Ecology and Biogeography 12:441–447.

^ a b Barbour, M. G., Burk, J. H., & Pitts, W. D. (1980).

Terrestrial plant ecology . Menlo Park CA: Benjamin/Cummings. Pp. 158–160.

^ Williamson, M., K.J. Gaston, and W.M. Lonsdale. 2001. The species–area relationship does not have any asymptote! Journal of Biogeography 28:827–830.

External links [ edit ] The species–area relation v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐k2zdv
Cached time: 20250812020510
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.263 seconds
Real time usage: 0.398 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 897/1000000
Revision size: 9179/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 46996/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1203/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33193/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.145/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4269417/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  265.503      1 -total
 36.19%   96.094      1 Template:Reflist
 30.20%   80.179      2 Template:Cite_journal
 29.01%   77.020      1 Template:Modelling_ecosystems
 28.13%   74.688      2 Template:Navbox
 26.87%   71.336      1 Template:Short_description
 14.45%   38.378      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.95%   21.105      4 Template:Main_other
  7.20%   19.120      1 Template:SDcat
  5.11%   13.563      1 Template:Use_dmy_dates Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2376755:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020510 and revision id 1203433952. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Species–area_relationship&oldid=1203433952 " Categories : Community ecology Biodiversity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2016 This page was last edited on 4 February 2024, at 21:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Species–area relationship 9 languages Add topic

