Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Catholic Church 2 Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches 3 Lutheran Churches 4 Anglican Communion 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Last rites 3 languages Bahasa Indonesia मराठी Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian prayers and ministrations given before death This article is about Christian ministrations to the dying. For last rites in Islam , see Islamic funeral and Salat al-Janazah . For other uses, see Last Rites (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Last rites" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Administering the last rites ( Dutch School , c. 1600) The last rites , also known as the Commendation of the Dying , are the last prayers and ministrations given to an individual of Christian faith, when possible, shortly before death .

[ 1 ] The Commendation of the Dying is practiced in liturgical Christian denominations , such as the Roman Catholic Church and the Lutheran Church .

[ 2 ] They may be administered to those mortally injured, terminally ill , or awaiting execution . Last rites cannot be performed on someone who has already died.

[ 3 ] Last rites, in sacramental Christianity, can refer to multiple sacraments administered concurrently in anticipation of an individual's passing (such as Holy Absolution and Holy Communion ).

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Catholic Church [ edit ] See also: Viaticum and Anointing of the Sick in the Catholic Church Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil receiving her last rites, 1853 A Catholic chaplain , Lieutenant Commander Joseph T. O'Callahan , administering the last rites to an injured crewman aboard USS Franklin , after the ship was set afire by a Japanese air attack, 19 March 1945 The Latin Church of the Catholic Church defines Last Rites as Viaticum ( Holy Communion administered to someone who is dying), and the ritual prayers of Commendation of the Dying, and Prayers for the Dead.

[ 5 ] The sacrament of Anointing of the Sick is usually postponed until someone is near death. Anointing of the Sick has been thought to be exclusively for the dying, though it can be received at any time. Extreme Unction (Final Anointing)  is the name given to Anointing of the Sick when received during last rites.

[ 6 ] If administered to someone who is not just ill but near death, Anointing of the Sick is generally accompanied by celebration of the sacraments of Penance and Viaticum.

The order of the three is important and should be given in the order of Penance (confessing one's sins), then Anointing of the Sick, and finally the Viaticum.

[ 7 ] The principal reason Penance is administered first to the seriously ill and dying is because the forgiveness of one's sins, and most especially one's mortal sins , is for Catholics necessary for being in a state of grace (in a full relationship with God). Dying while in the state of grace ensures that a Catholic will go to heaven (if they are in a state of grace but still attached to sin, they will eventually make it to heaven but must first go through a spiritual cleansing process called purgatory ).

Although these three (Penance, Anointing of the sick, and Viaticum) are not, in the proper sense, the Last Rites, they are sometimes spoken of as such; the Eucharist given as Viaticum is the only sacrament essentially associated with dying.

[ 8 ] "The celebration of the Eucharist as Viaticum is the sacrament proper to the dying Christian".

[ 9 ] In the Roman Ritual 's Pastoral Care of the Sick: Rites of Anointing and Viaticum , Viaticum is the only sacrament dealt with in Part II: Pastoral Care of the Dying . Within that part, the chapter on Viaticum is followed by two more chapters, one on Commendation of the Dying , with short texts, mainly from the Bible, a special form of the litany of the saints, and other prayers, and the other on Prayers for the Dead . A final chapter provides Rites for Exceptional Circumstances , namely, the Continuous Rite of Penance, Anointing, and Viaticum , Rite for Emergencies , and Christian Initiation for the Dying . The last of these concerns the administration of the sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation to those who have not received them.

[ 10 ] In addition, the priest has authority to bestow a blessing in the name of the Pope on the dying person, to which a plenary indulgence is attached.

[ 11 ] Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches [ edit ] Russian Orthodox priest administering the last rites to a soldier on the field of battle In the Eastern Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the Byzantine Rite , the last rites consist of the Sacred Mysteries (sacraments) of Confession and the reception of Holy Communion .

Following these sacraments, when a person dies, there are a series of prayers known as The Office at the Parting of the Soul From the Body . This consists of a blessing by the priest, the usual beginning , and after the Lord's Prayer , Psalm 50 . Then a Canon to the Theotokos is chanted, entitled, "On behalf of a man whose soul is departing, and who cannot speak". This is an elongated prayer speaking in the person of the one who is dying, asking for forgiveness of sin, the mercy of God, and the intercession of the saints . The rite is concluded by three prayers said by the priest, the last one being said "at the departure of the soul." [ 12 ] There is an alternative rite known as The Office at the Parting of the Soul from the Body When a Man has Suffered for a Long Time . The outline of this rite is the same as above, except that Psalm 70 and Psalm 143 precede Psalm 50 , and the words of the canon and the prayers are different.

[ 13 ] The rubric in the Book of Needs (priest's service book) states, "With respect to the Services said at the parting of the soul, we note that if time does not permit to read the whole Canon, then customarily just one of the prayers, found at the end of the Canon, is read by the Priest at the moment of the parting of the soul from the body." [ 14 ] As soon as the person has died the priest begins The Office After the Departure of the Soul From the Body (also known as The First Pannikhida ).

[ 15 ] In the Orthodox Church Holy Unction is not considered to be solely a part of a person's preparation for death, but is administered to any Orthodox Christian who is ill, physically or spiritually, to ask for God's mercy and forgiveness of sin.

[ 16 ] There is an abbreviated form of Holy Unction to be performed for a person in imminent danger of death, [ 16 ] which does not replace the full rite in other cases.

Lutheran Churches [ edit ] Main article: Lutheran sacraments § Anointing of the Sick In the Lutheran Churches , last rites are formally known as the Commendation of the Dying, in which the priest "opens in the name of the triune God, includes a prayer, a reading from one of the psalms, a litany of prayer for the one who is dying, [and] recites the Lord’s Prayer".

[ 2 ] The dying individual is then anointed with oil and receives the sacraments of Holy Absolution and Holy Communion .

[ 2 ] Anglican Communion [ edit ] Main article: Anointing of the sick § Anglican churches The proposed 1928 revision of the Church of England 's Book of Common Prayer would have permitted reservation of the Blessed Sacrament for use in communing the sick, including during last rites. This revision failed twice in the Parliament of the United Kingdom 's House of Commons .

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Anointing Deathbed confession Deathbed conversion Excommunication References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of THE LAST RITES" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 10 February 2024 .

^ a b c d "Liturgies for the end of life" (PDF) .

Evangelical Lutheran Church in America . 2017. p. 4 . Retrieved 11 May 2021 .

^ Kerper, Rev. Fr. Michael (July–August 2016), vonHaack, Sarah J. (ed.), "When can Last Rites be given?" , Dear Father Kerner, Parable , vol. 10, no. 1, Manchester, N.H.: Diocese of Manchester , pp.

10– 11, USPS 024523, archived from the original on 6 May 2021 , retrieved 15 November 2020 , The priest was correct: only a living person can receive a sacrament, including the sacrament of the sick.

^ Dotan Arad; Kathleen Ashley; Martin Christ; Hildegard Diemberger (10 December 2018).

Domestic Devotions in the Early Modern World . BRILL. p. 86.

ISBN 978-90-04-37588-8 .

^ "M. Francis Mannion, "Anointing or last rites?" in Our Sunday Visitor Newsweekly" . Archived from the original on 16 July 2018 . Retrieved 9 November 2019 .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The anointing of the sick" .

www.vatican.va .

^ Arnold, Michelle (29 December 2017).

"A Guide to the Last Rites" .

Catholic Answers . Archived from the original on 4 June 2018.

^ Stolz, Eric.

"Anointing of the Sick/Last Rites" .

St. Brendan Catholic Church . Retrieved 19 September 2022 .

^ "Sacramental Guidelines" (PDF) . Diocese of Gallup. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 November 2010 . Retrieved 4 December 2010 .

^ "Other Sacraments – St Patrick's Catholic Parish Mortlake" .

stpatsmortlake.org.au . Retrieved 26 April 2025 .

^ Armentrout, Don S.; Slocum, Robert Boak (1999).

An Episcopal Dictionary of the Church: A User-Friendly Reference for Episcopalians . Church Publishing, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-89869-211-2 .

^ Hapgood, Isabel Florence (1975), Service Book of the Holy Orthodox-Catholic Apostolic Church (Revised ed.), Englewood, NJ: Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese , pp.

360– 366 ^ A Monk of St. Tikhon's Monastery (1995), Book of Needs (Abridged) (2nd ed.), South Canaan PA: St. Tikhon's Seminary Press, pp.

123– 136, ISBN 1-878997-15-7 ^ A Monk of St. Tikhon's Monastery, Op. cit.

, p. 153.

^ A Monk of St. Tikhon's Monastery, Op. cit.

, pp. 137–154.

^ a b Hapgood, Op. cit.

, pp. 607–608.

^ Wohlers, Charles.

"The Proposed Book of Common Prayer (1928) of the Church of England" . Society of Archbishop Justus . Retrieved 10 May 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anointing of the Sick (Catholic Church) .

Extreme Unction article in The Catholic Encyclopedia (1909) Preparation for Death article in The Catholic Encyclopedia (1909) Higgins, Jethro (6 March 2018).

"Last Rites and the Anointing of the Sick" .

Oregon Catholic Press . Retrieved 27 July 2018 .

Sacramental Catechesis: An Online Resource for Dioceses v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Lutheranism Luther's Small Catechism The Ten Commandments Apostle's Creed Lord's Prayer Sacrament of Holy Baptism Confession Sacrament of the Eucharist Chief articles of faith in the Augsburg Confession I.

God II.

Original Sin III. The Son of God IV.

Justification By Faith V. The Office of Preaching VI. Of The New Obedience VII. Of The Church VIII. What the Church Is IX. Of Baptism X. Of the Lord's Supper XI. Of Confession XII. Of Repentance XIII. Of the Use of the Sacraments XIV.

XV.

Ecclesiastical Usages XVI. Of Civil Affairs XVII. Of Christ's Return to Judgment XVIII. Of Free Will XIX. Of the Cause of Sin XX. Of Good Works XXI. Of the Worship of the Saints Practices Divine Service Confirmation Common table prayer Sign of The Cross Matins Vespers Easter Vigil Liturgical Calendar Wreath of Christ Movements Gnesio-Lutherans Crypto-Calvinism Philippists Sacramentarians Ubiquitarians Lutheran orthodoxy Pietism Laestadianism Old Lutherans Neo-Lutheranism High Church Lutheranism Evangelical Catholicism Confessional Lutherans NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐77cw5
Cached time: 20250812013826
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.653 seconds
Real time usage: 0.813 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1832/1000000
Revision size: 13682/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104289/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1573/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 74419/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.376/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6590426/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  625.432      1 -total
 30.27%  189.325      1 Template:Reflist
 24.35%  152.297      1 Template:Catholicism
 22.45%  140.439     10 Template:Cite_web
 12.71%   79.475      1 Template:Short_description
 10.53%   65.841      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.23%   63.994      1 Template:Sister_project
  9.97%   62.385      1 Template:Side_box
  9.46%   59.183      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.60%   53.781      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18337:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812013826 and revision id 1287509951. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Last_rites&oldid=1287509951 " Categories : Christian worship and liturgy Christian prayer Christianity and death Death customs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2011 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from April 2020 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 26 April 2025, at 18:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Last rites 3 languages Add topic

