Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Thesaurus of the Shah of Khwarazm 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Zayn al-Din Gorgani 11 languages العربية فارسی עברית Malagasy مصرى مازِرونی پنجابی کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Тоҷикӣ اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 12th-century Persian physician Sayyid Zayn al-Din Isma'il al-Husayni al-Jurjani (Ismail Gorgani) Manuscript of Jurjani's Tashrih Zakhirah-i Khwarazmshahi , vol. I (on anatomy). Copy created in Safavid Iran , dated 1663 Personal life Born c. 1040 Gorgan, Iran Died c. 1136 (aged 94–95) Khwarazm Era Islamic golden age Main interest(s) Traditional medicine , Theology , Philosophy and Ethics Notable work(s) Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi and many others Religious life Religion Islam Muslim leader Influenced by Avicenna , Ibn Abi Sadiq Zayn al-Din Sayyed Isma‘il ibn Husayn Gorgani (c. 1040–1136), [ 1 ] also spelled al-Jurjani , was a Persian [ 2 ] 12th century royal Islamic physician from Gorgan, Iran .

[ 1 ] In addition to medical and pharmaceutical sciences, he was also an adept in theological , philosophic , and ethical sciences.

[ 3 ] Jurjani was a pupil of Ibn Abi Sadiq and Ahmad ibn Farrokh . He arrived at the court in the Persian province of Khwarazm in the year 1110 when he was already a septuagenarian. There he became a court physician to the governor of the province, Khwarazm-Shah Qutb al-Din Muhammad I , who ruled from 1097 to 1127. It was to him that he dedicated his most comprehensive and influential work, the Persian-language compendium Zakhirah-i Khvarazm'Shahi .

Jurjani continued as court physician to Khwarazm'Shah Qutb al-Din's son and successor, Ala al-Din Atsiz , until at some unspecified time he moved to the city of Merv , the capital of the rival Seljuq Sultan Sanjar (ruled 1118–1157), where he died nearly at 100 lunar years of age.

Jurjani composed a number of important medical and philosophical treatises, in both Persian and Arabic, most of them written after he moved to Khwarazm at the age of 70 lunar years.

Thesaurus of the Shah of Khwarazm [ edit ] Al-Jurjani wrote the Persian medical encyclopedia, Thesaurus of the Shah of Khwarazm (also known as The Treasure of Khwarazm Shah ), sometime after 1110, when he moved to the northern Persian province of Khwarezm. Much of his work was dependent on Avicenna 's The Canon of Medicine (c. 1025), along with al-Jurjani's own ideas not found in the Canon . The work is composed of ten volumes covering ten medical fields: anatomy , physiology , hygiene , diagnosis and prognosis , fevers , diseases particular to a part of the body, surgery , skin diseases , poisons and antidotes , and medicaments (both simple and compound).

[ 4 ] In endocrinology , in particular, al-Jurjani was one of "the first to associate exophthalmos with goitre ," which was not repeated until Caleb Parry (1755–1822) in 1825, and later by Robert James Graves (1796–1853) and Carl von Basedow (1799–1854). Al-Jurjani also established an association between goitre and palpitation .

[ citation needed ] On "Drugs recommended for lice control," Gorgani recommends the following method: A) Keeping oneself clean B) Wearing Cotton and Silk Clothing C) Changing them Frequently D) Using anointments composed of the following drugs which work as desiccating agents: 1) Fruits of sumac with Olive Oil.  2) leaves and roots of Rumex 3)  Alum (vitriol) with olive oil.  4)  leaves of Melia azedarach .  5) leaves of pomegranate; 6) leaves of colocynth 7) leaves of myrtle 8) leaves of Thymus Serpyllum 9) leaves of flax [ Linum Usitatissimum ] 10) leaves of Acorus Calamus ] 11) leaves of Acorus Calamus and finally 12) Cinnamon with olive oil, specially with the oil of Cathamus Tinctorius and oil radish.

Most of the above botanicals have recently been shown to possess especially insecticidal properties.

[ 5 ] Works [ edit ] Some of his works are: [ 3 ] Persian manuscript of Jurjani's al-Aghradh al-tibbiyah wa'l-mabahith al-‘ala’iyah . Copy created in Ilkhanid Iran , dated late 13th century/early 14th century Zakhireh-i Kharazmshahi , a ten volume encyclopedia of medical sciences Khafi Alayee , a summary of Zakhireh-i Kharazmshahi Al-Iqraz al-Tebbieh and Al-Mabahis al-Alaieh, Tib Yadegar Kitab-fi-Hifz al-Sihat (Book on Preserving Health) Book on Anatomy Zubdah al-Tib, a discussion of medicine and pharmacology (Arabic) Al tazkereh al-Ashrafyeh fi Asnaah al-Tebbieh, an Arabic translation of Khafi Alayee Al-Tib al-Mulkuki Kitab al-Manbah or Al-Risalah al-Manbah, a book on ethics and resisting desires and passions, Kitab Tadbir al-Yaum va Laylah, a book on ethics and morality, Kitab Nameh, about ethics Fi al-Qias, a philosophical work Fi al-Tahlil, another philosophical work Al-Zakhireh al-Kharazmshahieh, a translation of Zakhireh-i Kharazmshahi into Arabic Al-Kazemieh, a philosophical treatise Al-Javiah al-Tebbiah va al Mabahes al-alaiyeh, (authorship disputed) Kitab fi al-Rad al-Phalasifah See also [ edit ] List of Iranian scientists References [ edit ] ^ a b Abivardi, Cyrus (2001).

Iranian entomology: an introduction . Springer. p. 484.

ISBN 978-3-540-67592-1 .

^ Selin, Helaine (2008).

Encyclopaedia of the history of science, technology, and medicine in non-western cultures . Berlin New York: Springer. p. 131.

ISBN 9781402049606 .

Abū˒l-Fadā˒il Ismā˓īl ibn al-H. usayn al-Jurjānī, Zayn al-Dīn, sometimes called Sayyid Ismā˓īl, was the most eminent Persian physician after Ibn Sīnā (Avicenna), and the author of the first great medical compilation written in Persian.

^ a b Shams Ardekani, Mohammad Reza (Medical University of Tehran); Moatar, Fariborz (Medical University of Isfahan), A Research Conducted on the Life and Works of Hakim Sayyid Esmail Jurjani .

^ Life and Works of Hakim Seyed Ismail Jorjani by Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman , Majmua-e Maqalat Kangrah Buzargdasht Hakim Seyed Ismail Jorjani , Farhangistan Uloom Puzishki, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2000: 125–133 ^ Cyrus Abivardi, "Iranian Entomology", Published by Springer, 2001.  pg 484.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zayn al-Din Gorgani .

Golshani S A. Sayyed Ismael Jorjani, The famous Iranian physician and philosopher. Jorjani Biomed J. 2014; 2 (2) :71-69. URL: http://goums.ac.ir/jorjanijournal/article-1-318-fa.html ] Sources [ edit ] Gignoux, P. (2015) “Anatomy and Therapy of Eye-Diseases in Esmā῾īl Gorgānī Compared to Syriac Sources,” in Krasnowolska, A. and Rusek-Kowalska, R. (eds) Studies on the Iranian World: Medieval and Modern. Jagiellonian University Press, pp. 341–346.

B. Thierry de Crussol des Epesse, Discours sur l'oeil d'Esma`il Gorgani (Teheran: Institut Français de Recherche en Iran, 1998), pp. 7–13.

Lutz Richter-Bernburg, Persian Medical Manuscripts at the University of California, Los Angeles: A Descriptive Catalogue, Humana Civilitas, vol. 4 (Malibu: Udena Publications, 1978). pp. 208 C.A. Storey, Persian Literature: A Bio-Bibliographical Survey. Volume II, Part 2: E.Medicine (London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1971), pp 207–211 no. 361 The article "Djurdjani" by J. Schacht in The Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition, ed. by H.A.R. Gibbs, B. Lewis, Ch. Pellat, C. Bosworth et al., 11 vols. (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1960–2002)  (2nd ed.), vol. 2, p. 603 The article "Dakira-ye Kvarazmshahi" by `Ali-Akbar Sa`idi Sirjani in Encyclopædia Iranica, ed. Ehsan Yarshater, 6+ vols. (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul and Costa Mesa: Mazda, 1983 to present), vol. 6 (1999) pp. 609–610.

Shoja MM, Tubbs RS. The history of anatomy in Persia. J Anat 2007; 210:359–378.

A Research Conducted on the Life and Works of Hakim Sayyid Esmail Jurjani , Mohammad Reza Shams Ardekani, Fariborz Moatar.

Journal of the International Society for the History of Islamic Medicine , Vol 4, No 7, April 2005.

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zayn_al-Din_Gorgani&oldid=1277853177 " Categories : 1136 deaths 12th-century Iranian physicians Medieval Iranian pharmacologists People from Gorgan 1040s births Court physicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 02:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zayn al-Din Gorgani 11 languages Add topic

