Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geographical spread 2 Highlights of Mosan art Toggle Highlights of Mosan art subsection 2.1 Architecture 2.2 Stone carving 2.3 Metalwork 2.4 Painting, illumination and other works of art 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mosan art 14 languages العربية Беларуская Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Limburgs Nederlands Norsk bokmål Русский Slovenščina ไทย Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Regional style of art from the Meuse river valley Maastricht , Basilica of Our Lady . East choir with carved capitals (12th century) Curtius Museum , Liège .

Pierre Boudon or Apollo relief (12th century) Liège , St Bartholomew's Church .

Baptismal font by Renier de Huy (detail) Sint Odiliënberg . Basilica of Saint Wiro, Plechelmus and Otgerus Mosan art is a regional style of art from the valley of the Meuse in present-day Belgium , the Netherlands , and Germany . Although in a broader sense the term applies to art from this region from all periods, it generally refers to Romanesque art , with Mosan Romanesque architecture , stone carving , metalwork , enamelling and manuscript illumination reaching a high level of development during the 11th, 12th and 13th centuries.

The Meuse river valley lay in the heart of the earlier Carolingian Empire and therefore the style draws largely from the heritage of the Carolingian art tradition. Thus, Mosan art contains strong classical elements, which separates it from the international Romanesque style seen elsewhere during the period, for example in France, [ 1 ] Germany [ 2 ] Spain and Italy. However, it shares with mainstream Romanesque art elements such as the treatment of space. Although the iconography of 11th- and 12th-century Meuse valley art largely draws on Biblical inspiration, some of the elaborately carved capitals in the two main churches in Maastricht depict scenes from many aspects of daily life, as well as images from an intriguing world of fantasy.

Geographical spread [ edit ] The Mosan region was formed largely by the boundary of the Bishopric of Liège , which had strong political links to the emperors of the Holy Roman Empire , as well as to the bishops of Cologne . The region's main artistic centres were the cities of Liège , Huy , Dinant , Namur , Tongeren , Maastricht , Roermond and Aachen , as well as a number of important monasteries: Sint-Truiden , Aldeneik , Herkenrode , Averbode , Munsterbilzen , Susteren , Sint Odiliënberg , Rolduc , Burtscheid , Kornelimünster , Stavelot , Nivelles , Aulne , Floreffe , Flône , Celles , Gembloux and Lobbes . Mosan art at its peak had a strong influence on bordering regions, notably on Rhineland art ( Cologne , Bonn ).

Highlights of Mosan art [ edit ] Mosan Romanesque art has been described by art historians as the first golden age of Netherlandish art (before early Netherlandish painting and Dutch Golden Age painting ). Usually the term Mosan art does not include Medieval literature although Heinrich von Veldeke may be considered the first poet writing in Middle Dutch (as well as Middle High German ).

Architecture [ edit ] Mosan architecture can be seen as a distinctive branch in Romanesque architecture , a regional style that produced imposing churches in Aachen, Liège and Maastricht, as well as monasteries in rural areas. The fully developed Mosan style of the 12th century is a comprise between the older Meuse valley traditions and foreign influences, mainly coming from the Rhineland and Italy . An outstanding factor in Mosan architecture is the closed west front ( westwerk ). Unfortunately, some of the largest churches, notably Liège cathedral , and the Stavelot and Sint-Truiden abbeys, were destroyed.

Former collegiate church St Bartholomew , Liège Former collegiate church of St. Denis (Liège) Former collegiate church St John, Liège Former collegiate church of Our Lady, Huy Former collegiate church Saint George and Saint Ode, Amay Former collegiate church Saint Étienne, Waha Former collegiate church of Fosses-la-Ville Former abbey church of Saint Gertrude , Nivelles Former abbey church of Saint Ursmer , Lobbes Former abbey church of Celles Basilica of Saint Servatius , Maastricht Basilica of Our Lady , Maastricht Former abbey church , Aldeneik Former abbey church, Rolduc Former abbey church , Susteren Former abbey church, Sint Odiliënberg Munsterkerk, Roermond Aachen Cathedral (westwork) Liège , St Bartholomew's Liège, St Denis , westwork Celles , Saint Hadelin's Nivelles . Westwork abbey church Aldeneik , Westwork Maastricht , St Servatius , westwork Maastricht, Our Lady's , east front Susteren , Westwork Rolduc , Interior Stone carving [ edit ] Mosan stone carving reached a peak in the 12th century in Maastricht, Liège and Nivelles. Maastricht 'metsen' (stone carvers) worked on capitals and reliefs as far afield as Utrecht , Bonn and Eisenach .

Carved capitals in western galleries of Basilica of Saint Servatius , Maastricht (12th century) Carved capitals in East choir of Basilica of Our Lady , Maastricht (12th century) Carved capitals in crypt of abbey church of Rolduc (12th century) Vierge de Dom Rupert (12th century), Curtius Museum , Liège Pierre Boudon relief (12th century), Curtius Museum , Liège Samson Portal, Collegiate Church of Saint Gertrude , Nivelles Baptismal font, Furnaux ( Namur ) Oath on the Relics relief (12th century), Basilica of Our Lady, Maastricht Majestas Domini tympanum (12th century), Basilica of Saint Servatius, Maastricht Double relief choir screen (12th century), Basilica of Saint Servatius, Maastricht Four-part relief in Saint Peter's Church , Utrecht Maastricht , Basilica of Our Lady . Carved 4-fold capital Maastricht, St Servatius . Carved capital in westwork Liège , Curtius Museum . Carved capital from St Lambert's Cathedral Eisenach . Dragon capital in the Wartburg Liège, Curtius Museum. 'Vierge de Dom Rupert' Maastricht, Church of Our Lady. 'Oath on the Relics' Maastricht, St Servatius. 2-part relief Utrecht , St Peter's . 4-part relief.

Pontius Pilate pointing at Christ Metalwork [ edit ] Metalwork has been considered the high art of the 12th and early 13th-century Meuse region, culminating in the work of Nicholas of Verdun , which is of exceptionally high quality. The Shrine of the Three Kings at Cologne Cathedral , the Anno Shrine in Siegburg and the Shrine of Our Lady in Tournai are among his best work. Other important metalworkers were Renier de Huy and Hugo d'Oignies .

Baptismal font at St Bartholomew's Church, Liège (early 12th century) by Renier de Huy Shrine of Saint Servatius (±1165) in Maastricht Shrine of Saint Hadelin (1170, partly 11th century) in Visé Shrine of Saint Remacle in Stavelot Shrines of Saint Domitian and Saint Mangold (by Godefroid de Huy, ±1172-1189) in Huy Shrine of Our Lady (1205) at Tournai Cathedral by Nicholas of Verdun Shrine of the Three Kings at Cologne Cathedral (1180) by Nicholas of Verdun Shrine of Charlemagne ( Karlsschrein , 1215) and Shrine of Mary ( Marienschrein , 1238), Aachen Cathedral Barbarossa Chandelier (1170), Aachen Cathedral Retable of the Pentecost (1160–1170, Cluny Museum , Paris – [1] ) Stavelot Triptych .

Morgan Library , New York City Reliquary of St. Maurus , now in Bečov nad Teplou Stavelot altar base.

Royal Museums of Art and History , Brussels Reliquary with head of Pope Alexander I , Royal Museums of Art and History , Brussels The foot of the so-called Cross of Saint Bertin . Museum of Saint-Omer Baptismal font .

St Bartholomew's , Liège Stavelot Triptych , Morgan Library , New York Mosan reliquary in the Louvre , Paris Book-cover by Hugo d'Oignies Barbarossa Chandelier , Aachen Cathedral Shrine of Saint Remacle , Stavelot Shrine of Saint Hadelin , Visé Maastricht. Shrine of Saint Servatius Shrine of Charlemagne , Aachen Cathedral Shrine of the Three Kings , Cologne Cathedral Painting, illumination and other works of art [ edit ] Very little has come to us from what must have been an impressive body of Mosan murals .

Wolfram von Eschenbach , in his Parzival expressed his high regard for Maastricht (and Cologne) painters ( Parzival, 158, 13-16 ).

Book illumination , like the rest of the arts, was at its zenith in the second half of the 12th century. The principal centres were the abbey of Saint Laurent in Liège and the abbeys of Stavelot and Lobbes. Another highly developed art was vitreous enameling .

Mural of the choir vault (heavily restored). Basilica of Saint Servatius, Maastricht Stavelot Bible (11th century). British Library Floreffe Bible [ fr ] (12th century).

British Library , London Evangeliary of Averbode (12th century). University Library, Liège Manuscripts from the abbey of Sint-Truiden Evangeliary of Notger (10th-12th century) Ceiling painting Basilica of Saint Servatius , Maastricht Page from Stavelot Bible , British Library Page from Floreffe Bible, British Library Evangeliary of Notger . Ivory and enamel Evangeliary of Averbode , Liège University Library See also [ edit ] Romanesque art § Sculpture Mosan Renaissance architecture Tournai font Notes [ edit ] ^ www.musee-moyenage.fr Archived 2005-10-17 at the Wayback Machine ^ www.musee-moyenage.fr Archived 2005-10-17 at the Wayback Machine References [ edit ] Chapman, Gretel (1987). "Mosan art".

Dictionary of the Middle Ages . Volume 8. pp. 495–6 Hartog, Elizabeth den (2002). "Romanesque Sculpture in Maastricht" Timmers, J.J.M. (1971). "De Kunst van het Maasland" "Mosan school" – Encyclopædia Britannica Online External links [ edit ] Media related to Mosan art at Wikimedia Commons v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mosan_art&oldid=1302542160 " Categories : Mosan art Romanesque art Romanesque architecture Romanesque architecture in Belgium Vitreous enamel Culture of Wallonia Culture of Limburg Buildings and structures in Liège Province History of Liège Province History of Belgian Limburg Culture of Limburg (Netherlands) History of Limburg (Netherlands) Netherlandish Medieval art Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 02:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mosan art 14 languages Add topic

