Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure and nomenclature Toggle Structure and nomenclature subsection 1.1 Linear-chain monosaccharides 1.2 Open-chain stereoisomers 1.3 Configuration of monosaccharides 1.4 Cyclisation of monosaccharides (hemiacetal formation) 1.4.1 Haworth projection 2 Derivatives 3 See also 4 References 5 Literature 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Monosaccharide 71 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Simple sugars ) Simple sugars such as glucose and fructose This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Monosaccharide" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article focuses only on one specialised aspect of its subject .

Please help improve it by adding more general information. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( September 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a textbook .

Please help rewrite it in a neutral , encyclopedic style. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Monosaccharides (from Greek monos : single, sacchar : sugar), also called simple sugars , are the simplest forms of sugar and the most basic units ( monomers ) from which all carbohydrates are built.

Chemically, monosaccharides are polyhydroxy aldehydes with the formula H-[CHOH] n -CHO or polyhydroxy ketones with the formula H-[CHOH] m -CO-[CHOH] n -H with three or more carbon atoms.

[ 1 ] They are usually colorless , water - soluble , and crystalline organic solids. Contrary to their name (sugars), only some monosaccharides have a sweet taste . Most monosaccharides have the formula (CH 2 O) x (though not all molecules with this formula are monosaccharides).

Examples of monosaccharides include glucose (dextrose), fructose (levulose), and galactose . Monosaccharides are the building blocks of disaccharides (such as sucrose , lactose and maltose ) and polysaccharides (such as cellulose and starch ). The table sugar used in everyday vernacular is itself a disaccharide sucrose comprising one molecule of each of the two monosaccharides D -glucose and D -fructose.

[ 2 ] Each carbon atom that supports a hydroxyl group is chiral , except those at the end of the chain. This gives rise to a number of isomeric forms, all with the same chemical formula. For instance, galactose and glucose are both aldohexoses , but have different physical structures and chemical properties.

The monosaccharide glucose plays a pivotal role in metabolism , where the chemical energy is extracted through glycolysis and the citric acid cycle to provide energy to living organisms.  Maltose is the dehydration condensate of two glucose molecules.

Structure and nomenclature [ edit ] See also: Monosaccharide nomenclature With few exceptions (e.g., deoxyribose ), monosaccharides have the chemical formula (CH 2 O) x , where conventionally x ≥ 3.

[ 1 ] Monosaccharides can be classified by the number x of carbon atoms they contain: triose (3), tetrose (4), pentose (5), hexose (6), heptose (7), and so on.

Glucose, used as an energy source and for the synthesis of starch, glycogen and cellulose, is a hexose . Ribose and deoxyribose (in RNA and DNA , respectively) are pentose sugars. Examples of heptoses include the ketoses mannoheptulose and sedoheptulose . Monosaccharides with eight or more carbons are rarely observed as they are quite unstable. In aqueous solutions monosaccharides exist as rings if they have more than four carbons.

Linear-chain monosaccharides [ edit ] Simple monosaccharides have a linear and unbranched carbon skeleton with one carbonyl (C=O) functional group , and one hydroxyl (OH) group on each of the remaining carbon atoms . Therefore, the molecular structure of a simple monosaccharide can be written as H(CHOH) n (C=O)(CHOH) m H, where n + 1 + m = x ; so that its elemental formula is C x H 2 x O x .

By convention, the carbon atoms are numbered from 1 to x along the backbone, starting from the end that is closest to the C=O group. Monosaccharides are the simplest units of carbohydrates and the simplest form of sugar.

If the carbonyl is at position 1 (that is, n or m is zero), the molecule begins with a formyl group H(C=O)− and is technically an aldehyde . In that case, the compound is termed an aldose . Otherwise, the molecule has a ketone group, a carbonyl −(C=O)− between two carbons; then it is formally a ketone, and is termed a ketose. Ketoses of biological interest usually have the carbonyl at position 2.

The various classifications above can be combined, resulting in names such as "aldohexose" and "ketotriose".

A more general nomenclature for open-chain monosaccharides combines a Greek prefix to indicate the number of carbons (tri-, tetr-, pent-, hex-, etc.) with the suffixes "-ose" for aldoses and "-ulose" for ketoses.

[ 3 ] In the latter case, if the carbonyl is not at position 2, its position is then indicated by a numeric infix.  So, for example, H(C=O)(CHOH) 4 H is pentose, H(CHOH)(C=O)(CHOH) 3 H is pentulose, and H(CHOH) 2 (C=O)(CHOH) 2 H is pent-3-ulose.

Open-chain stereoisomers [ edit ] Two monosaccharides with equivalent molecular graphs (same chain length and same carbonyl position) may still be distinct stereoisomers , whose molecules differ in spatial orientation.  This happens only if the molecule contains a stereogenic center , specifically a carbon atom that is chiral (connected to four distinct molecular sub-structures).  Those four bonds can have any of two configurations in space distinguished by their handedness .  In a simple open-chain monosaccharide, every carbon is chiral except the first and the last atoms of the chain, and (in ketoses) the carbon with the keto group.

For example, the triketose H(CHOH)(C=O)(CHOH)H (glycerone, dihydroxyacetone ) has no stereogenic center, and therefore exists as a single stereoisomer. The other triose, the aldose H(C=O)(CHOH) 2 H ( glyceraldehyde ), has one chiral carbon—the central one, number 2—which is bonded to groups −H, −OH, −C(OH)H 2 , and −(C=O)H. Therefore, it exists as two stereoisomers whose molecules are mirror images of each other (like a left and a right glove). Monosaccharides with four or more carbons may contain multiple chiral carbons, so they typically have more than two stereoisomers. The number of distinct stereoisomers with the same diagram is bounded by 2 c , where c is the total number of chiral carbons.

The Fischer projection is a systematic way of drawing the skeletal formula of an acyclic monosaccharide so that the handedness of each chiral carbon is well specified.  Each stereoisomer of a simple open-chain monosaccharide can be identified by the positions (right or left) in the Fischer diagram of the chiral hydroxyls (the hydroxyls attached to the chiral carbons).

Most stereoisomers are themselves chiral (distinct from their mirror images).  In the Fischer projection, two mirror-image isomers differ by having the positions of all chiral hydroxyls reversed right-to-left. Mirror-image isomers are chemically identical in non-chiral environments, but usually have very different biochemical properties and occurrences in nature.

While most stereoisomers can be arranged in pairs of mirror-image forms, there are some non-chiral stereoisomers that are identical to their mirror images, in spite of having chiral centers.  This happens whenever the molecular graph is symmetrical, as in the 3-ketopentoses H(CHOH) 2 (CO)(CHOH) 2 H, and the two halves are mirror images of each other.  In that case, mirroring is equivalent to a half-turn rotation. For this reason, there are only three distinct 3-ketopentose stereoisomers, even though the molecule has two chiral carbons.

Distinct stereoisomers that are not mirror-images of each other usually have different chemical properties, even in non-chiral environments.  Therefore, each mirror pair and each non-chiral stereoisomer may be given a specific monosaccharide name .  For example, there are 16 distinct aldohexose stereoisomers, but the name "glucose" means a specific pair of mirror-image aldohexoses. In the Fischer projection, one of the two glucose isomers has the hydroxyl at left on C3, and at right on C4 and C5; while the other isomer has the reversed pattern.  These specific monosaccharide names have conventional three-letter abbreviations, like "Glu" for glucose and "Thr" for threose .

Generally, a monosaccharide with n asymmetrical carbons has 2 n stereoisomers. The number of open chain stereoisomers for an aldose monosaccharide is larger by one than that of a ketose monosaccharide of the same length.  Every ketose will have 2 ( n −3) stereoisomers where n > 2 is the number of carbons.  Every aldose will have 2 ( n −2) stereoisomers where n > 2 is the number of carbons.
These are also referred to as epimers which have the different arrangement of −OH and −H groups at the asymmetric or chiral carbon atoms (this does not apply to those carbons having the carbonyl functional group).

Configuration of monosaccharides [ edit ] Like many chiral molecules, the two stereoisomers of glyceraldehyde will gradually rotate the polarization direction of linearly polarized light as it passes through it, even in solution.  The two stereoisomers are identified with the prefixes D - and L -, according to the sense of rotation: D -glyceraldehyde is dextrorotatory (rotates the polarization axis clockwise), while L -glyceraldehyde is levorotatory (rotates it counterclockwise).

D - and L -glucose The D - and L - prefixes are also used with other monosaccharides, to distinguish two particular stereoisomers that are mirror-images of each other. For this purpose, one considers the chiral carbon that is furthest removed from the C=O group. Its four bonds must connect to −H, −OH, −CH 2 (OH), and the rest of the molecule.  If the molecule can be rotated in space so that the directions of those four groups match those of the analog groups in D -glyceraldehyde's C2, then the isomer receives the D - prefix. Otherwise, it receives the L - prefix.

In the Fischer projection, the D - and L - prefixes specifies the configuration at the carbon atom that is second from bottom: D - if the hydroxyl is on the right side, and L - if it is on the left side.

Note that the D - and L - prefixes do not indicate the direction of rotation of polarized light, which is a combined effect of the arrangement at all chiral centers.  However, the two enantiomers will always rotate the light in opposite directions, by the same amount. See also D/L system .

Cyclisation of monosaccharides (hemiacetal formation) [ edit ] A monosaccharide often switches from the acyclic (open-chain) form to a cyclic form, through a nucleophilic addition reaction between the carbonyl group and one of the hydroxyl groups of the same molecule.  The reaction creates a ring of carbon atoms closed by one bridging oxygen atom.  The resulting molecule has a hemiacetal or hemiketal group, depending on whether the linear form was an aldose or a ketose.  The reaction is easily reversed, yielding the original open-chain form.

In these cyclic forms, the ring usually has five or six atoms. These forms are called furanoses and pyranoses , respectively—by analogy with furan and pyran , the simplest compounds with the same carbon-oxygen ring (although they lack the double bonds of these two molecules). For example, the aldohexose glucose may form a hemiacetal linkage between the aldehyde group on carbon 1 and the hydroxyl on carbon 4, yielding a molecule with a 5-membered ring, called glucofuranose . The same reaction can take place between carbons 1 and 5 to form a molecule with a 6-membered ring, called glucopyranose . Cyclic forms with a seven-atom ring (the same of oxepane ), rarely encountered, are called heptoses .

Conversion between the furanose, acyclic, and pyranose forms of D -glucose Pyranose forms of some pentose sugars Pyranose forms of some hexose sugars For many monosaccharides (including glucose), the cyclic forms predominate, in the solid state and in solutions, and therefore the same name commonly is used for the open- and closed-chain isomers.  Thus, for example, the term "glucose" may signify glucofuranose, glucopyranose, the open-chain form, or a mixture of the three.

Cyclization creates a new stereogenic center at the carbonyl-bearing carbon.  The −OH group that replaces the carbonyl's oxygen may end up in two distinct positions relative to the ring's midplane.  Thus each open-chain monosaccharide yields two cyclic isomers ( anomers ), denoted by the prefixes α- and β-.  The molecule can change between these two forms by a process called mutarotation , that consists in a reversal of the ring-forming reaction followed by another ring formation.

[ 4 ] Haworth projection [ edit ] The stereochemical structure of a cyclic monosaccharide can be represented in a Haworth projection . In this diagram, the α-isomer for the pyranose form of a D -aldohexose has the −OH of the anomeric carbon below the plane of the carbon atoms, while the β-isomer has the −OH of the anomeric carbon above the plane. Pyranoses typically adopt a chair conformation, similar to that of cyclohexane . In this conformation, the α-isomer has the −OH of the anomeric carbon in an axial position, whereas the β-isomer has the −OH of the anomeric carbon in equatorial position (considering D -aldohexose sugars).

[ 5 ] α- D -Glucopyranose β- D -Glucopyranose Derivatives [ edit ] A large number of biologically important modified monosaccharides exist: Amino sugars such as: galactosamine glucosamine sialic acid N -acetylglucosamine Sulfosugars such as: sulfoquinovose Others such as: ascorbic acid mannitol glucuronic acid See also [ edit ] Monosaccharide nomenclature Reducing sugar Sugar acid Sugar alcohol References [ edit ] ^ a b IUPAC Chemical Nomenclature and Structure Representation Division (2013). "P-102.1.2". In Favre, Henri A.; Powell, Warren H. (eds.).

Nomenclature of Organic Chemistry: IUPAC Recommendations and Preferred Names 2013 .

IUPAC – RSC .

ISBN 978-0-85404-182-4 .

^ Collins, Peter M.; Ferrier, Robert J. (1995).

Monosaccharides : their chemistry and their roles in natural products . Robert J. Ferrier. Chichester: Wiley & Sons. p. 4.

ISBN 0-471-95343-1 .

OCLC 30894482 .

^ "Carbohydrates" .

Chemistry for Biologists . Royal Society of Chemistry . Retrieved 10 March 2017 .

^ Pigman, William Ward ; Anet, E. F. L. J. (1972). "Chapter 4: Mutarotations and Actions of Acids and Bases". In Pigman and Horton (ed.).

The Carbohydrates: Chemistry and Biochemistry . Vol. 1A (2nd ed.). San Diego: Academic Press. pp.

165– 194.

^ IUPAC , Compendium of Chemical Terminology , 5th ed. (the "Gold Book") (2025). Online version: (2006–) " Haworth representation ".

doi : 10.1351/goldbook.H02749 Literature [ edit ] McMurry, John. Organic Chemistry. 7th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson Brooks/Cole, 2008. Print.

External links [ edit ] Look up monosaccharide in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Nomenclature of Carbohydrates v t e Sugar as food commodity List of sugars and sugar products Chemistry Monosaccharide Fructose Galactose Glucose Xylose Disaccharide Lactose Maltose Sucrose Trehalose Added sugar Reducing sugar Sources Sugar beet Sugarcane Agave syrup Birch Coconut Date Honeydew Maple Palm Malt Products Syrups List of syrups Agave syrup Barley malt syrup Brown rice syrup Cheong Maesil-cheong Mogwa-cheong Yuja-cheong Corn syrup High-fructose High-maltose Glucose syrup Golden syrup Honey Inverted sugar syrup Kuromitsu Maple syrup Mizuame Molasses Pine honey Steen's cane syrup Table syrup Treacle Yacón syrup Solid forms Brown Peen tong Candi sugar Chancaca Crystalline fructose Gelling Gula melaka Jaggery Misri Molasses sugar Muscovado Nib Non-centrifugal cane sugar Panela Plantation Reserve Powdered Preserving Sucanat Sugar candy Barley sugar Butterscotch Candy Hard Rock candy Toffee Sugar glass Sugarloaf Wasanbon White Other forms Caramel Cotton candy floss Maple sugar foods Rum Sugar alcohol Sugar confectionery Sugarcane juice Tuzemák Unrefined sweeteners Industry Production Boilery Plantation Casa-grande Refinery Sugar bush Sugarcane mill Engenho Batey Zafra Sugar marketing By region Current Australia Bundaberg Sugar CSR Wilmar Sugar Cuba Caribbean Kenya India Mauritius Philippines Rwanda Sri Lanka South Africa Illovo Sugar Tongaat Hulett Tanzania Uganda United Kingdom British Sugar Tate & Lyle United States Sugar Association U.S. Sugar Program Historical Danish West Indies Fiji Hawaii History 1811 German Coast uprising Amelioration Act 1798 Blackbirding Colonial molasses trade Demerara rebellion of 1823 Holing cane Leith Sugar House Molasses Act Reciprocity Treaty of 1875 Slavery in the British and French Caribbean Sugar Act Sugar Duties Acts 1846 Sugar Intervention Taiwan Sugar Railways Triangular trade Culture Added sugar Crop Over Sugar shack Sugaring Sugar nips Sugar packet Sucrology Sugar people Sugar tit Sugar sculpture Treacle mining Related Australian Aboriginal sweet foods Bagasse Blood sugar level Cane knife Flavored syrup Fruit syrup Date honey Grape Jallab Health effects Nectar Sugar addiction Sugars in wine Residual sugar Sugar substitute Sweetened beverage Sweetener Sweetness Vinasse Research Robert Lustig John Yudkin Pure, White and Deadly (1972) Category Production v t e Types of carbohydrates General Aldose Ketose Furanose Pyranose Geometry Anomer Cyclohexane conformation Epimer Mutarotation Monosaccharides Dioses Aldodiose Glycolaldehyde Trioses Aldotriose Glyceraldehyde Ketotriose Dihydroxyacetone Tetroses Aldotetroses Erythrose Threose Ketotetrose Erythrulose Pentoses Aldopentoses Arabinose Lyxose Ribose Xylose Ketopentoses Ribulose Xylulose Deoxy sugars Deoxyribose Hexoses Aldohexoses Allose Altrose Galactose Glucose Gulose Idose Mannose Talose Ketohexoses Fructose Psicose Sorbose Tagatose Deoxy sugars Fucose Fuculose Rhamnose Heptoses Ketoheptoses Mannoheptulose Sedoheptulose Above 7 Octoses Nonoses Neuraminic acid Multiple Disaccharides Cellobiose Isomaltose Isomaltulose Lactose Lactulose Maltose Sucrose Trehalose Turanose Trisaccharides Maltotriose Melezitose Raffinose Tetrasaccharides Stachyose Other oligosaccharides Acarbose Fructooligosaccharide (FOS) Galactooligosaccharide (GOS) Isomaltooligosaccharide (IMO) Maltodextrin Polysaccharides Beta-glucan Oat beta-glucan Lentinan Sizofiran Zymosan Cellulose Chitin Chitosan Dextrin / Dextran Fructose / Fructan Inulin Galactose / Galactan Glucose / Glucan Glycogen Hemicellulose Levan beta 2→6 Lignin Mannan Pectin Starch Amylopectin Amylose Xanthan gum Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monosaccharide&oldid=1301142226 " Categories : Monosaccharides Carbohydrate chemistry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2009 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing context from September 2013 Wikipedia articles with style issues from April 2020 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 08:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monosaccharide 71 languages Add topic

