Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Uralian orogeny 7 languages فارسی Nederlands Português Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Long series of linear deformation and mountain building events that raised the Ural Mountains The Uralian orogeny refers to the long series of linear deformation and mountain building events that raised the Ural Mountains , starting in the Late Carboniferous and Permian periods of the Palaeozoic Era, c.

323–299 and 299–251 million years ago (Mya) respectively, and ending with the last series of continental collisions in Triassic to early Jurassic times.

The region affected by the orogeny, the Uralian orogenic belt or the Uralides , is usually thought of as the boundary between Europe and Asia .  It extends from the Aral Sea to Novaya Zemlya , and it includes in addition to the Ural Mountains, the Pay-Khoy Ridge of northwest Russia and the Mugodzhar Hills of northwest Kazakhstan .  Its total length is about 3,500 kilometres (2,200 mi), of which the Ural Mountains are about 2,500 km (1,600 mi).

[ 1 ] At the latitude of the Middle-Urals Ring Structure ( c.

56° N, between Perm and Ufa ) the Ural mountains have an eastward-convex bend. It has been proposed that the Precambrian Middle-Urals Ring Structure caused a disturbance in the orogeny leading to the formation the bend.

[ 2 ] Formation [ edit ] The Uralian orogeny and the formation of Laurasia during the late Carboniferous (300 Mya), early Permian (280 Mya), and Middle Triassic (240 Mya); View centred on 25°N,35°E The Uralian orogen ( sensu stricto ) occurred between three Palaeozoic continents, Baltica , Kazakhstania , and Siberia .  In the late Precambrian, the northeast margin of Baltica was deformed in the Timanide and Cadomide orogenies or the assembly of the Pannotia supercontinent.  The break-up of this supercontinent opened the Palaeo-Uralian Ocean, in which a number of unidentified continental fragments rifted from Baltica.  As Baltica collided with Laurentia to form Laurussia, island arcs and other microcontinents were accreted to Baltica in the Late Devonian-Early Carboniferous.

[ 3 ] In the Ordovician-Silurian, Kazakhstania formed separately when subduction -driven growth accreted crust to a series of small, late Precambrian microcontinents.  In the early Late Carboniferous, Kazakhstania began to collide with Laurussia as the Palaeo-Uralian ocean subducted beneath the margins of the latter.

[ 3 ] The northern continuation of the Ural mountains, the Pay-Khoy-Novaya Zemlya foldbelt, is the result of the collision between Laurussia and Siberia in the Early Jurassic.

[ 3 ] The southern continuation of the Ural mountains, the southern Tian-Shan mountains, formed in the late Palaeozoic with the closure of the Turkestanian Ocean, an Ordovician-Carboniferous southern branch of the Palaeo-Uralian Ocean.  Tian-Shan remained a stable platform until the Alpine-Himalayan orogeny in the Pliocene-Quaternary.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Main Uralian Fault References [ edit ] ^ "J. Zavacky, The Urals, a Late Paleozoic Mountain Belt " . Archived from the original on 2010-07-01 . Retrieved 2010-04-17 .

^ G. Burba (2003).

The geologic evolution of the Ural Mountains: A supposed exposure to a giant impact Archived 2021-08-31 at the Wayback Machine . Microsymposium 38, MS011, 2003 ^ a b c d Puchkov, V. N. (2009).

"The evolution of the Uralian orogen" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

327 (1): 161– 195.

Bibcode : 2009GSLSP.327..161P .

doi : 10.1144/SP327.9 .

S2CID 129439058 . Retrieved 8 January 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Late Permian Period map v t e Paleozoic Era Cambrian Ordovician Silurian Devonian Carboniferous Permian Terreneuvian Series 2 Miaolingian Furongian Early Middle Late Llandovery Wenlock Ludlow Pridoli Early Middle Late Mississippian Pennsylvanian Cisuralian Guadalupian Lopingian v t e Geology of Europe Countries Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Faroe Islands Estonia Finland Åland Islands France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy ( Sicily ) Kazakhstan Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Jan Mayen Svalbard Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Gibraltar Alderney Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Geologic regions Orogens Acadian Alpine Belomorian Cadomian Caledonian Carpathian Dalslandian Gothian Grampian Hallandian-Danopolonian Hellenic Laxfordian Lopian Saamian Scandian Scourian Timanide Svecofennian Sveconorwegian Uralian Variscan Mountain ranges Alps Apennines Caucasus Dinaric Alps Harz Massif Central Ore Mountains Pyrenees Scandinavian Mountains Sudetes Urals Western Carpathians Oceanic basins Atlantic Ocean Arctic Ocean Bay of Biscay Black Sea Mediterranean Sea Norwegian Sea Intracontinental basins and grabens Aquitaine Basin Barents Basin Baltic Sea Basin Central Lowlands Dnieper–Donets Rift Ebro Basin European Cenozoic Rift System Hellenic Trench Limagne Graben Mezen Basin Molasse Basin Moscow Basin North Sea Basin Oslo Rift Pannonian Basin Paris Basin Peri-Caspian Depression Timan-Pechora Basin White Sea Rift System Tectonic plates and microcontinents Adriatic plate Aegean Sea plate Anatolian plate Eurasian plate Iberian plate Jan Mayen Microcontinent Moesian plate Pelso plate Tisza plate Terranes Armorican terrane Avalonia Baltica Cimmeria East European Craton Fennoscandian Craton Sarmatian Craton Volgo–Uralia UNESCO World Heritage Sites Aeolian Islands Aggtelek Calanques de Piana Curonian Spit Dolomites Durmitor Geirangerfjord Giant's Causeway Glarus High Coast Jungfrau-Aletsch Jurassic Coast Komi Kvarken Laponia Messel Pit Meteora Monte Perdido Monte San Giorgio Mount Etna Nærøyfjord Pirin Plitvice Rhine Gorge Scandola Škocjan St Kilda Stevns Klint Surtsey Thingvellir This orogeny article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Uralian_orogeny&oldid=1306119204 " Categories : Orogenies of Europe Ural Mountains Carboniferous orogenies Permian orogenies Geology of European Russia Geology of Russia Carboniferous Europe Permian Europe Plate tectonics stubs Geological process stubs Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All stub articles This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 01:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Uralian orogeny 7 languages Add topic

