Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Themes 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Affluent Society 4 languages Català Français 한국어 Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1958 book by John Kenneth Galbraith For the form of society, see Affluent society .

The Affluent Society First edition cover Author John Kenneth Galbraith Language English Subject Economics Genre Non-fiction Publisher Houghton Mifflin Publication date 1958 Publication place United States Media type Print Pages 280 The Affluent Society is a 1958 (4th edition revised 1984) book by Harvard economist John Kenneth Galbraith .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The book sought to clearly outline the manner in which the post– World War II United States was becoming wealthy in the private sector but remained poor in the public sector , lacking social and physical infrastructure, and perpetuating income disparities . The book sparked much public discussion at the time.  It is also credited with popularizing the term " conventional wisdom ".  Many of the ideas presented were later expanded and refined in Galbraith's 1967 book, The New Industrial State .

The Modern Library placed the book at no. 46 on its list of the top 100 English-language non-fiction books of the 20th century.

[ 4 ] Themes [ edit ] The "central tradition" in economics, created by Adam Smith and expanded by David Ricardo and Thomas Robert Malthus in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, is poorly suited to the affluent post–World War II U.S. society. This is so because the "central tradition" economists wrote during a time of widespread poverty where production of basic goods was necessary. U.S. society, at the time of Galbraith's writing, was one of widespread affluence, where production was based on luxury goods and wants.

Using production, or gross domestic product , as a measure of U.S. society's well-being omits important measures of social and personal well-being. GDP also neglects differences in output. For example, "An increased supply of educational services has a standing in the total not different in kind from an increased output of television receivers." [ 5 ] Production has risen to its paramount but unwarranted status because it is held in grace by both Democrats and Republicans.

Galbraith writes: On the importance of production as a test of performance, there is no difference between Republicans and Democrats, right and left, white and minimally prosperous black, Catholic and Protestant. It is common ground for the Chairman of Americans for Democratic Action, the President of the United States Chamber of Commerce and the President of the National Association of Manufactures.

[ 5 ] American demand for goods and services is not organic. That is, the demands are not internally created by a consumer. These such demands - food, clothes, and shelter - have been met for the vast majority of Americans. The new demands are created by advertisers and the "machinery for consumer-demand creation" that benefit from increased consumer spending . This exuberance in private production and consumption pushes out public spending and investment.

[ 5 ] He called this the dependence effect, a process by which "wants are increasingly created by the process by which they are satisfied".

[ 5 ] He argued that lauding production creating demand via advertising is as like one "who applauds the efforts of the squirrel to keep abreast of the wheel that is propelled by his own efforts." Galbraith believes America must transition from a private production economy to a public investment economy. He advocates three large proposals: the elimination of poverty, government investment in public schools, and the growth of the " New Class ." Galbraith outlines the two types of poverty to better understand the causes and potential remedies. Case poverty is related to a specific individual and insular poverty is an island where nearly everyone is poor. To fund social programs, Galbraith believes in the expanded use of consumption taxes. The "New Class" consists of schoolteachers, professors, surgeons, and electrical engineers.

Galbraith ends the book with another appeal to the importance and need for investment in educating people: Whether the problem be that of a burgeoning population and of space in which to live with peace and grace, or whether it be the depletion of the materials which nature has stocked in the earth’s crust and which have been drawn upon more heavily in this century than in all previous time together, or whether it be that of occupying minds no longer committed to the stockpiling of consumer goods, the basic demand on America will be on its resources of intelligence and education.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] History of economic thought Marshall Sahlins articulated in 1966 the theory that hunter-gatherers were the original affluent society .

References [ edit ] ^ Galbraith, John Kenneth (1958).

The Affluent Society (1st ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company – via Internet Archive .

^ Galbraith, John Kenneth (1969).

The Affluent Society (2nd ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company – via Internet Archive .

^ Galbraith, John Kenneth (1984).

The Affluent Society (4th ed.). Penguin  Books – via Internet Archive .

^ "100 Best Nonfiction « Modern Library" . Randomhouse.com . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ a b c d e Galbraith, John Kenneth (1998).

The Affluent Society - Fortieth Anniversary Edition . New York: Houghton Mifflin Company. pp. 100, 109, 158, 170, 259, 260 – via Internet Archive .

External links [ edit ] Galbraith, John Kenneth (2010). "The Affluent Society".

The Affluent Society and Other Writings 1952-1967 . Vol. 208.

The Library of America . pp.

145 -605.

ISBN 978-1-59853-077-3 – via Internet Archive .

Abridgement of The Affluent Society Hayek, F.A.

(April 1961). "The Non-Sequitur of the 'Dependence Effect' ".

Southern Economic Journal .

27 (4): 346– 348.

doi : 10.2307/1055533 .

JSTOR 1055533 .

Hayek, F.A.

(1967). "The Non-Sequitur of the 'Dependence Effect' ".

Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. p.

313-317 – via Internet Archive .

v t e John Kenneth Galbraith Books American Capitalism (1952) The Great Crash, 1929 (1954) The Affluent Society (1958) The New Industrial State (1967) Economics and the Public Purpose (1973) The Age of Uncertainty (1977) The Nature of Mass Poverty (1979) The Anatomy of Power (1983) A Tenured Professor (1990) The Culture of Contentment (1992) The Economics of Innocent Fraud (2004) People Catherine Galbraith (wife) Peter W. Galbraith (son) James K. Galbraith (son) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Affluent_Society&oldid=1301235535 " Categories : 1958 non-fiction books 1958 in economic history Books by John Kenneth Galbraith 1940s in the United States 1950s in the United States Houghton Mifflin books Sociology books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 20:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Affluent Society 4 languages Add topic

