Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 In ancient Greek thought 1.2 Nietzsche and Kierkegaard 1.3 Twentieth century 2 Whitehead's Process and Reality Toggle Whitehead's Process and Reality subsection 2.1 Process metaphysics 2.1.1 Whitehead's 'actual entities' 2.1.2 Time, causality, and process 2.1.3 Atomicity 2.1.4 Topology 2.1.5 Whitehead's abstractions 2.1.6 Relation between actual entities and abstractions stated in the ontological principle 2.1.7 Causation and concrescence of a process 3 Commentary on Whitehead and on process philosophy Toggle Commentary on Whitehead and on process philosophy subsection 3.1 On God 4 Legacy and applications Toggle Legacy and applications subsection 4.1 Biology 4.2 Ecology 4.3 Mathematics 4.4 Medicine 4.5 Psychology 4.6 Philosophy of movement 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Process philosophy 16 languages Afrikaans العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Slovenščina Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical approach Process philosophy (also ontology of becoming or processism ) [ 1 ] is an approach in philosophy that identifies processes, changes, or shifting relationships as the only real experience of everyday living.

[ 2 ] In opposition to the classical view of change as illusory (as argued by Parmenides ) or accidental (as argued by Aristotle), process philosophy posits transient occasions of change or becoming as the only fundamental things of the ordinary everyday real world.

Since the time of Plato and Aristotle , classical ontology has posited ordinary world reality as constituted of enduring substances , to which transient processes are ontologically subordinate, if they are not denied. If Socrates changes, becomes sick, Socrates is still the same (the substance of Socrates being the same), and change (his sickness) only glides over his substance: change is accidental, and devoid of primary reality, whereas the substance is essential .

In physics, Ilya Prigogine [ 3 ] distinguishes between the "physics of being" and the "physics of becoming". Process philosophy covers not just scientific intuitions and experiences, but can be used as a conceptual bridge to facilitate discussions among religion, philosophy, and science.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Process philosophy is sometimes classified as closer to continental philosophy than analytic philosophy , because it is usually only taught in continental philosophy departments.

[ 6 ] However, other sources state that process philosophy should be placed somewhere in the middle between the poles of analytic versus continental methods in contemporary philosophy.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] History [ edit ] In ancient Greek thought [ edit ] Heraclitus proclaimed that the basic nature of all things is change; he posits strife, ἡ ἔρις hē eris ("strife, conflict"), as the underlying basis of all reality, which is itself thus defined by change.

[ 9 ] The quotation from Heraclitus appears in Plato 's Cratylus twice; first, in 401d: [ 10 ] τὰ ὄντα ἰέναι τε πάντα καὶ μένειν οὐδέν Ta onta ienai te panta kai menein ouden "All entities move and nothing remains still." and, second, in 402a: [ 11 ] "πάντα χωρεῖ καὶ οὐδὲν μένει" καὶ "δὶς ἐς τὸν αὐτὸν ποταμὸν οὐκ ἂν ἐμβαίης" Panta chōrei kai ouden menei kai dis es ton auton potamon ouk an embaies "Everything changes and nothing remains still ... and ... you cannot step twice into the same stream." [ 12 ] Heraclitus considered fire to be the most fundamental element: "All things are an interchange for fire, and fire for all things, just like goods for gold and gold for goods." [ 13 ] The following is an interpretation of Heraclitus's concepts in modern terms, as understood by Nicholas Rescher : "...reality is not a constellation of things at all, but one of processes.  The fundamental 'stuff' of the world is not material substance, but volatile flux, namely 'fire', and all things are versions thereof ( puros tropai ).  Process is fundamental: the river is not an object , but a continuing flow; the sun is not a thing , but an enduring fire.  Everything is a matter of process, of activity, of change ( panta rhei )." [ 14 ] Nietzsche and Kierkegaard [ edit ] In his written works, Friedrich Nietzsche proposed what has been regarded as a philosophy of becoming that encompasses a "naturalistic doctrine intended to counter the metaphysical preoccupation with being", and a theory of "the incessant shift of perspectives and interpretations in a world that lacks a grounding essence".

[ 15 ] Søren Kierkegaard posed questions of individual becoming in Christianity which were opposed to the ancient Greek philosophers' focus on the indifferent becoming of the cosmos . However, he established as much of a focus on aporia as Heraclitus and others previously had, such as in his concept of the leap of faith which marks an individual becoming.

[ 16 ] As well as this, Kierkegaard opposed his philosophy to Hegel 's system of philosophy approaching becoming and difference for what he saw as a "dialectical conflation of becoming and rationality", making the system take on the same trait of motionlessness as Parmenides ' system.

[ 17 ] Twentieth century [ edit ] In the early twentieth century, the philosophy of mathematics was undertaken to develop mathematics as an airtight, axiomatic system in which every truth could be derived logically from a set of axioms. In the foundations of mathematics , [ 18 ] this project is variously understood as logicism or as part of the formalist program of David Hilbert .

Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell attempted to complete, or at least facilitate, this program with their seminal book Principia Mathematica , which purported to build a logically consistent set theory on which to found mathematics. After this, Whitehead extended his interest to natural science, which he held needed a deeper philosophical basis. He intuited that natural science was struggling to overcome a traditional ontology of timeless material substances that does not suit natural phenomena. According to Whitehead, material is more properly understood as 'process'.

Whitehead's Process and Reality [ edit ] Alfred North Whitehead began teaching and writing on process and metaphysics when he joined Harvard University in 1924.

[ 19 ] In his book Science and the Modern World (1925), Whitehead noted that the human intuitions and experiences of science, aesthetics, ethics, and religion influence the worldview of a community, but that in the last several centuries science dominates Western culture . Whitehead sought a holistic, comprehensive cosmology that provides a systematic descriptive theory of the world which can be used for the diverse human intuitions gained through ethical, aesthetic, religious, and scientific experiences, and not just the scientific.

[ 4 ] In 1929, Whitehead produced the most famous work of process philosophy, Process and Reality , [ 20 ] continuing the work begun by Hegel but describing a more complex and fluid dynamic ontology.

Process thought describes truth as "movement" in and through substance ( Hegelian truth), rather than substances as fixed concepts or "things" ( Aristotelian truth). Since Whitehead, process thought is distinguished from Hegel in that it describes entities that arise or coalesce in becoming , rather than being simply dialectically determined from prior posited determinates. These entities are referred to as complexes of occasions of experience . It is also distinguished in being not necessarily conflictual or oppositional in operation. Process may be integrative, destructive or both together, allowing for aspects of interdependence, influence, and confluence, and addressing coherence in universal as well as particular developments, i.e., those aspects not befitting Hegel's system. Additionally, instances of determinate occasions of experience, while always ephemeral, are nonetheless seen as important to define the type and continuity of those occasions of experience that flow from or relate to them.
Whitehead's influences were not restricted to philosophers or physicists or mathematicians. He was influenced by the French philosopher Henri Bergson (1859–1941), whom he credits along with William James and John Dewey in the preface to Process and Reality .

[ 20 ] Process metaphysics [ edit ] For Whitehead, metaphysics is about logical frameworks for the conduct of discussions of the character of the world. It is not directly and immediately about facts of nature, but only indirectly so, in that its task is to explicitly formulate the language and conceptual presuppositions that are used to describe the facts of nature. Whitehead thinks that discovery of previously unknown facts of nature can in principle call for reconstruction of metaphysics.

[ 20 ] : 13, 19 The process metaphysics elaborated in Process and Reality [ 20 ] posits an ontology which is based on the two kinds of existence of an entity , that of actual entity and that of abstract entity or abstraction , also called 'object'.

[ 21 ] Actual entity is a term coined by Whitehead to refer to the entities that really exist in the natural world.

[ 22 ] For Whitehead, actual entities are spatiotemporally extended events or processes.

[ 23 ] An actual entity is how something is happening, and how its happening is related to other actual entities.

[ 23 ] The actually existing world is a multiplicity of actual entities overlapping one another.

[ 23 ] The ultimate abstract principle of actual existence for Whitehead is creativity . Creativity is a term coined by Whitehead to show a power in the world that allows the presence of an actual entity, a new actual entity, and multiple actual entities.

[ 23 ] Creativity is the principle of novelty.

[ 22 ] It is manifest in what can be called singular causality , which term may be contrasted with the term nomic causality . An example of singular causation might be that "I woke this morning because my alarm clock rang"; an example of nomic causation is that "alarm clocks generally wake people in the morning." Aristotle recognizes singular causality as efficient causality . For Whitehead, there are many contributory singular causes for an event; for example, a further contributory singular cause of someone being awoken by an alarm clock on a particular morning may be that they were sleeping next to it (till it rang).

An actual entity is a general philosophical term for an utterly determinate and completely concrete individual particular of the actually existing world or universe of changeable entities considered in terms of singular causality, about which categorical statements can be made. Whitehead's most far-reaching and radical contribution to metaphysics is his invention of a better way of choosing the actual entities. Whitehead chooses a way of defining the actual entities that makes them all alike, qua actual entities, with a single exception.

For example, for Aristotle , the actual entities were the substances , such as Socrates. Besides Aristotle's ontology of substances, another example of an ontology that posits actual entities is in the monads of Leibniz , which are said to be 'windowless'.

[ a ] Whitehead's 'actual entities' [ edit ] For Whitehead's ontology of processes as defining the world, the actual entities exist as the only fundamental elements of reality.

The actual entities are of two kinds, temporal and atemporal.

With one exception, all actual entities for Whitehead are temporal and are occasions of experience (which are not to be confused with consciousness ). An entity that people commonly think of as a simple concrete object , or that Aristotle would think of as a substance, is, in this ontology, considered to be a temporally serial composite of indefinitely many overlapping occasions of experience. A human being is thus composed of indefinitely many occasions of experience.

The one exceptional actual entity is at once both temporal and atemporal : God. He is objectively immortal, as well as being immanent in the world. He is objectified in each temporal actual entity; but He is not an eternal object.

The occasions of experience are of four grades. The first grade comprises processes in a physical vacuum such as the propagation of an electromagnetic wave or gravitational influence across empty space. The occasions of experience of the second grade involve just inanimate matter; "matter" being the composite overlapping of occasions of experience from the previous grade. The occasions of experience of the third grade involve living organisms. Occasions of experience of the fourth grade involve experience in the mode of presentational immediacy, which means more or less what are often called the qualia of subjective experience. So far as we know, experience in the mode of presentational immediacy occurs in only more evolved animals. That some occasions of experience involve experience in the mode of presentational immediacy is the one and only reason why Whitehead makes the occasions of experience his actual entities; for the actual entities must be of the ultimately general kind. Consequently, it is inessential that an occasion of experience have an aspect in the mode of presentational immediacy; occasions of the grades one, two, and three, lack that aspect.

There is no mind-matter duality in this ontology, because "mind" is simply seen as an abstraction from an occasion of experience which has also a material aspect, which is of course simply another abstraction from it; thus the mental aspect and the material aspect are abstractions from one and the same concrete occasion of experience. The brain is part of the body, both being abstractions of a kind known as persistent physical objects , neither being actual entities. Though not recognized by Aristotle, there is biological evidence, written about by Galen , [ 25 ] that the human brain is an essential seat of human experience in the mode of presentational immediacy. We may say that the brain has a material and a mental aspect, all three being abstractions from their indefinitely many constitutive occasions of experience, which are actual entities.

Time, causality, and process [ edit ] Inherent in each actual entity is its respective dimension of time. Potentially, each Whiteheadean occasion of experience is causally consequential on every other occasion of experience that precedes it in time, and has as its causal consequences every other occasion of experience that follows it in time; thus it has been said that Whitehead's occasions of experience are 'all window', in contrast to Leibniz's 'windowless' monads. In time defined relative to it, each occasion of experience is causally influenced by prior occasions of experiences, and causally influences future occasions of experience. An occasion of experience consists of a process of prehending other occasions of experience, reacting to them. This is the process in process philosophy .

Such process is never deterministic. Consequently, free will is essential and inherent to the universe.

The causal outcomes obey the usual well-respected rule that the causes precede the effects in time. Some pairs of processes cannot be connected by cause-and-effect relations, and they are said to be spatially separated . This is in perfect agreement with the viewpoint of the Einstein theory of special relativity and with the Minkowski geometry of spacetime.

[ 26 ] It is clear that Whitehead respected these ideas, as may be seen for example in his 1919 book An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge [ 27 ] as well as in Process and Reality . In this view, time is relative to an inertial reference frame, different reference frames defining different versions of time.

Atomicity [ edit ] The actual entities, the occasions of experience, are logically atomic in the sense that an occasion of experience cannot be cut and separated into two other occasions of experience. This kind of logical atomicity is perfectly compatible with indefinitely many spatio-temporal overlaps of occasions of experience. One can explain this kind of atomicity by saying that an occasion of experience has an internal causal structure that could not be reproduced in each of the two complementary sections into which it might be cut. Nevertheless, an actual entity can completely contain each of indefinitely many other actual entities.

Another aspect of the atomicity of occasions of experience is that they do not change. An actual entity is what it is. An occasion of experience can be described as a process of change, but it is itself unchangeable.

The atomicity of the actual entities is of a simply logical or philosophical kind, thoroughly different in concept from the natural kind of atomicity that describes the atoms of physics and chemistry .

Topology [ edit ] Whitehead's theory of extension was concerned with the spatio-temporal features of his occasions of experience. Fundamental to both Newtonian and to quantum theoretical mechanics is the concept of momentum. The measurement of a momentum requires a finite spatiotemporal extent. Because it has no finite spatiotemporal extent, a single point of Minkowski space cannot be an occasion of experience, but is an abstraction from an infinite set of overlapping or contained occasions of experience, as explained in Process and Reality .

[ 20 ] Though the occasions of experience are atomic, they are not necessarily separate in extension, spatiotemporally, from one another. Indefinitely many occasions of experience can overlap in Minkowski space.

Nexus is a term coined by Whitehead to show the network actual entity from the universe. In the universe of actual entities spread [ 22 ] actual entity. Actual entities are clashing with each other and form other actual entities.

[ 23 ] The birth of an actual entity based on an actual entity, actual entities around him referred to as nexus.

[ 22 ] An example of a nexus of temporally overlapping occasions of experience is what Whitehead calls an enduring physical object , which corresponds closely with an Aristotelian substance. An enduring physical object has a temporally earliest and a temporally last member. Every member (apart from the earliest) of such a nexus is a causal consequence of the earliest member of the nexus, and every member (apart from the last) of such a nexus is a causal antecedent of the last member of the nexus. There are indefinitely many other causal antecedents and consequences of the enduring physical object, which overlap, but are not members, of the nexus. No member of the nexus is spatially separate from any other member. Within the nexus are indefinitely many continuous streams of overlapping nexūs, each stream including the earliest and the last member of the enduring physical object. Thus an enduring physical object, like an Aristotelian substance, undergoes changes and adventures during the course of its existence.

In some contexts, especially in the theory of relativity in physics, the word 'event' refers to a single point in Minkowski or in Riemannian space-time. A point event is not a process in the sense of Whitehead's metaphysics. Neither is a countable sequence or array of points. A Whiteheadian process is most importantly characterized by extension in space-time, marked by a continuum of uncountably many points in a Minkowski or a Riemannian space-time. The word 'event', indicating a Whiteheadian actual entity, is not being used in the sense of a point event.

Whitehead's abstractions [ edit ] Whitehead's abstractions are conceptual entities that are abstracted from or derived from and founded upon his actual entities. Abstractions are themselves not actual entities. They are the only entities that can be real but are not actual entities. This statement is one form of Whitehead's 'ontological principle'.

An abstraction is a conceptual entity that refers to more than one single actual entity. Whitehead's ontology refers to importantly structured collections of actual entities as nexuses of actual entities. Collection of actual entities into a nexus emphasizes some aspect of those entities, and that emphasis is an abstraction, because it means that some aspects of the actual entities are emphasized or dragged away from their actuality, while other aspects are de-emphasized or left out or left behind.

'Eternal object' is a term coined by Whitehead. It is an abstraction, a possibility, or pure potential. It can be ingredient into some actual entity.

[ 22 ] It is a principle that can give a particular form to an actual entity.

[ 23 ] [ 28 ] Whitehead admitted indefinitely many eternal objects. An example of an eternal object is a number, such as the number 'two'. Whitehead held that eternal objects are abstractions of a very high degree of abstraction. Many abstractions, including eternal objects, are potential ingredients of processes.

Relation between actual entities and abstractions stated in the ontological principle [ edit ] For Whitehead, besides its temporal generation by the actual entities which are its contributory causes, a process may be considered as a concrescence of abstract ingredient eternal objects. God enters into every temporal actual entity.

Whitehead's ontological principle is that whatever reality pertains to an abstraction is derived from the actual entities upon which it is founded or of which it is comprised.

Causation and concrescence of a process [ edit ] Concrescence is a term coined by Whitehead for the process of a new occasion manifesting as "fully actual"—i.e., becoming concrete —and, having completed this process of actualization (achieving satisfaction , in his terms), in turn becoming an objective datum for successor occasions.

[ 22 ] The concretion process can be regarded as a process of subjectification.

[ 23 ] Datum is a term coined by Whitehead to show the different variants of information possessed by actual entity. In process philosophy, each datum is obtained through the events of concrescence.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Commentary on Whitehead and on process philosophy [ edit ] Whitehead is not an idealist in the strict sense.

[ which?

] Whitehead's thought may be regarded as related to the idea of panpsychism (also known as panexperientialism, because of Whitehead's emphasis on experience).

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] On God [ edit ] Whitehead's philosophy is complex and nuanced regarding the concept of "God". In Process and Reality: Corrected Edition (1978), [ 31 ] the editors elaborate upon Whitehead's view of the concept: He is the unconditioned actuality of conceptual feeling at the base of things; so that by reason of this primordial actuality, there is an order in the relevance of eternal objects to the process of creation.

[ 31 ] : 344 [...] The particularities of the actual world presuppose it ; while it merely presupposes the general metaphysical character of creative advance, of which it is the primordial exemplification.

[ 31 ] : 344 Process philosophy might be considered, according to some theistic forms of religion, to give God a special place in the universe of occasions of experience. Regarding Whitehead's use of the term "occasions" in reference to "God", Process and Reality: Corrected Edition explains: 'Actual entities' – also termed 'actual occasions' – are the final real things of which the world is made up. There is no going behind actual entities to find anything more real. They differ among themselves: God is an actual entity, and so is the most trivial puff of existence in far-off empty space. But, though there are gradations of importance, and diversities of function, yet in the principles which actuality exemplifies all are on the same level. The final facts are, all alike, actual entities; and these actual entities are drops of experience, complex and interdependent.

[ 31 ] : 18 It also can be assumed, within some forms of theology, that a God encompasses all the other occasions of experience, yet also transcends them; it might, therefore, be argued that Whitehead endorses some form of panentheism .

[ 32 ] Since (as it is argued in many theologies) "free will" is inherent to the nature of the universe, Whitehead's God is not omnipotent in Whitehead's metaphysics.

[ 33 ] God's role is to offer enhanced occasions of experience. God participates in the evolution of the universe by offering possibilities, which may be accepted or rejected. Whitehead's thinking here has given rise to process theology , whose prominent advocates include Charles Hartshorne , John B. Cobb, Jr.

, and Hans Jonas (with the latter being influenced by the—non-theological—philosopher Martin Heidegger as well). However, other process philosophers have questioned Whitehead's theology, seeing it as a regressive Platonism.

[ 34 ] Whitehead enumerated three essential natures of God . First, the primordial nature of God consists of all potentialities of existence for actual occasions, which Whitehead dubbed eternal objects; God can offer possibilities by ordering the relevance of eternal objects. Second, the consequent nature of God prehends everything that happens in reality; as such, God experiences all of reality in a sentient manner. Third and last, the superjective nature is the way in which God's synthesis becomes a sense-datum for other actual entities; in some sense, God is prehended by existing actual entities.

[ 35 ] Legacy and applications [ edit ] Biology [ edit ] In plant morphology , Rolf Sattler developed a process morphology (dynamic morphology) that overcomes the structure/process (or structure/function) dualism that is commonly taken for granted in biology. According to process morphology, structures such as leaves of plants do not have processes, they are processes.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] In evolution and in development , the nature of the changes of biological objects are considered by many authors to be more radical than in physical systems. In biology, changes are not just changes of state in a pre-given space, instead the space and more generally the mathematical structures required to understand object change over time.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Ecology [ edit ] With its perspective that everything is interconnected, that all life has value, and that non-human entities are also experiencing subjects, process philosophy has played an important role in discourse on ecology and sustainability. The first book to connect process philosophy with environmental ethics was John B. Cobb, Jr.

's 1971 work, Is It Too Late: A Theology of Ecology .

[ 40 ] In a more recent book (2018) edited by John B. Cobb, Jr.

and Wm. Andrew Schwartz, Putting Philosophy to Work: Toward an Ecological Civilization [ 41 ] contributors explicitly explore the ways in which process philosophy can be put to work to address the most urgent issues facing our world today, by contributing to a transition toward an ecological civilization. That book emerged from the largest international conference held on the theme of ecological civilization ( Seizing an Alternative: Toward an Ecological Civilization ) which was organized by the Center for Process Studies in June 2015. The conference brought together roughly 2,000 participants from around the world and featured such leaders in the environmental movement as Bill McKibben , Vandana Shiva , John B. Cobb, Jr.

, Wes Jackson , and Sheri Liao .

[ 42 ] The notion of ecological civilization is often affiliated with the process philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead —especially in China.

[ 43 ] Mathematics [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the philosophy of mathematics , some of Whitehead's ideas re-emerged in combination with cognitivism as the cognitive science of mathematics and embodied mind theses.

Somewhat earlier, exploration of mathematical practice and quasi-empiricism in mathematics from the 1950s to 1980s had sought alternatives to metamathematics in social behaviours around mathematics itself: for instance, Paul Erdős 's simultaneous belief in Platonism and a single "big book" in which all proofs existed, combined with his personal obsessive need or decision to collaborate with the widest possible number of other mathematicians. The process, rather than the outcomes, seemed to drive his explicit behaviour and odd use of language, as if the synthesis of Erdős and collaborators in seeking proofs, creating sense-datum for other mathematicians, was itself the expression of a divine will. Certainly, Erdős behaved as if nothing else in the world mattered, including money or love, as emphasized in his biography The Man Who Loved Only Numbers .

Medicine [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Several fields of science and especially medicine seem [ vague ] to make liberal use of ideas in process philosophy, notably the theory of pain and healing of the late 20th century. The philosophy of medicine began to deviate somewhat from scientific method and an emphasis on repeatable results in the very late 20th century by embracing population thinking , and a more pragmatic approach to issues in public health , environmental health , and especially mental health . In this latter field, R. D. Laing , Thomas Szasz , and Michel Foucault were instrumental in moving medicine away from emphasis on "cures" and towards concepts of individuals in balance with their society, both of which are changing, and against which no benchmarks or finished "cures" were very likely to be measurable.

Psychology [ edit ] See also: Process psychology In psychology , the subject of imagination was again explored more extensively since Whitehead, and the question of feasibility or "eternal objects" of thought became central to the impaired theory of mind explorations that framed postmodern cognitive science . A biological understanding of the most eternal object, that being the emerging of similar but independent cognitive apparatus, led to an obsession with the process "embodiment", that being, the emergence of these cognitions . Like Whitehead's God, especially as elaborated in J. J. Gibson 's perceptual psychology emphasizing affordances , by ordering the relevance of eternal objects (especially the cognitions of other such actors), the world becomes. Or, it becomes simple enough for human beings to begin to make choices, and to prehend what happens as a result. These experiences may be summed in some sense but can only approximately be shared, even among very similar cognitions with identical DNA. An early explorer of this view was Alan Turing who sought to prove the limits of expressive complexity of human genes in the late 1940s, to put bounds on the complexity of human intelligence and so assess the feasibility of artificial intelligence emerging. Since 2000, Process Psychology has progressed as an independent academic and therapeutic discipline: In 2000, Michel Weber created the Whitehead Psychology Nexus: an open forum dedicated to the cross-examination of Alfred North Whitehead's process philosophy and the various facets of the contemporary psychological field.

[ 44 ] Philosophy of movement [ edit ] The philosophy of movement is a sub-area within process philosophy that treats processes as movements . It studies processes as flows, folds, and fields in historical patterns of centripetal, centrifugal, tensional, and elastic motion.

[ 45 ] See Thomas Nail 's philosophy of movement and process materialism.

See also [ edit ] Concepts Actual idealism Anicca , the Buddhist doctrine that all is "transient, evanescent, inconstant" Panta rhei , Heraclitus's concept that "everything flows" Dialectic Dialectical monism Elisionism Holomovement Pancreativism Salishan languages#Nounlessness Speculative realism People John B. Cobb David Ray Griffin Arthur Peacocke Michel Weber Arran Gare Joseph A. Bracken Milič Čapek Wilfrid Sellars Wilmon Henry Sheldon Thomas Nail Iain McGilchrist Eugene Gendlin Rein Raud Charles Hartshorne Notes [ edit ] ^ D. M. Datta, quoting Leibniz in an attempt to explain and analyze the "windowlessness" of monads: First, the monads are substances; therefore, their accidents "cannot separate themselves from substances, nor go about outside of them" and thus "neither substance nor accident can come into a Monad from outside." Secondly, a monad is simple, and therefore it has no parts and "there is no way of explaining how a Monad can be altered in quality or internally changed by any other created thing"; [... t]hirdly, a monad is a spiritual mirror of the whole universe, and it has "no outside" and therefore, 'coming from outside' or 'passing outside from it' is inconceivable.

[ 24 ] References [ edit ] ^ Nicholas Rescher , Process Metaphysics: An Introduction to Process Philosophy , SUNY Press, 1996, p. 42.

^ "Process Philosophy" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2022.

^ Ilya Prigogine, From being to becoming , David Bohm , "Wholeness and the Implicate Order", W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 1980.

^ a b Jeremy R. Hustwit (2007).

"Process Philosophy: 2.a. In Pursuit of a Holistic Worldview" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Cf.

Michel Weber (ed.), After Whitehead: Rescher on Process Metaphysics , Frankfurt / Paris / Lancaster, Ontos Verlag, 2004.

^ William Blattner, "Some Thoughts About "Continental" and "Analytic" Philosophy" ^ Seibt, Johanna.

"Process Philosophy" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Nicholas Gaskill, A. J. Nocek, The Lure of Whitehead , University of Minnesota Press, 2014, p. 4: "it is no wonder that Whitehead fell by the wayside. He was too scientific for the "continentals," not scientific enough for the "analytics," and too metaphysical—which is to say uncritical —for them both" and p. 231: "the analytics and Continentals are both inclined toward Kantian presuppositions in a manner that Latour and Whitehead brazenly renounce." ^ Wheelwright, P. (1959).

Heraclitus , Oxford University Press, Oxford UK, ISBN 0-19-924022-1 , p.35.

^ Cratylus Paragraph Crat. 401 section d line 5 .

^ Cratylus Paragraph 402 section a line 8 .

^ This sentence has been translated by Seneca in Epistulae, VI, 58, 23 .

^ Harris, William.

"Heraclitus: The Complete Philosophical Fragments" .

Middlebury College . Retrieved 3 October 2015 .

^ Rescher, Nicholas (2000).

Process Philosophy: A survey of basic issues . [Pittsburgh]: University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 5.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt6wrc3b .

ISBN 0822961288 .

^ Cox, Christoph (1999).

Nietzsche: Naturalism and Interpretation . University of California Press. p. 170.

ISBN 0-520-21553-2 .

^ Carlisle, Claire (2005).

Kierkegaard's Philosophy of Becoming: Movements and Positions . State University of New York Press. p. 9-10.

ISBN 0-7914-6547-0 .

^ Carlisle, Claire (2005).

Kierkegaard's Philosophy of Becoming: Movements and Positions . State University of New York Press. p. 15.

ISBN 0-7914-6547-0 .

^ "Inconsistent Mathematics" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2022.

^ "Alfred North Whitehead" .

^ a b c d e Alfred North Whitehead (1929).

Process and Reality . New York: Macmillan.

^ Palter, R.M. (1960).

Whitehead's Philosophy of Science , University of Chicago Press, Chicago IL, p. 23.

^ a b c d e f g Robert Audi. 1995, The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy.

Cambridge: The Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge. 851–853.

^ a b c d e f g h John B. Cobb and David Ray Griffin. 1976, Process Theology, An Introduction. Philadelphia: The Westminster Press.

^ Datta, D. M.; The Hegeler Institute (1936). Sugden, Sherwood J. B. (ed.).

"The Windowless Monads" .

The Monist .

46 (1): 13– 24.

doi : 10.5840/monist19364612 .

ISSN 0026-9662 .

^ Siegel, R. E. (1973).

Galen: On Psychology, Psychopathology, and Function and Diseases of the Nervous System. An Analysis of his Doctrines, Observations, and Experiments , Karger, Basel, ISBN 978-3-8055-1479-8 .

^ Naber, G. L. (1992).

The Geometry of Minkowski Spacetime. An Introduction to the Mathematics of the Special Theory of Relativity , Springer, New York, ISBN 978-0-387-97848-2 ^ Whitehead, A. N. (1919).

An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.

^ Cf.

Michel Weber (ed.), After Whitehead: Rescher on Process Metaphysics , Frankfurt / Paris / Lancaster, Ontos Verlag, 2004 ( ISBN 3-937202-49-8 ).

^ Seager, William.

"Whitehead and the Revival (?) of Panpsychism" .

University of Toronto Scarborough . University of Toronto at Scarborough . Retrieved 14 June 2017 .

^ Röck, Tina.

"The Experiential Fundament of Panexperientialism" (PDF) . CambridgeScholars . Retrieved 31 May 2022 .

^ a b c d Alfred North Whitehead (1978). David Ray Griffin; Donald W. Sherburne (eds.).

Process and Reality: Corrected Edition . The Free Press (Macmillan).

ISBN 0-02-934580-4 .

^ Cooper, John W. (2006).

Panentheism--The Other God of the Philosophers: From Plato to the Present . Grand Rapids MI: Baker Academic. p. 176.

ISBN 978-0801049316 .

^ Dombrowski, Daniel A. (2017).

Whitehead's Religious Thought: From Mechanism to Organism, From Force to Persuasion . Albany: State Univ of New York Pr. pp.

33– 35.

ISBN 978-1438464299 .

^ Hustwit, J. R.

"Process Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy (IEP) . Retrieved 15 June 2017 .

^ Viney, Donald.

"Process Theism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosoph . Center for the Study of Language and Information (CSLI), Stanford University . Retrieved 15 June 2017 .

^ Sattler, R (1990). "Towards a more dynamic plant morphology".

Acta Biotheoretica .

38 ( 3– 4): 303– 315.

doi : 10.1007/BF00047245 .

S2CID 84421634 .

^ Sattler, R (1992). "Process morphology: structural dynamics in development and evolution".

Canadian Journal of Botany .

70 (4): 708– 714.

Bibcode : 1992CaJB...70..708S .

doi : 10.1139/b92-091 .

^ Montévil, Maël; Mossio, Matteo; Pocheville, Arnaud; Longo, Giuseppe (1 October 2016).

"Theoretical principles for biology: Variation" .

Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology . From the Century of the Genome to the Century of the Organism: New Theoretical Approaches.

122 (1): 36– 50.

doi : 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2016.08.005 .

PMID 27530930 .

S2CID 3671068 .

^ Longo, Giuseppe; Montévil, Maël; Kauffman, Stuart (1 January 2012).

"No entailing laws, but enablement in the evolution of the biosphere" .

Proceedings of the 14th annual conference companion on Genetic and evolutionary computation . GECCO '12. New York, NY, USA: ACM. pp.

1379– 1392.

arXiv : 1201.2069 .

Bibcode : 2012arXiv1201.2069L .

doi : 10.1145/2330784.2330946 .

ISBN 9781450311786 .

S2CID 15609415 .

^ Cobb, John B. Jr. (1971).

Is It Too Late?: A Theology of Ecology . Macmillan Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0028012803 .

^ Cobb, John B. Jr.; Scwhartz, Wm. Andrew (2018).

Putting Philosophy to Work: Toward an Ecological Civilization . Minnesota: Process Century Press.

ISBN 978-1940447339 .

^ Herman Greene, "Re-Imagining Civilization as Ecological: Report on the 'Seizing an Alternative: Toward an Ecological Civilization' Conference" , last modified 24 August 2015, Center for Ecozoic Societies , accessed 1 November 2016.

Archived 4 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Wang, Zhihe; Huili, He; Meijun, Fan (November 2014).

"The Ecological Civilization Debate in China: The Role of Ecological Marxism and Constructive Postmodernism—Beyond the Predicament of Legislation" .

Monthly Review . Retrieved 23 August 2018 .

^ Cobb, John B., Jr. "Process Psychotherapy: Introduction".

Process Studies vol. 29, no. 1 (Spring–Summer 2000): 97–102; cf.

Michel Weber and Will Desmond (eds.), Handbook of Whiteheadian Process Thought , Frankfurt / Lancaster, ontos verlag, Process Thought X1 & X2, 2008.

^ Nail, Thomas (10 December 2018).

Being and motion . New York, NY.

ISBN 978-0-19-090890-4 .

OCLC 1040086073 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) External links [ edit ] Academia pages of the Center for Philosophical Practice .

Seibt, Johanna.

"Process Philosophy" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Process philosophy at PhilPapers Process philosophy at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project Hustwit, Jeremy R.

"Process philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Whitehead Research Project Process and Reality. Part V. Final Interpretation Wolfgang Sohst: Prozessontologie. Ein systematischer Entwurf der Entstehung von Existenz (Berlin 2009) Critique of a Metaphysics of Process (Antwerp 2012) v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Alfred North Whitehead Books Principia Mathematica (1910–1913) glossary Process and Reality (1929) Concepts Inert knowledge Point-free geometry Process philosophy Tensor product of graphs Theory of gravitation Study Center for Process Studies Contemporary Whitehead Studies Whitehead Research Project NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bw867
Cached time: 20250816102723
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.785 seconds
Real time usage: 0.942 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4666/1000000
Revision size: 46690/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 202328/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3286/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 147946/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.477/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25650061/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  790.285      1 -total
 20.99%  165.881     14 Template:Cite_book
 14.86%  117.469      3 Template:Lang
 14.64%  115.661      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 14.38%  113.624      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.04%   63.500      1 Template:Short_description
  4.75%   37.545      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.68%   37.018      4 Template:Rp
  4.43%   35.041      2 Template:Unreferenced_section
  4.21%   33.296      7 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24269:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816102723 and revision id 1304942687. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Process_philosophy&oldid=1304942687 " Categories : Process philosophy Holism Religion and science Subfields of metaphysics Alfred North Whitehead Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2021 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2013 Articles needing additional references from May 2013 All articles needing additional references All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2013 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 02:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Process philosophy 16 languages Add topic

