Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Foundry operations 2 Metal processing 3 Origin of life 4 See also 5 Notes Toggle the table of contents Reducing atmosphere 2 languages Català Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Atmosphere containing reducing agents This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Reducing atmosphere" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A reducing atmosphere is an atmosphere in which oxidation is prevented by the absence of oxygen and other oxidizing gases or vapours, and which may contain actively reductant gases such as hydrogen , carbon monoxide , methane and hydrogen sulfide that would be readily oxidized to remove any free oxygen. Although Early Earth had a reducing prebiotic atmosphere prior to the Proterozoic eon , starting at about 2.5 billion years ago in the late Neoarchaean period , the Earth's atmosphere experienced a significant rise in oxygen and transitioned to an oxidizing atmosphere with a surplus of molecular oxygen ( dioxygen , O 2 ) as the primary oxidizing agent .

Foundry operations [ edit ] The principal mission of an iron foundry is the conversion of iron oxides (purified iron ores) to iron metal.  This reduction is usually effected using a reducing atmosphere consisting of some mixture of natural gas , hydrogen (H 2 ), and carbon monoxide .  The byproduct is carbon dioxide .

[ 1 ] Metal processing [ edit ] In metal processing, a reducing atmosphere is used in annealing ovens for relaxation of metal stresses without corroding the metal. A non-oxidizing gas, usually nitrogen or argon , is typically used as a carrier gas so that diluted amounts of reducing gases may be used. Typically, this is achieved through using the combustion products of fuels and tailoring the ratio of CO:CO 2 . However, other common reducing atmospheres in the metal processing industries consist of dissociated ammonia, vacuum, and direct mixing of appropriately pure gases of N 2 , Ar, and H 2 .

[ 2 ] A reducing atmosphere is also used to produce specific effects on ceramic wares being fired. A reduction atmosphere is produced in a fuel fired kiln by reducing the draft and depriving the kiln of oxygen. This diminished level of oxygen causes incomplete combustion of the fuel and raises the level of carbon inside the kiln. At high temperatures the carbon will bond with and remove the oxygen in the metal oxides used as colorants in the glazes. This loss of oxygen results in a change in the color of the glazes because it allows the metals in the glaze to be seen in an unoxidized form. A reduction atmosphere can also affect the color of the clay body. If iron is present in the clay body, as it is in most stoneware , then it will be affected by the reduction atmosphere as well.

In most commercial incinerators , exactly the same conditions are created to encourage the release of carbon-bearing fumes. These fumes are then oxidized in reburn tunnels where oxygen is injected progressively. The exothermic oxidation reaction maintains the temperature of the reburn tunnels. This system allows lower temperatures to be employed in the incinerator section, where the solids are volumetrically reduced.

Origin of life [ edit ] See also: Geological history of oxygen The atmosphere of Early Earth is widely speculated to have been reducing. The Miller–Urey experiment , related to some hypotheses for the origin of life, entailed reactions in a reducing atmosphere composed of a mixed atmosphere of methane , ammonia and hydrogen sulfide .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Some hypotheses for the origin of life invoke a reducing atmosphere consisting of hydrogen cyanide (HCN).  Experiments show that HCN can polymerize in the presence of ammonia to give various products including amino acids .

[ 5 ] The same principle applies to Mars , Venus and Titan .

Cyanobacteria are suspected to be the first photoautotrophs that evolved oxygenic photosynthesis , which over the latter half of the Archaen eon eventually depleted all reductants in the Earth's oceans, terrestrial surface and atmosphere, gradually increasing the oxygen concentration in the atmosphere, changing it to what is known as an oxidizing atmosphere. This rising oxygen initially led to a 300 million-year-long ice age that devastated the then-mostly anaerobe -dominated biosphere , forcing the surviving anaerobic colonies to evolve into symbiotic microbial mats with the newly evolved aerobes . Some aerobic bacteria eventually became endosymbiont within other anaerobes (likely archaea ), and the resultant symbiogenesis led to the evolution of an entirely new lineage of life — the eukaryotes , who took advantage of mitochondrial aerobic respiration to power their cellular activities, allowing life to thrive and evolve into ever more complex forms.

[ 6 ] The increased oxygen in the atmosphere also eventually created the ozone layer , which shielded away harmful ionizing ultraviolet radiation that otherwise would have photodissociated away surface water and rendered life impossible on land and the ocean surface.

In contrast to the hypothesized early reducing atmosphere, evidence exists that Hadean atmospheric oxygen levels were similar to today's.

[ 7 ] These results suggest prebiotic building blocks were delivered from elsewhere in the galaxy. The results, however, do not contradict existing theories on life's journey from anaerobic to aerobic organisms. The results quantify the nature of gas molecules containing carbon, hydrogen, and sulphur in the earliest atmosphere, but they shed no light on the much later rise of free oxygen in the air.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Atmosphere of Earth – Gas layer surrounding Earth Great Oxidation Event – Paleoproterozoic surge in atmospheric oxygen Paleoclimatology – Study of changes in ancient climate Paleoatmosphere – Ancient atmosphere, particularly of Earth, in the geological past Redox – Chemical reaction with oxidation state changes Notes [ edit ] ^ Formanek, Lothar; Lüngen, Hans Bodo; Prölss, Julian; Rose, Fritz; Stellmacher, Ulrike (2019-07-30), "Iron, 3. Direct Reduction Processes" , Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry , Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, pp.

1– 21, doi : 10.1002/14356007.o14_o02.pub3 , ISBN 9783527306732 , retrieved 2022-02-28 ^ Koria, S. C.

"Fuels Refractory and Furnaces" (PDF) . Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur . Retrieved 28 December 2018 – via National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning.

^ McGrath, John W.; Chin, Jason P.; Quinn, John P. (2013). "Organophosphonates Revealed: New Insights into the Microbial Metabolism of Ancient Molecules".

Nature Reviews Microbiology .

11 (6): 412– 419.

doi : 10.1038/nrmicro3011 .

PMID 23624813 .

S2CID 32515430 .

^ Orgel, Leslie E. (1998). "The Origin of Life—a Review of Facts and Speculations".

Trends in Biochemical Sciences .

23 (12): 491– 495.

doi : 10.1016/S0968-0004(98)01300-0 .

PMID 9868373 .

^ Ruiz-Bermejo, Marta; Zorzano, María-Paz; Osuna-Esteban, Susana (2013).

"Simple Organics and Biomonomers Identified in HCN Polymers: An Overview" .

Life .

3 (3): 421– 448.

Bibcode : 2013Life....3..421R .

doi : 10.3390/life3030421 .

PMC 4187177 .

PMID 25369814 .

^ Gribbin, J. (1995-12-09).

"Structure of the Earth's atmosphere" . New Scientist, 2007. p. 1.

^ Trail, Dustin; Watson, E. Bruce; Tailby, Nicholas D. (2011). "The oxidation state of Hadean magmas and implications for early Earth's atmosphere".

Nature .

480 (7375): 79– 82.

Bibcode : 2011Natur.480...79T .

doi : 10.1038/nature10655 .

PMID 22129728 .

S2CID 4338830 .

^ "Earth's Early Atmosphere: An Update" . NASA Astrobiology Institute.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reducing_atmosphere&oldid=1292217303 " Categories : Metallurgy Planetary science Pottery Redox Reducing agents Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 20:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reducing atmosphere 2 languages Add topic

