Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Festivals 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Vaishakha 23 languages Afrikaans বাংলা भोजपुरी Català डोटेली Esperanto Français ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Nederlands नेपाली ଓଡ଼ିଆ ភាសាខ្មែរ Русский संस्कृतम् தமிழ் తెలుగు اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Vaisakha ) Month in Hindu calendar For the month in Bengali Calendar , see Boisakh .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Vaishakha" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Vaishakha Native name वैशाख ( Sanskrit ) Calendar Hindu calendar Month number 2 Season Spring Gregorian equivalent Mid April To Mid May Significant days Vaisakhi ← Chaitra Jyeshtha → Vaisakha ( Sanskrit : वैशाख , IAST : Vaiśākha ) is a month of the Hindu calendar that corresponds to April/May in the Gregorian Calendar .

[ 1 ] In the Indian national calendar , Vaisakha is the second month of the year.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Regional calendars used in the Indian subcontinent have two aspects: lunar and solar. Lunar months begin with Chaitra and solar months start with Vaisakha Sankranti . However, regional calendars mark when the official new year is celebrated. In regions such as Maharashtra which begin the official new year with the commencement of the lunar year, the solar year is marked by celebrating Vaisakha Sankranti. Conversely, regions starting the new year with Vaisakha Sankranti, give prominence to the start of the lunar year in Chaitra. In the Vedic calendar, it is called Madhava, and in the Vaishnava calendar, it is called Madhushudana month.

Overview [ edit ] In the Hindu solar calendar, Vaisakha begins in mid-April in Bengal , Mithila , Nepal , and Punjab . In Tamil Nadu , it is known as Vaikasi (mid-May to mid-June) and represents the second month of the Tamil solar calendar. The Tamil month that corresponds to Vaisakha is Chithirai (mid-April to mid-May). In the Hindu lunar calendar, Vaisakha begins with the new moon in April and represents the second month of the lunar year. The name of the month is derived from the position of the Moon near the Vishākhā constellation (" Nakshatra ") on the full-moon day.

[ 4 ] In the Vaishnava calendar, Madhusudana governs this month.

The month of Boishakh also marks the official start of Summer. The month is notorious for the afternoon storms called Kalboishakhi ( Nor'wester ).

[ 5 ] The storms usually start with strong gusts from the north-western direction at the end of a hot day and cause widespread destruction.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Festivals [ edit ] Pohela Boishakh celebration in Dhaka The first day of Baishakh is celebrated as the Pôhela Boishak or Bangla New Year's Day. In Mithila Region it is celebrated as the Jur Sital or Mithila New Year's Day.
The day is observed with cultural programs, festivals and carnivals all around the country. The day of is also the beginning of all business activities in West Bengal and Bangladesh . The traders starts new fiscal account book called Halkhata .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The accounting in the Halkhata begins only after this day. It is celebrated with sweets and gifts with customers.

[ 8 ] The harvest festival of Vaisakhi is celebrated on in this month which marks the Punjabi new year according to the Punjabi calendar .

Jallianwala Bagh massacre took place on the Punjabi New year day.

Akshaya Tritiya , also known as Akti or Akha Teej , is an annual Jain and Hindu spring festival.

[ 10 ] It falls on the third tithi (lunar day) of the bright half ( Shukla Paksha ) of the Hindu month of Vaisakha .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Vaisakha Purnima is celebrated as Buddha Purnima or the birthday of Gautama Buddha amongst Buddhists of South and Southeast Asia, Tibet and Mongolia.

Purnima refers to the Full Moon. Known in Sinhala as Vesak, it is observed in the full moon of May.

Vaisakha sukla Panchami is celebrated as Adi Shankara birthday the great philosopher and theologian of Hinduism religion.

Vaishakha Purnima is known as "vaikasi vishakam" in Tamil Nadu which is celebrated as the birthday of Lord Murugan .

Vaisakha sukla chaturdasi is celebrated as Narasimha Jayanti Festival in Sri Varaha Lakshmi Narasimha Swamivari Temple at Simhachalam .

[ 14 ] Shukla Paksha Krishna Paksha 1.

Prathama 1. Prathama 2.

Dwitiya 2. Dwitiya 3.

Tritiya 3. Tritiya 4.

Chaturthi 4. Chaturthi 5.

Panchami 5. Panchami 6.

Shashti 6. Shashti 7.

Saptami 7. Saptami 8.

Ashtami 8. Ashtami 9.

Navami 9. Navami 10.

Dashami 10. Dashami 11.

Ekadashi 11. Ekadashi 12.

Dwadashi 12. Dwadashi 13.

Thrayodashi 13. Thrayodashi 14.

Chaturdashi 14. Chaturdashi 15.

Purnima 15.

Amavasya See also [ edit ] Hinduism portal Astronomical basis of the Hindu calendar Boishakh – 1st month of the Bengali calendar Vaisakhi – Religious festival in Sikhism and Hinduism Vesākha – Buddhist festival marking the birth, enlightenment and death of the Buddha Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Besakih Temple – Major Hindu temple in Bali, Indonesia Hindu units of measurement Hindu astronomy – Astronomy on the Indian subcontinent Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Jyotish – Indian form of astrology Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ Henderson, Helene. (Ed.) (2005) Holidays, festivals, and celebrations of the world dictionary Third edition. Electronic edition. Detroit: Omnigraphics, p. xxix.

ISBN 0-7808-0982-3 ^ Boniface Mundu (2013).

The Silent Short Stories: A Word of Truth . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

ISBN 9781492173311 .

^ "Nepali Calendar - २०७४ जेष्ठ - नेपाली क्यालेन्डर" .

www.nepcal.com . Retrieved 7 June 2017 .

^ "Another New Year,Another Resolution" . daily-sun.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2014 . Retrieved 1 June 2014 .

^ Rajib Shaw; Fuad Mallick & Aminul Islam (2013).

Disaster Risk Reduction Approaches in Bangladesh . Springer. p. 98.

ISBN 978-4-431-54252-0 .

^ "Kalboishakhis - Bangladesh's deadly storms" . aljazeera.com. 29 April 2014 . Retrieved 1 June 2014 .

^ S.M. Imamul Huq & Jalal Uddin Md. Shoaib (2013).

The Soils of Bangladesh . Springer. pp.

15– 16.

ISBN 978-94-007-1128-0 .

^ a b M H Haider (8 April 2014).

"HAL KHATA TIME-BOUND, YET TIMELESS" . thedailystar.net . Retrieved 1 June 2014 .

^ "Halkatha – An explanation" .

amaderkotha.com.bd . Archived from the original on 2 June 2014 . Retrieved 1 June 2014 .

^ "Akshaya Tritiya 2017: Here is Why it is of significance in Hinduism and the reason behind people buying Gold on this day!" .

NewsGram . 28 April 2017.

^ "Akshaya Tritiya 2023: Why is Akshaya Tritiya celebrated, what does the Bhavishya Purana say?" .

Yugantar Pravah . 11 April 2023 . Retrieved 11 April 2023 .

^ "What are the auspicious events that happened on Akshaya Tritiya?" .

Bru Times News .

^ Publishing, Bloomsbury (13 September 2011).

Religious Celebrations: An Encyclopedia of Holidays, Festivals, Solemn Observances, and Spiritual Commemorations [2 volumes] . Bloomsbury Publishing USA. p. 18.

ISBN 978-1-59884-206-7 .

^ Nrusimha Jayanthi.

"Festivals" .

Simhachalam Devasthanam . Archived from the original on 30 October 2022 . Retrieved 24 June 2016 .

v t e Days and months of the Hindu calendar Days Pratipada Dvitiya Tritiya Chaturthi Panchami Shashthi Saptami Ashtami Navami Dashami Ekadashi Dvadashi Trayodashi Chaturdashi Amavasya Purnima Months Lunar Chaitra Vaishakha Jyeshtha Ashadha Shravana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartika Margashirsha (Agrahayana) Pausha Magha Phalguna Adhika-masa Solar Meṣa Vṛṣabha Mithuna Karkaṭa Siṃha Kanya Tulā Vṛścika Dhanu Makara Kumbha Mīna v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vaishakha&oldid=1305598702 " Category : Months of the Hindu calendar Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2013 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 01:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vaishakha 23 languages Add topic

