Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Michael D. Maltz 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Michael Maltz ) American criminologist and academic This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Michael D. Maltz" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Michael D. Maltz (born 1938) is an American electrical engineer , criminologist and Emeritus Professor at University of Illinois at Chicago in criminal justice , and adjunct professor and researcher at Ohio State University .

Biography [ edit ] Michael Maltz was born in Brooklyn , New York on December 18, 1938. He attended Stuyvesant High School in New York City , graduating in 1955, and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , graduating with a degree in electrical engineering in 1959. Maltz earned a Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Stanford University in 1963.

In 1967, his son David Maltz was born, followed by twin sons Joel and Robert -- Joel died in 1974. He married Marcia Farr in 1984. His stepdaughter Julianna Whiteman was born in 1975, Maltz was a professor (1972–2002) at University of Illinois at Chicago in criminal justice and in Information and Decision Sciences , and is currently an adjunct professor of sociology and researcher at Ohio State University . He was also the editor of the Journal of Quantitative Criminology from 1996 to 2000. In addition, he was a visiting fellow for research and policy studies at the US Bureau of Justice Statistics , from 1995 to 2000.

In 1985 Maltz was awarded the Lanchester Prize [ 1 ] by the Operations Research Society of America , recognizing his book Recidivism [ 2 ] as that year's "best contribution to operations research and the management sciences published in English". This book also won the Leslie T. Wilkins Award for the Outstanding Book in the Fields of Criminology and Criminal Justice. In 1996 Maltz received a [Fulbright Scholarship,] which he spent at El Colegio de Michoacán in Mexico.

Work [ edit ] Michael Maltz's research focuses on the application of operations research and data visualization to the field of criminology .  In addition to authoring books on recidivism and crime mapping , he has been a strong advocate of ensuring that inferences made from data are not attributable to biases in the data used, nor to the way they were collected, nor to the methods used to analyze them. This interest has surfaced most publicly in his critique of John Lott 's More Guns, Less Crime (see "A Note on the Use of County-Level Crime Data" and "Measurement and Other Errors in County-Level UCR Data: A reply to Lott and Whitley" below) based primarily on a detailed analysis of the validity of the Uniform Crime Reports data set that Lott used to draw his conclusions. A further critique, of the way Lott responded to his analysis, was contained in a blog entry.

He led an effort to clean the FBI-collected Uniform Crime Reports crime data, which is available in a zip file on the web from the Historical Violence Database , housed at Ohio State University.

A particularly lucid explanation of the pitfalls of improper use of statistics in social science (and, in particular, criminology ) is contained in his article "Deviating from the Mean: The Declining Significance of Significance" .

Publications [ edit ] Maltz has published numerous books and articles on techniques for making valid and useful inferences from data. Among his books are two which are available on his academia.edu website (see below): 1984.

Recidivism . Orlando, Florida: Academic Press, Inc.

1991 Mapping Crime in Its Community Setting: Event Geography Analysis . With Andrew C. Gordon and Warren Friedman. New York : Springer-Verlag Inc.

Envisioning Criminology , coedited with Steven K. Rice, Springer 2015.

Envisioning Criminology , coedited with Steven K. Rice, Springer 2018.

Articles and book chapters, a selection: 1994.

"Deviating from the Mean: The Declining Significance of Significance" . In: Journal of research in crime and delinquency , Vol. 31 No. 4, November 1994 434-463.

1996.

"Power to the People: Crime Mapping and Information Sharing in the Chicago Police Department" . Paper with Marc Buslik.

1999.

"Bridging Gaps in Police Crime Data" . Report published by the Bureau of Justice Statistics.

1999.

"Displaying Violent Crime Trends Using Estimates from the National Crime Victimization Survey" With Marianne Zawitz. Published by the Bureau of Justice Statistics.

2000. "Crime and Justice". With Arnold Barnett and Jonathan Caulkins. In: Encyclopedia of Operations Research and Management Science . Saul I. Gass and Carl M. Harris (Editor). Springer.

2002.

"A Note on the Use of County-Level UCR Data" . With Joseph Targonski. In: Journal of Quantitatiûe Criminology , Vol. 18, No. 3, September 2002.

2006.

"Some p-baked thoughts (p > 0.5) on experiments and statistical significance" .

Journal of Experimental Criminology, 1, 2, 211-226.

2009.

"Waves, particles, and crime" , in Putting Crime in Its Place:Units of Analysis in Geographic Criminology, W. Bernasco, G. Bruinsma,  and D. Weisburd, Eds., Springer-Verlag.

2009. "Look before you analyze: Visualizing data in criminal justice," in the Handbook of Quantitative Criminology, A. Piquero and D. Weisburd, Eds., Springer-Verlag.

2011. "Homicide rates in the Old West" (with Randolph Roth and Douglas L. Eckberg), Western Historical Quarterly, 42, 2.

2019.

"Can We Trust the FBI's Crime Estimation Procedures?" The Criminologist , American Society of Criminology.

These and other papers can be found on his academia.edu website.

References [ edit ] ^ Lanchester Prize Archived 2005-12-20 at the Wayback Machine ^ Recidivism External links [ edit ] Michael Maltz’s homepage on academia.edu.

Criminal Justice Research Center at The Ohio State University.

El Colegio de Michoacán Journal of Quantitative Criminology v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Israel Academics DBLP Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michael_D._Maltz&oldid=1300737620 " Categories : 1938 births American criminologists Living people Ohio State University faculty American operations researchers Stanford University alumni Data and information visualization experts University of Illinois Chicago faculty Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from February 2013 All BLP articles lacking sources This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 03:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Michael D. Maltz 1 language Add topic

