Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Approaches to characterizing circular definitions Toggle Approaches to characterizing circular definitions subsection 1.1 Classical 1.2 Pragmatic 1.3 Lexicographic 1.3.1 Circular lexicographic (dictionary) definitions 1.3.2 Examples of narrowly circular definitions in dictionaries 2 Mathematical theory 3 Linguistics 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Circular definition 18 languages العربية Čeština الدارجة Español हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша 日本語 Polski Português Română Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Svenska 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Self-referential description of meaning This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Circular definition" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Circular definition of "circular definition" A circular definition is a type of definition that uses the term (s) being defined as part of the description or assumes that the term(s) being described are already known. There are several kinds of circular definition, and several ways of characterising the term: pragmatic , lexicographic and linguistic . Circular definitions are related to circular reasoning in that they both involve a self-referential approach.

Circular definitions may be unhelpful if the audience must either already know the meaning of the key term, or if the term to be defined is used in the definition itself.

In linguistics, a circular definition is a description of the meaning of a lexeme that is constructed using one or more synonymous lexemes that are all defined in terms of each other.

[ 1 ] Approaches to characterizing circular definitions [ edit ] Classical [ edit ] In Plato 's Meno , several definitions of virtue are offered, the third of which states that virtue is the power of attaining good justly or with justice, where justice has already been defined as a form or aspect of virtue.

Socrates , in response to Meno, states that the process of finding a definition will have to be started again because the wording offered defines virtue as a part of virtue.

[ 2 ] Pragmatic [ edit ] From a pragmatic point of view, circular definitions may be characterised in terms of new, useful or helpful information: a definition is deficient if the audience must either already know the meaning of the key term, or if the term to be defined is used in the definition itself. Such definitions lead to a need for additional information that motivated someone to look at the definition in the first place and, thus, violate the principle of providing new or useful information.

[ 3 ] Here are some examples: Suppose we define " oak " as a tree which has catkins and grows from an acorn, and then define "acorn" as the nut produced by an oak tree. To someone who does not know which trees are oaks, nor which nuts are acorns, the definition is inadequate.

If someone wants to know what a cellular phone is, telling them that it is a "phone that is cellular" will not be especially illuminating. Much more helpful would be to explain the concept of a cell in the context of telecommunications, or at least to make some reference to portability.

Similarly, defining dialectical materialism as "materialism that involves dialectic" is unhelpful.

Consequently, when constructing systems of definitions, authors should use good practices that avoid producing viciously circular definitions. In many learner's dictionaries, circular definitions are greatly reduced by writing definitions using only the words in a constrained defining vocabulary .

[ 4 ] Lexicographic [ edit ] From a lexicographic point of view, the simplest form of circular definition in a dictionary is in terms of synonyms, and the number of steps for closing the definition chain into a circle is known as the depth of the circular definition: the circular definition "object: a thing" → "thing: an object" is a circular definition with a depth of two. The circular definition "object: a thing" → "thing: an entity" → "entity: an object" has a depth of three.

"Four legs" is a simple example of differentia specifica.

The classic "genus-difference" dictionary definition is in terms of nearest kind ( genus proximum ) and specific differences ( differentia specifica ). This genus-difference description may be involved in producing circular definitions of part and kind relationships, for example: "rake: an implement with three or more tines" → "tine: a part of a rake". However, if more specific differences are added, then the effect of circularity may disappear: "rake: a gardening implement with a long handle with three or more tines arranged on crossbar at 90° to the handle and the tines at 90° to both crossbar and handle"; in this case, "tine" is most usefully defined with reference to "rake", but with additional differences providing points of comparison, e.g.: "tine: a sharp spike at the end of a rake". In practice, a pragmatic approach is often taken in considering the effects of circularity in dictionary definitions.

[ 5 ] Circular lexicographic (dictionary) definitions [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Dictionary entries are often given as examples of apparent circular definitions. Dictionary production, as a project in lexicography , should not be confused with a mathematical or logical activity, where giving a definition for a word is similar to providing an explanans for an explanandum in a context where practitioners are expected to use a deductive system .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] While, from a linguistic prescriptivist perspective, any dictionary might be believed to dictate correct usage, the linguistic descriptivist perspective recognizes that looking up words in dictionaries is not itself a rule-following practice independent of the give-and-take of using words in context.

[ 7 ] Thus, the example of a definition of oak given above (something that has catkins and grows from acorns) is not completely useless, even if "acorn" and "catkin" are defined in terms of "oak", in that it supplies additional concepts (e.g., the concept of catkin) in the definition.

[ citation needed ] While a dictionary might produce a "circle" among the terms, "oak", "catkin", and "acorn", each of these is used in different contexts [ clarification needed ] (e.g., those related to plants, trees, flowers, and seeds) that generate ever-branching networks of usages. In another case it might produce a true circle. Taken as a whole, dictionaries are circular because each and every word is defined in terms of words that are also contained within the dictionary. ( A person could not pick up a (foreign) dictionary and make any sense of it unless they already know the meaning of a minimal subset of a number of words without having the need to refer to the dictionary for said meaning.

[ clarification needed ] ) A circular definition crept into the classic definition of death that was once "the permanent cessation of the flow of vital bodily fluids", which raised the question "what makes a fluid vital?" [ 8 ] [ clarification needed ] Definitions in lexicography can be broadly or narrowly circular. Narrowly circular definitions simply define one word in terms of another. A broadly circular definition has a larger circle of words. For example, the definition of the primary word is defined using two other words, which are defined with two other words, etc., creating a definitional chain. This can continue until the primary word is used to define one of the words used in the chain, closing the wide circle of terms. If all definitions rely on the definitions of other words in a very large, but finite chain, then all text-based definitions are ultimately circular.

Extension (semantics) to the actual things that referring terms like nouns stand for, provided that agreement on reference is accomplished, is one method of breaking this circularity, but this is outside the capacity of a text-based definition.

[ citation needed ] Examples of narrowly circular definitions in dictionaries [ edit ] The 2007 Merriam-Webster dictionary defines a "hill" and a "mountain" this way: hill - "1: a usually rounded natural elevation of land lower than a mountain " [ 9 ] mountain - "1a: a landmass that projects conspicuously above its surroundings and is higher than a hill " [ 10 ] Merriam-Webster's online dictionary provides another example of a circular definition with the words "condescending" and "patronizing:" Main Entry: condescending [ 11 ] Function: adjective 1 : showing or characterized by condescension: patronizing From "condescension": Main Entry: condescension [ 12 ] Function: noun 1 : voluntary descent from one's rank or dignity in relations with an inferior 2 : patronizing attitude or behavior To "patronize": Main Entry: patronize [ 13 ] Function: transitive verb 1 : to act as patron of: provide aid or support for 2 : to adopt an air of condescension toward : treat haughtily or coolly From the Oxford Dictionary of English: Punishment – "a penalty inflicted as retribution for an offence".

Penalty – "a punishment imposed for breaking a law, rule, or contract".

Retribution – "punishment inflicted on someone as vengeance for a wrong or criminal act".

Vengeance – "punishment inflicted or retribution exacted for an injury or wrong".

Therefore, a punishment means "a punishment imposed for breaking a law, rule, or contract inflicted as punishment inflicted on someone as punishment inflicted or retribution exacted for an injury or wrong for a wrong or criminal act for an offence". Obviously, this is not the final result of substitution as this would result in an endlessly long sentence.

Mathematical theory [ edit ] Formal approaches to characterizing circular definitions are found in logic , mathematics and in computer science . A branch of mathematics called non-well-founded set theory allows for the construction of circular sets. Circular sets are good for modelling cycles, and, despite the field's name, this area of mathematics is well founded.

Computer science allows for procedures to be defined by using recursion . Such definitions are not circular as long as they terminate.

[ 14 ] Linguistics [ edit ] Linguistically, a circular definition is a description of the meaning of a lexeme that is constructed using one or more synonymous lexemes that are all defined in terms of each other.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Begging the question Circular reasoning Fallacies of definition Genus–differentia definition Infinite regress Lexicography Lexical definition Meta-circular evaluator Self-reference Self-refuting idea Recursive definition Revision theory Tautology Vicious circle principle References [ edit ] ^ a b "Circular Definition" .

Glossary of Linguistic Terms . 2015-12-03 . Retrieved 2023-03-07 .

^ Plato, Meno , 79b-c ^ Wierzbicka, A., Semantics: Primes and Universals . Oxford University Press: 1996.

^ Bullock, D. 'NSM + LDOCE: A Non-Circular Dictionary of English', International Journal of Lexicography , 24/2, 2011: 226-240 ^ Atkins, B. and M. Rundell.

The Oxford Guide to Practical Lexicography . Oxford University Press: 2008.

^ Michael Silverstein (2006). " Old Wine, New Ethnographic Lexicography ".

Annual Review of Anthropology , 35:486-7.

^ a b Philip Seargeant, "Lexicography as a Philosophy of Language".

Language Sciences , 33:1-10 (2011).

^ Tulloch, Gail (2005).

Euthanasia, Choice and Death , p.8. Edinburgh University.

ISBN 9780748618811 .

^ "hill" . Merriam-Webster. Retrieved January 17, 2013.

^ "mountain" . Merriam-Webster. Retrieved January 17, 2013.

^ "condescending" . Merriam-Webster. Retrieved January 17, 2013.

^ "condescension" . Merriam-Webster. Retrieved January 17, 2013.

^ "patronizing" . Merriam-Webster. Retrieved January 17, 2013.

^ "Recursion" .

University of Utah School of Computing . Retrieved June 18, 2020 .

v t e Definition Circular Concept Coordinative Enumerative Extensional Fallacies of Intensional Genus–differentia Lexical Operational Ostensive Persuasive Precising Recursive Stipulative Theoretical NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐qz2gm
Cached time: 20250812035333
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.321 seconds
Real time usage: 0.416 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1542/1000000
Revision size: 12637/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 38689/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4390/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 26972/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.204/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4316144/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  367.009      1 -total
 29.03%  106.546      1 Template:Reflist
 23.40%   85.865      2 Template:Cite_web
 21.16%   77.644      1 Template:Defining
 20.51%   75.274      1 Template:Navbox
 17.30%   63.480      1 Template:Short_description
 16.19%   59.433      1 Template:Refimprove
 15.72%   57.705      2 Template:Ambox
 10.44%   38.318      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.22%   22.834      2 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:68038:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812035333 and revision id 1264121148. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Circular_definition&oldid=1264121148 " Categories : Definition Philosophical logic Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2016 This page was last edited on 20 December 2024, at 16:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Circular definition 18 languages Add topic

