Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Universal suffrage 2.1.1 Early history 2.1.2 Women's suffrage 2.1.3 Anti-women's suffrage propaganda 2.2 Equal suffrage 2.3 Passive suffrage 2.4 Census suffrage 2.5 Compulsory suffrage 2.6 Business vote 3 Basis of exclusion Toggle Basis of exclusion subsection 3.1 Gender 3.2 Religion 3.3 Wealth, tax class, social class 3.4 Knowledge 3.5 Race 3.6 Age 3.7 Criminality 3.8 Residency 3.9 Nationality 3.10 Naturalization 3.11 Function 4 History around the world Toggle History around the world subsection 4.1 Australia 4.2 Canada 4.3 European Union 4.4 Finland 4.5 France 4.6 Germany 4.7 India 4.8 Ireland 4.9 Italy 4.10 Japan 4.11 New Zealand 4.12 Norway 4.13 Poland 4.14 Singapore 4.15 South Africa 4.16 Sri Lanka 4.17 Sweden 4.18 Turkey 4.19 United Kingdom 4.20 United States 4.21 Majority-Muslim countries 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 8.1 United States 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Suffrage 61 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Right to vote in public and political elections Not to be confused with Universal suffrage .

"Right to vote", "Suffragist", and "The Franchise" redirect here. For the group, see Right to Vote . For the organisation, see National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies . For other uses, see The Franchise (disambiguation) .

People queuing and showing their identity documents for voting in the 2014 Indian general election Suffrage , political franchise , or simply franchise is the right to vote in public, political elections and referendums (although the term is sometimes used for any right to vote ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In some languages, and occasionally in English, the right to vote is called active suffrage , as distinct from passive suffrage , which is the right to stand for election.

[ 4 ] The combination of active and passive suffrage is sometimes called full suffrage .

[ 5 ] In most democracies, eligible voters can vote in elections for representatives. Voting on issues by referendum ( direct democracy ) may also be available. For example, in Switzerland , this is permitted at all levels of government. In the United States , some states allow citizens the opportunity to write, propose, and vote on referendums ( popular initiatives ); other states and the federal government do not.

Referendums in the United Kingdom are rare.

Suffrage continues to be especially restricted on the basis of age , residency and citizenship status in many places. In some countries additional restrictions exist. In Great Britain and the United States a felon might lose the right to vote. In some countries being under guardianship may restrict the right to vote.

Non-resident citizen voting allows emigrants and expats of some countries to vote in their home country.

[ 6 ] Resident non-citizens can vote in some countries, which may be restricted to citizens of closely linked countries (e.g., Commonwealth citizens and European Union citizens ) or to certain offices or questions.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Multiple citizenship typically allows to vote in multiple countries.

[ 6 ] Historically the right to vote was more restricted, for example by gender, race, or wealth.

Etymology [ edit ] The word suffrage comes from Latin suffragium , which initially meant "a voting-tablet", "a ballot", "a vote", or "the right to vote".

Suffragium in the second century and later came to mean "political patronage, influence, interest, or support", and sometimes "popular acclaim" or "applause". By the fourth century the word was used for "an intercession", asking a patron for their influence with the Almighty.

Suffragium was used in the fifth and sixth centuries with connection to buying influence or profiteering from appointing to office, and eventually the word referred to the bribe itself.

[ 10 ] William Smith rejects the connection of suffragium to sub "under" + fragor "crash, din, shouts (as of approval)", related to frangere "to break"; Eduard Wunder writes that the word may be related to suffrago , signifying an ankle bone or knuckle bone.

[ 11 ] In the 17th century the English suffrage regained the earlier meaning of the Latin suffragium , "a vote" or "the right to vote".

[ 12 ] Types [ edit ] Universal suffrage [ edit ] Main article: Universal suffrage The Peterloo Massacre of 1819 Universal suffrage would be achieved when all have the right to vote without restriction. It could, for example, look like a system where everyone was presumed to have the right to vote unless a government can prove beyond a reasonable doubt the need to revoke voting rights.

[ 13 ] The trend towards universal suffrage has progressed in some democracies by eliminating some or all of the voting restrictions due to gender, race, religion, social status, education level, wealth, citizenship , ability and age . However, throughout history the term 'universal suffrage' has meant different things with the different assumptions about the groups that were or were not deemed desirable voters.

Early history [ edit ] The short-lived Corsican Republic (1755–1769) was the first country to grant limited universal suffrage to all citizens over the age of 25.

In 1819, 60–80,000 women and men from 30 miles around Manchester assembled in the city's St. Peter's Square to protest their lack of any representation in the Houses of Parliament. Historian Robert Poole has called the Peterloo Massacre one of the defining moments of its age.

[ 14 ] (The eponymous Peterloo film featured a scene of women suffragists planning their contribution to the protest.) At that time Manchester had a population of around 140,000 and the population totals of Greater Manchester were around 490,000.

[ 15 ] This was followed by other experiments in the Paris Commune of 1871 and the island republic of Franceville (1889). From 1840 to 1852, the Kingdom of Hawai'i granted universal suffrage without mention of sex. In 1893, when the Kingdom of Hawai'i was overthrown in a coup , New Zealand was the only independent country to practice universal (active) suffrage, and the Freedom in the World index lists New Zealand as the only free country in the world in 1893.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Women's suffrage [ edit ] Main article: Women's suffrage German election poster from 1919: Equal rights – equal duties!

Women's suffrage is the right of women to vote.

[ 18 ] This was the goal of the suffragists, who believed in using legal means, as well as the suffragettes , who used extremist measures. Short-lived suffrage equity was drafted into provisions of the State of New Jersey's first, 1776 Constitution, which extended the Right to Vote to unwed female landholders and black land owners.

IV. That all inhabitants of this Colony, of full age, who are worth fifty pounds proclamation money, clear estate in the same, and have resided within the county in which they claim a vote for twelve months immediately preceding the election, shall be entitled to vote for Representatives in Council and Assembly; and also for all other public officers, that shall be elected by the people of the county at large.

New Jersey 1776 However, the document did not specify an Amendment procedure, and the provision was subsequently replaced in 1844 by the adoption of the succeeding constitution , which reverted to "all white male" suffrage restrictions.

[ 19 ] Although the Kingdom of Hawai'i granted female suffrage in 1840, the right was rescinded in 1852. Limited voting rights were gained by some women in Sweden, Britain, and some western U.S. states in the 1860s. In 1893, the British colony of New Zealand became the first self-governing nation to extend the right to vote to all adult women.

[ 20 ] In 1894, the women of South Australia achieved the right to both vote and stand for Parliament . The autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland in the Russian Empire was the first nation to allow all women to both vote and run for parliament.

Anti-women's suffrage propaganda [ edit ] A British postcard against women's suffrage postcard from c.

1908 . It shows unflattering caricatures of suffragettes in front of parliament and the caption: "This is the house that man built" with a poem. From the People's History Museum , Manchester .

Britain's WSPU poster by Hilda Dallas , 1909 Those against the women's suffrage movement made public organizations to put down the political movement, with the main argument being that a woman's place was in the home, not polls. Political cartoons and public outrage over women's rights increased as the opposition to suffrage worked to organize legitimate groups campaigning against women's voting rights. The Massachusetts Association Opposed to the Further Extension of Suffrage to Women was one organization that came out of the 1880s to put down the voting efforts.

[ 21 ] Much anti-suffrage propaganda poked fun at the idea of women in politics. Political cartoons displayed the most sentiment by portraying the issue of women's suffrage to be swapped with men's lives. Some mocked the popular suffrage hairstyle of full-upward combed hair. Others depicted young girls turning into suffragettes after a failure in life, such as not being married.

[ 22 ] Equal suffrage [ edit ] See also: Weighted voting Equal suffrage is sometimes confused with Universal suffrage , although the meaning of the former is the removal of graded votes, wherein a voter could possess a number of votes in accordance with income, wealth or social status.

[ 23 ] Passive suffrage [ edit ] These paragraphs are an excerpt from Nomination rules .

[ edit ] Nomination rules in elections regulate the conditions under which a candidate or political party is entitled to stand for election. The right to stand for election, right to be a candidate or passive suffrage is one part of free and fair elections .

[ 24 ] Passive suffrage is distinct from active suffrage , the right to vote. The criteria to stand as a candidate depends on the individual legal system. They may include the age of a candidate , citizenship, endorsement by a political party and profession.

[ 25 ] Laws' restrictions, such as competence or moral aptitude, can be used in a discriminatory manner. Restrictive and discriminatory nomination rules can impact the civil rights of candidates, political parties, and voters.

Census suffrage [ edit ] Also known as "censitary suffrage", it is the opposite of equal suffrage, meaning that the votes cast by those eligible to vote are not equal, but weighed differently according to the person's income or rank in society (e.g., people who do not own property or whose income is lower than a given amount are barred from voting; or people with higher education have more votes than those with lower education; stockholders who have more shares in a given company have more votes than those with fewer shares).  In many countries, census suffrage restricted who could vote and be elected: in the United States, until the Jacksonian reforms of the 1830s, only men who owned land of a specified acreage or monetary value could vote or participate in elections.

[ 26 ] Similarly, in Brazil, the Constitution of 1824 established that, in order to vote, citizens would need to have an annual income of 200,000 milréis and, to be voted, their minimum annual income would need to be 400,000 milréis.

[ 27 ] Compulsory suffrage [ edit ] Main article: Compulsory suffrage Where compulsory suffrage exists, those who are eligible to vote are required by law to do so. Thirty-two countries currently practise this form of suffrage.

[ 28 ] Business vote [ edit ] See also: Plural voting , Functional constituency (Hong Kong) , and Indirectly elected member In local government in England and some of its ex-colonies, businesses formerly had, and in some places still have, a vote in the urban area in which they paid rates . This is an extension of the historical property-based franchise from natural persons to other legal persons .

In the United Kingdom, the Corporation of the City of London has retained and even expanded business vote, following the passing of the City of London (Ward Elections) Act 2002 . This has given business interests within the City of London , which is a major financial centre with few residents, the opportunity to apply the accumulated wealth of the corporation to the development of an effective lobby for UK policies.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] This includes having the City Remembrancer , financed by the City's Cash , as a parliamentary agent , provided with a special seat in the House of Commons located in the under-gallery facing the Speaker 's chair.

[ 31 ] In a leaked document from 2012, an official report concerning the City's Cash revealed that the aim of major occasions such as set-piece sumptuous banquets featuring national politicians was "to increase the emphasis on complementing hospitality with business meetings consistent with the City corporation's role in supporting the City as a financial centre".

[ 32 ] The first issue taken up by the Northern Ireland civil rights movement was the business vote, abolished in 1968 (a year before it was abolished in Great Britain outside the City of London).

[ 33 ] In the Republic of Ireland , commercial ratepayers [ nb 1 ] can vote in local plebiscites , for changing the name of the locality or street , [ 37 ] [ nb 2 ] or delimiting a business improvement district .

[ 40 ] From 1930 to 1935, 5 of 35 members of Dublin City Council were "commercial members".

[ 41 ] In cities in most Australian states, voting is optional for businesses but compulsory for individuals.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Some municipalities in Delaware allow corporations to vote on local matters.

[ 44 ] Basis of exclusion [ edit ] See also: Disenfranchisement Gender [ edit ] Main article: Women's suffrage Women's Suffrage Headquarters on Euclid Avenue in Cleveland , Ohio , in 1912 In ancient Athens , often cited as the birthplace of democracy, only adult, male citizens who owned land were permitted to vote. Through subsequent centuries, Europe was generally ruled by monarchs, though various forms of parliament arose at different times. The high rank ascribed to abbesses within the Catholic Church permitted some women the right to sit and vote at national assemblies – as with various high-ranking abbesses in Medieval Germany, who were ranked among the independent princes of the empire. Their Protestant successors enjoyed the same privilege almost into modern times.

[ 45 ] Marie Guyart, a French nun who worked with the First Nations peoples of Canada during the seventeenth century, wrote in 1654 regarding the suffrage practices of Iroquois women, "These female chieftains are women of standing amongst the savages, and they have a deciding vote in the councils. They make decisions there like the men, and it is they who even delegated the first ambassadors to discuss peace." [ 46 ] The Iroquois, like many First Nations peoples in North America, had a matrilineal kinship system . Property and descent were passed through the female line. Women elders voted on hereditary male chiefs and could depose them.

The emergence of many modern democracies began with male citizens obtaining the right to vote in advance of female citizens, except in the Kingdom of Hawai'i , where universal suffrage without mention of age or sex was introduced in 1840; however, a constitutional amendment in 1852 rescinded female voting and put property qualifications on male voting.

Voting rights for women were introduced into international law by the United Nations' Human Rights Commission, whose elected chair was Eleanor Roosevelt . In 1948 the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ; Article 21 states: "(1) Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country, directly or through freely chosen representatives. (3) The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures." The United Nations General Assembly adopted the Convention on the Political Rights of Women , which went into force in 1954, enshrining the equal rights of women to vote, hold office, and access public services as set out by national laws. One of the most recent jurisdictions to acknowledge women's full right to vote was Bhutan in 2008 (its first national elections).

[ 47 ] Most recently, in 2011 King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia let women vote in the 2015 local elections (and from then on) and be appointed to the Consultative Assembly .

Religion [ edit ] In the aftermath of the Reformation it was common in European countries for people of disfavored religious denominations to be denied civil and political rights, often including the right to vote, to stand for election or to sit in parliament. In Great Britain and Ireland , Roman Catholics were denied the right to vote from 1728 to 1793, and the right to sit in parliament until 1829. The anti-Catholic policy was justified on the grounds that the loyalty of Catholics supposedly lay with the Pope rather than the national monarch.

In England and Ireland, several Acts practically disenfranchised non-Anglicans or non-Protestants by imposing an oath before admission to vote or to stand for office. The 1672 and 1678 Test Acts forbade non-Anglicans to hold public offices, and the 1727 Disenfranchising Act took away Catholics' voting rights in Ireland, which were restored only in 1788. Jews could not even be naturalized. An attempt was made to change this situation, but the Jewish Naturalization Act 1753 provoked such reactions that it was repealed the following year.

Nonconformists ( Methodists and Presbyterians ) were only allowed to run for election to the British House of Commons starting in 1828, Catholics in 1829 (following the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 , which extended the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1791 ), and Jews in 1858 (with the Emancipation of the Jews in England ).

Benjamin Disraeli could only begin his political career in 1837 because he had been converted to Anglicanism at the age of 12.

In several states in the U.S. after the Declaration of Independence , Jews, Quakers or Catholics were denied voting rights and/or forbidden to run for office.

[ 48 ] The Delaware Constitution of 1776 stated that: [ 49 ] Every person who shall be chosen a member of either house, or appointed to any office or place of trust, before taking his seat, or entering upon the execution of his office, shall (...) also make and subscribe the following declaration, to wit: I, A B. do profess faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ His only Son, and in the Holy Ghost, one God, blessed for evermore; and I do acknowledge the holy scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by divine inspiration.

This was repealed by article I, section 2 of the 1792 Constitution : "No religious test shall be required as a qualification to any office, or public trust, under this State".

[ 50 ] The 1778 Constitution of the State of South Carolina stated that "No person shall be eligible to sit in the house of representatives unless he be of the Protestant religion", [ 51 ] the 1777 Constitution of the State of Georgia (art. VI) that "The representatives shall be chosen out of the residents in each county (...) and they shall be of the Protestent (sic) religion".

[ 52 ] In Maryland , voting rights and eligibility were extended to Jews in 1828.

[ 53 ] In Canada , several religious groups ( Mennonites , Hutterites , Doukhobors ) were disenfranchised by the wartime Elections Act of 1917, mainly because they opposed military service. This disenfranchisement ended with the closure of the First World War, but was renewed for Doukhobors from 1934 (via the Dominion Elections Act ) to 1955.

[ 54 ] The first Constitution of modern Romania in 1866 provided in article 7 that only Christians could become Romanian citizens.

Jews native to Romania were declared stateless persons. In 1879, under pressure from the Berlin Peace Conference , this article was amended, granting non-Christians the right to become Romanian citizens, but naturalization was granted on a case-by-case basis and was subject to Parliamentary approval. An application took over ten years to process. Only in 1923 was a new constitution adopted, whose article 133 extended Romanian citizenship to all Jewish residents and equality of rights to all Romanian citizens.

[ 55 ] Wealth, tax class, social class [ edit ] Demonstration for universal right to vote, Prague, Austria-Hungary , 1905 Until the nineteenth century, many Western proto-democracies had property qualifications in their electoral laws; e.g. only landowners could vote (because the only tax for such countries was the property tax), or the voting rights were weighted according to the amount of taxes paid (as in the Prussian three-class franchise ). Most countries abolished the property qualification for national elections in the late nineteenth century, but retained it for local government elections for several decades. Today these laws have largely been abolished, although the homeless may not be able to register because they lack regular addresses.

In the United Kingdom , until the House of Lords Act 1999 , peers who were members of the House of Lords were excluded from voting for the House of Commons as they were not commoners. Although there is nothing to prevent the monarch from voting, it is considered improper for the monarch to do so.

[ 56 ] Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, many nations made voters pay to elect officials, keeping impoverished people from being fully enfranchised. These laws were in effect in Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

[ 57 ] Knowledge [ edit ] Sometimes the right to vote has been limited to people who had achieved a certain level of education or passed a certain test. In some US states, " literacy tests " were previously implemented to exclude those who were illiterate.

[ 58 ] Black voters in the South were often deemed by election officials to have failed the test even when they did not.

[ 59 ] Under the 1961 constitution of Rhodesia , voting on the "A" roll, which elected up to 50 of the 65 members of parliament, was restricted based on education requirements, which in practice led to an overwhelming white vote. Voting on the "B" roll had universal suffrage, but only appointed 15 members of parliament.

[ 60 ] [ clarification needed ] In the 20th century, many countries other than the US placed voting restrictions on illiterate people, including: Bolivia , Brazil , Canada , Chile , Ecuador , and Peru .

[ 57 ] Race [ edit ] Various countries, usually countries with a dominant race within a wider population, have historically denied the vote to people of particular races, or to all but the dominant race. This has been achieved in a number of ways: Official – laws and regulations passed specifically disenfranchising people of particular races (for example, the Antebellum United States , Boer republics , pre-apartheid and apartheid South Africa, or many colonial political systems, who provided suffrage only for white settlers and some privileged non-white groups). Canada and Australia denied suffrage for their indigenous populations until the 1960s.

Indirect – nothing in law specifically prevents anyone from voting on account of their race, but other laws or regulations are used to exclude people of a particular race. In southern states of the United States of America before the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 , poll taxes , literacy and other tests were used to disenfranchise African-Americans.

[ 58 ] [ 61 ] Property qualifications have tended to disenfranchise a minority race, particularly if tribally owned land is not allowed to be taken into consideration. In some cases this was an unintended (but usually welcome) consequence.

[ citation needed ] Many African colonies after World War II until decolonization had tough education and property qualifications which practically gave meaningful representation only for rich European minorities.

Unofficial – nothing in law prevents anyone from voting on account of their race, but people of particular races are intimidated or otherwise prevented from exercising this right. This was a common tactic employed by white Southerners against Freedmen during the Reconstruction Era and the following period before more formal methods of disenfranchisement became entrenched. Unofficial discrimination could even manifest in ways which, while allowing the act of voting itself, effectively deprive it of any value – for example, in Israel , the country's Arab minority has maintained a party-system separate from that of the Jewish majority. In the run-up for the country's 2015 elections , the electoral threshold was raised from 2% to 3.25%, thus forcing the dominant Arab parties – Hadash , the United Arab List , Balad and Ta'al – either to run under one list or risk losing their parliamentary representation.

Age [ edit ] Youth rights Activities Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co.

Child Labor Deterrence Act Children's Online Privacy Protection Act Kids Online Safety Act Convention on the Rights of the Child Fair Labor Standards Act Hammer v. Dagenhart History of youth rights in the United States Morse v. Frederick Newsboys' strike of 1899 Prez Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms Wild in the Streets Theory / concepts Adultcentrism Adultism Ageism Criminalization Democracy Ephebiphobia Fear of children Free-range parenting Intergenerational equity Future generations Paternalism Social class Suffrage Taking Children Seriously Universal suffrage Unschooling Youth activism Youth detention center Youth empowerment Youth exclusion Youth suffrage Youth voice Issues Adolescent sexuality Age of candidacy Age of consent Age-of-consent reform Age of majority Age of marriage Behavior modification facility Child labour Children in the military Child marriage Compulsory education Conscription Corporal punishment at home at school in law Curfew Child abuse Emancipation of minors Gambling age Human rights and youth sport In loco parentis Juvenile delinquency Juvenile court Juvenile law Legal drinking age ( U.S. history ) Legal working age Minimum driving age Marriageable age Minor (law) Minors and abortion Restavec School leaving age Smoking age ( U.S. history ) Status offense Underage drinking in the US Voting age Youth-adult partnership Youth participation Youth politics Youth unemployment Youth voting Organizations United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child Akt Americans for a Society Free from Age Restrictions Canadian Youth for Choice Human Rights and Youth Rights Commission Common Cents Community Alliance for the Ethical Treatment of Youth DoSomething Future Coalition Global Youth Action Network High School Democrats of America Indian Youth Climate Network International Falcon Movement – Socialist Educational International Mermaids National Union of Students LGBT+ Campaign National Youth Rights Association One World Youth Project Queer Youth Network Students for a Democratic Society Freechild Project Three O'Clock Lobby UK Youth Parliament Youth International Party Youth Liberation of Ann Arbor The Youth Cafe Young Communist League of Canada Young Democrats of America World Federation of Democratic Youth People Fletcher Hanson Henry Holt Koroknay-Palicz Duff Males Postman Yaco Related Ages of consent in Asia Ages of consent in Europe Ages of consent in North America Ages of consent in Oceania Ages of consent in South America Ages of consent in the United States Animal rights Anti-racism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Feminism French petitions against age-of-consent laws Legal status of tattooing in European countries Legal status of tattooing in the United States Libertarianism Students' rights Youth Olympic Games Youth sports Youth wing Liberation theology Communism Socialism Marxism Youth rights Society portal v t e Main articles: Voting age and Age of candidacy All modern democracies require voters to meet age qualifications to vote.

[ citation needed ] Worldwide voting ages are not consistent, differing between countries and even within countries, though the range usually varies between 16 and 21 years. The United Kingdom was the first major democratic nation to extend suffrage to those 18 and older in 1969 .

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] The movement to lower the voting age is one aspect of the Youth rights movement.

Demeny voting has been proposed as a form of proxy voting by parents on behalf of their children who are below the age of suffrage.

Nomination rules generally include age of candidacy rules.

Criminality [ edit ] Main article: Disfranchisement § Based on criminal conviction Some countries restrict the voting rights of convicted criminals. Some countries, and some U.S. states , also deny the right to vote to those convicted of serious crimes even after they are released from prison. In some cases (e.g. in many U.S. states ) the denial of the right to vote is automatic upon a felony conviction; in other cases (e.g. France and Germany) deprivation of the vote is meted out separately, and often limited to perpetrators of specific crimes such as those against the electoral system or corruption of public officials. In the Republic of Ireland , prisoners are allowed the right to vote, following the Hirst v UK (No2) ruling , which was granted in 2006.

Canada allowed only prisoners serving a term of less than 2 years the right to vote, but this was found to be unconstitutional in 2002 by the Supreme Court of Canada in Sauvé v. Canada (Chief Electoral Officer) , and all prisoners have been allowed to vote as of the 2004 Canadian federal election .

Residency [ edit ] Under certain electoral systems elections are held within subnational jurisdictions, thus preventing persons from voting who would otherwise be eligible on the basis that they do not reside within such a jurisdiction, or because they live in an area that cannot participate. In the United States, license plates in Washington, D.C. read "TAXATION WITHOUT REPRESENTATION," in reference to the district not holding a seat in either the House of Representatives or Senate , however residents can vote in presidential elections based on the Twenty-third Amendment to the United States Constitution adopted in 1961. Residents of Puerto Rico enjoy neither.

Sometimes citizens become ineligible to vote because they are no longer resident in their country of citizenship . For example, Australian citizens who have been outside Australia for more than one and fewer than six years may excuse themselves from the requirement to vote in Australian elections while they remain outside Australia (voting in Australia is compulsory for resident citizens).

[ 64 ] Danish citizens that reside permanently outside Denmark lose their right to vote.

[ 65 ] In some cases, a certain period of residence in a locality may required for the right to vote in that location. For example, in the United Kingdom up to 2001, each 15 February a new electoral register came into effect, based on registration as of the previous 10 October, with the effect of limiting voting to those resident five to seventeen months earlier depending on the timing of the election.

Nationality [ edit ] Main article: Right of foreigners to vote In most countries, suffrage is limited to citizens and, in many cases, permanent residents of that country. However, some members of supra-national organisations such as the Commonwealth of Nations and the European Union have granted voting rights to citizens of all countries within that organisation. Until the mid-twentieth century, many Commonwealth countries gave the vote to all British citizens within the country, regardless of whether they were normally resident there. In most cases this was because there was no distinction between British and local citizenship . Several countries qualified this with restrictions preventing non-white British citizens such as Indians and British Africans from voting. Under European Union law, citizens of European Union countries can vote in each other's local and European Parliament elections on the same basis as citizens of the country in question, but usually not in national elections.

Naturalization [ edit ] In some countries, naturalized citizens do not have the right to vote or to be a candidate, either permanently or for a determined period.

Article 5 of the 1831 Belgian Constitution made a difference between ordinary naturalization, and grande naturalisation . Only (former) foreigners who had been granted grande naturalisation were entitled to vote, be a candidate for parliamentary elections, or be appointed minister. However, ordinary naturalized citizens could vote for municipal elections.

[ 66 ] Ordinary naturalized citizens and citizens who had acquired Belgian nationality through marriage could vote, but not run as candidates for parliamentary elections in 1976. The concepts of ordinary and grande naturalization were suppressed from the Constitution in 1991.

[ 67 ] In France , the 1889 Nationality Law barred those who had acquired the French nationality by naturalization or marriage from voting, and from eligibility and access to several public jobs. In 1938 the delay was reduced to five years.

[ 68 ] These instances of discrimination, as well as others against naturalized citizens, were gradually abolished in 1973 (9 January 1973 law) and 1983.

In Morocco , a former French protectorate , and in Guinea, a former French colony, naturalized citizens are prohibited from voting for five years following their naturalization.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] In the Federated States of Micronesia , one must be a Micronesian citizen for at least 15 years to run for parliament.

[ 71 ] In Nicaragua , Peru and the Philippines , only citizens by birth are eligible for being elected to the national legislature; naturalized citizens enjoy only voting rights.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] In Uruguay , naturalized citizens have the right of eligibility to the parliament after five years.

[ 75 ] In the United States, the President and Vice President must be natural-born citizens. All other governmental offices may be held by any citizen, although citizens may only run for Congress after an extended period of citizenship (seven years for the House of Representatives and nine for the Senate).

Function [ edit ] In France, an 1872 law, rescinded by a 1945 decree, prohibited all army personnel from voting.

[ 76 ] In Ireland, police (the Garda Síochána and, before 1925, the Dublin Metropolitan Police ) were barred from voting in national elections, though not local elections , from 1923 to 1960.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] The 1876 Constitution of Texas (article VI, section 1) stated that "The following classes of persons shall not be allowed to vote in this State, to wit: (...) Fifth—All soldiers, marines and seamen, employed in the service of the army or navy of the United States." [ 81 ] In many countries with a presidential system of government a person is forbidden to be a legislator and an official of the executive branch at the same time. Such provisions are found, for example, in Article I of the U.S. Constitution.

History around the world [ edit ] See also: Universal suffrage § Dates by country , Timeline of women's suffrage , Timeline of women's suffrage in the United States , and Voting age Countries with universal suffrage granted to women, 2024 [ 82 ] Australia [ edit ] See also: Suffrage in Australia and Voting rights of Australian Aboriginals 1855 – South Australia is the first colony to allow all male suffrage to British subjects (later extended to Aboriginal Australians over the age of 21.

1894 – South Australian women eligible to vote.

[ 83 ] 1896 – Tasmania becomes last colony to allow all male suffrage.

1899 – Western Australian women eligible to vote.

[ 83 ] 1902 – The Commonwealth Franchise Act enables women to vote federally and in the state of New South Wales. This legislation also allows women to run for government, making Australia the first democratic state in the world to allow this.

1921 – Edith Cowan is elected to the West Australian Legislative Assembly as member for West Perth, the first woman elected to any Australian Parliament.

[ 84 ] 1962 – Australian Aborigines guaranteed the right to vote in Commonwealth elections, however, in practice this right was dependent on Aboriginal voting rights having been granted by the individual's respective state.

1965 – Queensland is the last state to grant voting rights to Aboriginal Australians.

1973 - After South Australian Premier Don Dunstan introduced the Age of Majority (Reduction) Bill in October 1970, the voting age in South Australia was lowered to 18 years old in 1973. Consequently, the voting age for all federal elections was lowered from 21 to 18. The states had lowered the voting age to 18 by 1973, the first being Western Australia in 1970.

Canada [ edit ] See also: The Famous Five (Canada) 1871 – One of the first acts of the new Province of British Columbia strips the franchise from First Nations, and ensures Chinese and Japanese people are prevented from voting.

1916 – Manitoba becomes the first province in which women have the right to vote in provincial elections.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] 1917 – The federal Wartime Elections Act gives voting rights to women with relatives fighting overseas. Voting rights are stripped from all " enemy aliens " (those born in enemy countries who arrived in Canada after 1902; see also Ukrainian Canadian internment ).

[ 87 ] The federal Military Voters Act gives the vote to all soldiers, even non-citizens, (with the exception of Indian and Metis veterans) [ 88 ] and to women serving as nurses or clerks for the armed forces, but the votes are not for specific candidates but simply for or against the government.

1918 – Women gain full voting rights in federal elections.

[ 89 ] 1919 – Women gain the right to run for federal office.

[ 89 ] 1940 – Quebec becomes the last province where women's right to vote is recognized. (see Canadian women during the world wars for more information on Canadian suffrage) 1947 – Racial exclusions against Chinese and Indo-Canadians lifted.

1948 – Racial exclusions against Japanese Canadians lifted.

[ 90 ] 1955 – Religious exclusions are removed from election laws.

[ 91 ] 1960 – Right to vote is extended unconditionally to First Nations peoples. (Previously they could vote only by giving up their status as First Nations people.) [ 92 ] 1960 – Right to vote in advance is extended to all electors willing to swear they would be absent on election day.

[ 93 ] 1965 – First Nations people granted the right to vote in Alberta provincial elections, starting with the 1967 Alberta general election .

[ 92 ] 1969 – First Nations people granted the right to vote in Quebec provincial elections, starting with the 1970 Quebec general election .

[ 92 ] 1970 – Voting age lowered from 21 to 18.

[ 94 ] 1982 – The new Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees all adult citizens the right to vote.

1988 – Supreme Court of Canada rules mentally ill patients have the right to vote.

[ 95 ] 1993 – Any elector can vote in advance.

[ 91 ] 2000 – Legislation is introduced making it easier for people of no fixed address to vote.

2002 – Prisoners given the right to vote in the riding (voting district) where they were convicted. All adult Canadians except the Chief and Deputy Electoral Officers can now vote in Canada.

[ 96 ] 2019 – The Supreme Court of Canada rules that portions of the federal Canada Elections Act which prevent citizens who have been living abroad for more than five years from voting by mail are in violation of Section 3 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and thus unconstitutional.

[ 97 ] European Union [ edit ] The European Union has given the right to vote in municipal elections to the citizen of another EU country by the Council Directive 94/80/EG from 19 December 1994.

[ 98 ] Finland [ edit ] 1907 - Universal suffrage in all elections for all over 24 years old [ 99 ] 2000 – Section 14, al. 2 of the 2000 Constitution of Finland states that "Every Finnish citizen and every foreigner permanently resident in Finland, having attained eighteen years of age, has the right to vote in municipal elections and municipal referendums, as provided by an Act. Provisions on the right to otherwise participate in municipal government are laid down by an Act." [ 100 ] France [ edit ] 11 August 1792: Introduction of universal suffrage (men only) 1795: Universal suffrage for men is replaced with indirect Census suffrage 13 December 1799: The French Consulate re-establishes male universal suffrage increased from 246,000 to over 9 million.

In 1850 (31 May): The number of people eligible to vote is reduced by 30% by excluding criminals and the homeless.

Napoleon III calls a referendum in 1851 (21 December), all men aged 21 and over are allowed to vote. Male universal suffrage is established thereafter.

As of 21 April 1944 the franchise is extended to women over 21.

Effective 9 July 1974 the minimum age to vote is reduced to 18 years old.

[ 101 ] Germany [ edit ] 1848 – male citizens (citizens of state in German Confederation), adult and "independent" got voting rights, male voting population - 85% [ 102 ] [ 103 ] 1849 – male citizens above 25, not disfranchised, not declared legally incapable, did not claim pauper relief a year before the election, not a bankrupt nor in bankruptcy proceedings, not convicted of electoral fraud, [ 104 ] 1866 – male citizens above 25 (citizen for at least three years), not disfranchised, not declared legally incapable, did not claim pauper relief a year before the election, enrolled on the electoral roll, inhabitant of the electoral district, [ 105 ] 1869 – male citizens above 25 (citizens of state in North German Confederation), not disfranchised, not a bankrupt nor in bankruptcy proceedings, not serving soldier, did not claim pauper relief a year before the election, inhabitant of the electoral district, not in prison, not declared legally incapable, [ 106 ] 1918 - full suffrage for all citizens above 20 [ 107 ] 1970 - full suffrage for all citizens above 18 [ 108 ] 2019 - suffrage for citizens with insanity defense , and persons under guardianship .

[ 109 ] India [ edit ] Since the very first Indian general election held in 1951–52 , universal suffrage for all adult citizens aged 21 or older was established under Article 326 of the Constitution of India . The minimum voting age was reduced to 18 years by the 61st Amendment , effective 28 March 1989.

Ireland [ edit ] Main article: History of the franchise in Ireland Italy [ edit ] The Supreme Court states that "the rules derogating from the passive electoral law must be strictly interpreted".

[ 110 ] Japan [ edit ] Main article: Suffrage in Japan 1889 – Male taxpayers above 25 that paid at least 15 JPY of tax got voting rights, [ 111 ] the voting population were 450,000 (1.1% of Japan population), [ 112 ] 1900 – Male taxpayers above 25 that paid at least 10 JPY of tax got voting rights, the voting population were 980,000 (2.2% of Japan population), [ 112 ] 1919 – Male taxpayers above 25 that paid at least 3 JPY of tax got voting rights, the voting population were 3,070,000 (5.5% of Japan population) [ 113 ] 1925 – Male above 25 got voting rights, the voting population were 12,410,000 (20% of Japan population), [ 112 ] 1945 – Japan citizens above 20 got voting rights, the voting population were 36,880,000 (48.7% of Japan population), [ 113 ] 2015 – Japan citizens above 18 got voting rights, voting population - 83.3% of Japan population.

[ 114 ] New Zealand [ edit ] Main article: History of voting in New Zealand 1853 – British government passes the New Zealand Constitution Act 1852 , granting limited self-rule, including a bicameral parliament , to the colony. The vote was limited to male British subjects aged 21 or over who owned or rented sufficient property and were not imprisoned for a serious offence. Communally owned land was excluded from the property qualification, thus disenfranchising most Māori (indigenous) men.

1860 – Franchise extended to holders of miner's licenses who met all voting qualifications except that of property.

1867 – Māori seats established, giving Māori four reserved seats in the lower house . There was no property qualification; thus Māori men gained universal suffrage before other New Zealanders. The number of seats did not reflect the size of the Māori population, but Māori men who met the property requirement for general electorates were able to vote in them or in the Māori electorates but not both.

1879 – Property requirement abolished.

1893 – Women won equal voting rights with men, making New Zealand the first nation in the world to allow women to vote.

1969 – Voting age lowered to 20.

1974 – Voting age lowered to 18.

1975 – Franchise extended to permanent residents of New Zealand, regardless of whether they have citizenship.

1996 – Number of Māori seats increased to reflect Māori population.

2010 – Prisoners imprisoned for one year or more denied voting rights while serving the sentence.

Norway [ edit ] 1814 – The Norwegian constitution gave male landowners or officials above the age of 25 full voting rights.

[ 115 ] 1885 – Male taxpayers that paid at least 500 NOK of tax (800 NOK in towns) got voting rights.

1900 – Universal suffrage for men over 25.

1901 – Women, over 25, paying tax or having common household with a man paying tax, got the right to vote in local elections.

1909 – Women, over 25, paying tax or having common household with a man paying tax, got full voting rights.

1913 – Universal suffrage for all over 25, applying from the election in 1915.

1920 – Voting age lowered to 23.

[ 116 ] 1946 – Voting age lowered to 21.

1967 – Voting age lowered to 20.

1978 – Voting age lowered to 18.

Poland [ edit ] 1918 – In its first days of independence in 1918, after 123 years of partition, voting rights were granted to both men and women. Eight women were elected to the Sejm in 1919.

1952 – Voting age lowered to 18.

Singapore [ edit ] See also: Voting rights in Singapore South Africa [ edit ] 1910 – The Union of South Africa is established by the South Africa Act 1909 . The House of Assembly is elected by first-past-the-post voting in single-member constituencies. The franchise qualifications are the same as those previously existing for elections of the legislatures of the colonies that comprised the Union. In the Transvaal and the Orange Free State the franchise is limited to white men. In Natal the franchise is limited to men meeting property and literacy qualifications; it was theoretically colour-blind but in practise nearly all non-white men were excluded. The traditional " Cape Qualified Franchise " of the Cape Province is limited to men meeting property and literacy qualifications and is colour-blind; nonetheless 85% of voters are white. The rights of non-white voters in the Cape Province are protected by an entrenched clause in the South Africa Act requiring a two-thirds vote in a joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament.

1930 – The Women's Enfranchisement Act, 1930 extends the right to vote to all white women over the age of 21.

1931 – The Franchise Laws Amendment Act, 1931 removes the property and literacy qualifications for all white men over the age of 21, but they are retained for non-white voters.

1936 – The Representation of Natives Act, 1936 removes black voters in the Cape Province from the common voters' roll and instead allows them to elect three "Native Representative Members" to the House of Assembly. Four Senators are to be indirectly elected by chiefs and local authorities to represent black South Africans throughout the country. The act is passed with the necessary two-thirds majority in a joint sitting.

1951 – The Separate Representation of Voters Act, 1951 is passed by Parliament by an ordinary majority in separate sittings. It purports to remove coloured voters in the Cape Province from the common voters' roll and instead allow them to elect four "Coloured Representative Members" to the House of Assembly.

1952 – In Harris v Minister of the Interior the Separate Representation of Voters Act is annulled by the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court because it was not passed with the necessary two-thirds majority in a joint sitting. Parliament passes the High Court of Parliament Act, 1952 , purporting to allow it to reverse this decision, but the Appellate Division annuls it as well.

1956 – By packing the Senate and the Appellate Division, the government passes the South Africa Act Amendment Act, 1956 , reversing the annulment of the Separate Representation of Voters Act and giving it the force of law.

1958 – The Electoral Law Amendment Act, 1958 reduces the voting age for white voters from 21 to 18.

1959 – The Promotion of Bantu Self-government Act, 1959 repeals the Representation of Natives Act, removing all representation of black people in Parliament.

1968 – The Separate Representation of Voters Amendment Act, 1968 repeals the Separate Representation of Voters Act, removing all representation of coloured people in Parliament.

1969 – The first election of the Coloured Persons Representative Council (CPRC), which has limited legislative powers, is held. Every Coloured citizen over the age of 21 can vote for its members, in first-past-the-post elections in single-member constituencies.

1978 – The voting age for the CPRC is reduced from 21 to 18.

1981 – The first election of the South African Indian Council (SAIC), which has limited legislative powers, is held. Every Indian South African citizen over the age of 18 can vote for its members, in first-past-the-post elections in single-member constituencies.

1984 – The Constitution of 1983 establishes the Tricameral Parliament . Two new Houses of Parliament are created, the House of Representatives to represent coloured citizens and the House of Delegates to represent Indian citizens. Every coloured and Indian citizen over the age of 18 can vote in elections for the relevant house. As with the House of Assembly, the members are elected by first-past-the-post voting in single-member constituencies. The CPRC and SAIC are abolished.

1994 – With the end of apartheid , the Interim Constitution of 1993 abolishes the Tricameral Parliament and all racial discrimination in voting rights. A new National Assembly is created, and every South African citizen over the age of 18 has the right to vote for the assembly. The right to vote is also extended to long term residents. It is estimated the 500 000 foreign nationals voted in the 1994 national and provincial elections. Elections of the assembly are based on party-list proportional representation . The right to vote is enshrined in the Bill of Rights .

1999 – In August and Another v Electoral Commission and Others the Constitutional Court rules that prisoners cannot be denied the right to vote without a law that explicitly does so.

2003 – The Electoral Laws Amendment Act, 2003 purports to prohibit convicted prisoners from voting.

2004 – In Minister of Home Affairs v NICRO and Others the Constitutional Court rules that prisoners cannot be denied the right to vote, and invalidates the laws that do so.

2009 – In Richter v Minister for Home Affairs and Others the Constitutional Court rules that South African citizens outside the country cannot be denied the right to vote.

Sri Lanka [ edit ] 1931 - Donoughmore Constitution granted equal suffrage for women and men, with voting possible at 21 with no property restrictions.

Sweden [ edit ] 1809 – New constitution adopted and separation of powers outlined in the Instrument of Government .

1810 – The Riksdag Act , setting out the procedures of functioning of the Riksdag , is introduced.

1862 – Under the municipal laws of 1862 , some women were entitled to vote in local elections .

1865 – Parliament of Four Estates abolished and replaced by a bicameral legislature . The members of the First Chamber were elected indirectly by the county councils and the municipal assemblies in the larger towns and cities.

1909 – All men who had done their military service and who paid tax were granted suffrage.

1918 – Universal , and equal suffrage were introduced for local elections .

1919 – Universal , equal , and women's suffrage granted for general elections.

1921 – First general election with universal , equal , and women's suffrage enacted, although some groups were still unable to vote.

1922 – Requirement that men had to have completed national military service to be able to vote abolished.

1937 – Interns in prisons and institutions granted suffrage.

1945 – Individuals who had gone into bankruptcy or were dependent on welfare granted suffrage.

1970 – Indirectly elected upper chamber dismantled.

[ 117 ] [ relevant?

] 1974 – Instrument of Government stopped being enforced.

[ needs context ] .

1989 – The final limitations on suffrage abolished along with the Riksdag 's decision to abolish the 'declaration of legal incompetency'.

[ 118 ] Turkey [ edit ] Main article: Women in Turkish politics 1926 – Turkish civil code (Equality in civil rights) 1930 – Right to vote in local elections 1933 – First woman muhtar (Village head) Gülkız Ürbül in Demircidere village, Aydın Province 1934 – Right to vote in General elections 1935 – First 18 Women MPs in Turkish parliament 1950 – First woman city mayor Müfide İlhan in Mersin United Kingdom [ edit ] See also: Reform Acts , Elections in the United Kingdom § History , and Women's suffrage in the United Kingdom The Chartists' National Convention at the British Coffee House in February 1839 From 1265, a few percent of the adult male population in the Kingdom of England (of which Wales was a full and equal member from 1542 ) were able to vote in parliamentary elections that occurred at irregular intervals to the Parliament of England .

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] The franchise for the Parliament of Scotland developed separately. King Henry VI of England established in 1432 that only owners of property worth at least forty shillings , a significant sum, were entitled to vote in an English county constituency . The franchise was restricted to males by custom rather than statute.

[ 121 ] Changes were made to the details of the system, but there was no major reform until the Reform Act 1832 .

[ nb 3 ] A series of Reform Acts and Representation of the People Acts followed. In 1918, all men over 21 and some women over 30 won the right to vote, and in 1928 all women over 21 won the right to vote resulting in universal suffrage.

[ 123 ] Reform Act 1832 – extended voting rights to adult males who rented propertied land of a certain value, so allowing 1 in 7 adult males in the UK voting rights.

Chartism – The People's Charter was drawn up in 1838 by the London Working Men's Association . The following year, the first Chartist petition was presented to House of Commons . Further Chartist petitions were presented in 1842 and 1848.

[ 124 ] Reform Act 1867 – extended the franchise to men in urban areas who met a property qualification, so increasing male suffrage.

Reform Act 1884 – addressed imbalances between the boroughs and the countryside; this brought the voting population to 5,500,000, although 40% of males were still disenfranchised because of the property qualification.

Between 1885 and 1918 moves were made by the women's suffrage movement to ensure votes for women. However, the duration of the First World War stopped this reform movement.

Representation of the People Act 1918 – the consequences of World War I persuaded the government to expand the right to vote, not only for the many men who fought in the war who were disenfranchised, but also for the women who worked in factories, agriculture and elsewhere as part of the war effort, often substituting for enlisted men and including dangerous work such as in munitions factories. All men aged 21 and over were given the right to vote. Property restrictions for voting were lifted for men. The local government franchise was extended to include all women over 21, on the same terms as men. Parliamentary Votes were given to 40% of women, with property restrictions and limited to those over 30 years old. This increased the electorate from 7.7 million to 21.4 million with women making up 8.5 million of the electorate. Seven percent of the electorate had more than one vote, either because they owned business property or because they were university graduates. The first election with this system was the 1918 general election .

Representation of the People Act 1928 – equal suffrage for women and men, with voting possible at 21 with no property restrictions.

Representation of the People Act 1948 – removed plural voting in parliamentary elections for university graduates and business owners.

Representation of the People Act 1969 – extension of suffrage to those 18 and older, the first major democratic country to do so, [ 62 ] [ 125 ] and abolition of plural voting in local government elections.

United States [ edit ] Main article: Voting rights in the United States The Constitution of the United States did not originally define who was eligible to vote, allowing each state to decide this status. In the early history of the U.S., most states allowed only white male adult property owners to vote (about 6% of the population).

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] By 1856 property ownership requirements were eliminated in all states, giving suffrage to most white men. However, tax-paying requirements remained in five states until 1860 and in two states until the 20th century.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] Since the Civil War , five amendments to the Constitution have limited the ways in which the right to vote may be restricted in American elections, though none have added a general right to vote.

[ nb 4 ] 15th Amendment (1870): "The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude." 19th Amendment (1920): "The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex." 23rd Amendment (1961): provides that residents of the District of Columbia can vote for the President and Vice President.

24th Amendment (1964): "The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or other election for President or Vice President, for electors for President or Vice President, or for Senator or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any State by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax." This did not change the rules for state elections.

26th Amendment (1971): "The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of age." The use of grandfather clauses to allow European-Americans to vote while excluding African-Americans from voting was ruled unconstitutional in the 1915 decision Guinn v. United States . States continued to use literacy tests and poll taxes , which also disenfranchised poor white citizens. Racial equality in voting was substantially secured after the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 , a major victory in the Civil Rights Movement . State elections, it was not until the 1966 decision Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections that the U.S. Supreme Court declared state poll taxes violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Majority-Muslim countries [ edit ] Main article: Timeline of first women's suffrage in majority-Muslim countries See also [ edit ] Constituency Democracy Direct democracy Disenfranchisement List of suffragists and suffragettes Voting system Youth suffrage Anti-suffragism Women's suffrage Notes [ edit ] ^ Strictly speaking, all ratepayers; however, domestic rates were abolished after the 1977 election .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] ^ For example South Dublin County Council produced lists of addresses of residences [ 38 ] and ratepayers [ 39 ] within Palmerstown for the 2014 plebiscite on changing the district's spelling.

^ Until this Act specified 'male persons', a few women had been able to vote in parliamentary elections through property ownership, although this was rare.

[ 122 ] ^ The 14th Amendment (1868) altered the way each state is represented in the House of Representatives . It counted all residents for apportionment including former slaves, overriding the three-fifths compromise of the original Constitution; it also reduced a state's apportionment if it wrongfully denied the right to vote to males over age 21. However, this sanction was not enforced in practice.

References [ edit ] ^ "suffrage" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins.

^ "Definition of "suffrage" – Collins English Dictionary" . Retrieved 28 July 2015 .

^ "suffrage – definition of suffrage in English from the Oxford dictionary" . Archived from the original on 27 November 2013 . Retrieved 28 July 2015 .

^ "Deprivation of the Right to Vote" .

ACE Electoral Knowledge Network . Aceproject.org.

^ Gianoulis, Tina (2015).

"Women's Suffrage Movement" (PDF) . glbtq.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2019.

^ a b Umpierrez de Reguero, Sebastián; Finn, Victoria (2 July 2024). "Migrants' intention to vote in two countries, one country, or neither".

Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties .

34 (3): 466– 489.

doi : 10.1080/17457289.2023.2189727 .

hdl : 1814/75483 .

ISSN 1745-7289 .

^ "Who is eligible to vote at a UK general election?" . The Electoral Commission. Archived from the original on 19 April 2014 . Retrieved 9 February 2016 ^ "Can I vote?" . European Parliament Information Office in the United Kingdom. Archived from the original on 11 March 2016 . Retrieved 9 February 2016 ^ "Why Can Commonwealth Citizens Vote in the U.K.? An Expat Asks" .

The Wall Street Journal . 27 April 2015 . Retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ G. E. M. de Ste. Croix (March 1954), "Suffragium: From Vote to Patronage", The British Journal of Sociology , 5 (1), The London School of Economics and Political Science : 33– 48, doi : 10.2307/588044 , JSTOR 588044 ^ "LacusCurtius • Voting in Ancient Rome – Suffragium (Smith's Dictionary, 1875)" . Penelope.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ "Suffrage" . Merriam-Webster. 31 August 2012 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ Hamilton, Vivian E. (2012).

"Democratic Inclusion, Cognitive Development, and the Age of Electoral Majority" . Rochester, NY.

SSRN 2086875 .

^ Poole, Robert (April 2006). " 'By the Law or the Sword': Peterloo Revisited".

History .

2 (302): 254– 276.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-229X.2006.00366.x .

JSTOR 24427836 .

^ A Vision of Britain through time.

"Greater Manchester Met.C: Total Population" . Retrieved 6 April 2007 .

^ Nohlen, Dieter, e al. (2001).

Elections in Asia and the Pacific: South East Asia, East Asia, and the South Pacific . p. 14. Oxford University Press, 2001 ^ A. Kulinski, K. Pawlowski.

The Atlantic Community – The Titanic of the XXI Century . p. 96. WSB-NLU. 2010 ^ "Definition of SUFFRAGE" .

merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 1 July 2019 .

^ "The New Jersey Constitution of 1776" . Retrieved 17 December 2006 .

^ "Votes for Women" . Electoral Commission of New Zealand. Archived from the original on 19 August 2012 . Retrieved 11 August 2020 .

^ "Opposition to Suffrage" .

History of U.S. Woman's Suffrage . 5 April 2016 . Retrieved 4 April 2019 .

^ "12 Cruel Anti-Suffragette Cartoons" .

mentalfloss.com . 21 June 2015 . Retrieved 4 April 2019 .

^ "Definition: suffrage" . Websters Dictionary. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011 . Retrieved 24 October 2011 .

^ Bishop, Sylvia; Hoeffler, Anke (2016). "Free and fair elections: A new database".

Journal of Peace Research .

53 (4): 608– 616.

doi : 10.1177/0022343316642508 .

S2CID 110571606 .

^ "Criteria to stand as a candidate — ACE Electoral Knowledge Network" . Aceproject.org. 3 September 2010 . Retrieved 29 October 2012 .

^ Keyssar, Alexander (2009), The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States (PDF) (2nd ed.), p. 5 .

^ Constitution of the Empire of Brazil ^ "CIA:The World Factbook" . Archived from the original on 9 January 2008 . Retrieved 22 May 2012 .

^ Johal, Sukhdev; Moran, Michael; Williams, Karel (2012). "The future has been postponed: The Great Financial Crisis and British politics".

British Politics .

7 (1): 69– 81.

doi : 10.1057/bp.2011.30 .

ISSN 1746-918X .

S2CID 153648412 .

^ Leaver, Adam.

"Banking's groundhog day" .

redpepper.org.uk . Red Pepper . Retrieved 21 December 2017 .

^ "Written Answers to Questions – City of London Remembrancer" .

Hansard . UK Parliament. 3 March 2014. 3 March 2014 : Column 593W . Retrieved 28 October 2014 .

^ Mathiason, Nick; Newman, Melanie (9 July 2012).

"City of London Corporation: a lesson in lobbying" .

The Guardian .

^ Arthur, Paul (17 June 2014).

"Northern Ireland 1968–72" . In Aughey, Arthur; Morrow, Duncan (eds.).

Northern Ireland Politics . Taylor & Francis. p. 24.

ISBN 9781317890836 . Retrieved 27 November 2015 .

^ Callanan, Mark; Keogan, Justin F. (2003).

Local Government in Ireland: Inside Out . Institute of Public Administration. p. 332.

ISBN 9781902448930 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ "Local Government (Financial Provisions) Act, 1978" .

Irish Statute Book . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ "Local Government (Financial Provisions) Act, 1978 – Debates" .

Bills index . Oireachtas. 14 December 1977 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

; ^ "S.I. No. 31/1956 – Local Government (Changing of Place Names) Regulations, 1956" .

Irish Statute Book . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ "Plebiscite Palmerston Addresses" . South Dublin County Council. 2014. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ "Plebiscite Palmerston Rated Occupiers" . South Dublin County Council. 2014. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ "S.I. No. 166/2007 – Local Government (Business Improvement Districts Ratepayer Plebiscite) Regulations 2007" .

Irish Statute Book . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

; "Q.50 – Councillor Mannix Flynn" (PDF) .

Questions Lodged Pursuant to Standing Order No.16 for Reply at the Monthly Meeting of Dublin City Council to be Held on Monday, 4th September 2017 . pp.

11– 13. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 December 2017 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ "Local Government (Dublin) Act, 1930 §§31(1), 32(2)–(3), 34, 35" .

Irish Statute Book . Retrieved 2 February 2017 .

; "Local Government (Dublin) Act, 1935, Section 2" .

Irish Statute Book . Retrieved 2 February 2017 .

^ Hasham, Nicole; McKenny, Leesha (16 August 2014).

"City of Sydney business vote plan may falter, backers concede" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 27 November 2015 .

^ Weissmann, Jordan (August 2014).

"Australia businesses get to vote: Sydney conservatives want it to be required by law" .

Slate . Retrieved 27 November 2015 .

^ Ivanova, Irina (21 June 2023).

"A Delaware city is set to give corporations the right to vote in elections" .

Moneywatch . CBS News.

^ "Abbess" .

Original Catholic Encyclopedia . 21 July 2010. Archived from the original on 14 January 2012 . Retrieved 26 December 2012 .

^ Women Mystics Confront the Modern World (Marie-Florine Bruneau: State University of New York: 1998: p. 106) ^ Ridge, Mian (25 March 2008).

"Bhutan makes it official: it's a democracy" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 2 September 2011 .

^ Williamson, Chilton (1960), American Suffrage. From property to democracy , Princeton University Press ^ Constitution of Delaware, 1776 , The Avalon Project at Yale Law School , archived from the original on 30 November 2007 , retrieved 7 December 2007 ^ State Constitution (Religious Sections) – Delaware , The Constitutional Principle: Separation of Church and State , retrieved 7 December 2007 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ An Act for establishing the constitution of the State of South Carolina, 19 March 1778 , The Avalon Project at Yale Law School , archived from the original on 13 December 2007 , retrieved 5 December 2007 ^ Constitution of Georgia , The Avalon Project at Yale Law School , 5 February 1777, archived from the original on 13 December 2007 , retrieved 7 December 2007 ^ An Act for the relief of Jews in Maryland, passed 26 February 1825 , vol. 3183, Archives of Maryland, 26 February 1825, p. 1670 , retrieved 5 December 2007 ^ A History of the Vote in Canada, Chapter 3 Modernization, 1920–1981 , Elections Canada , retrieved 6 December 2007 ^ Chronology – From the History Museum of the Romanian Jews; Hasefer Publishing House , The Romanian Jewish Community, archived from the original on 14 September 2012 , retrieved 6 December 2007 ^ "UK Parliamentary Website Election FAQs" . Archived from the original on 16 August 2018 . Retrieved 16 August 2018 .

^ a b de Ferranti, David (2004).

Inequality in Latin America: Breaking with History?

(PDF) . Washington DC, USA: The World Bank. pp.

109– 122.

^ a b Transcript of Voting Rights Act (1965) U.S. National Archives.

^ "Civil Rights Movement – Literacy Tests & Voter Applications" .

crmvet.org . Retrieved 10 December 2018 .

^ Wood, J. R. T. (June 2005). So far and no further! Rhodesia's bid for independence during the retreat from empire 1959–1965. Victoria, British Columbia: Trafford Publishing. p. 92.

ISBN 978-1-4120-4952-8 .

^ The Constitution: The 24th Amendment Time . Retrieved 24 October 2011.

^ a b Bingham, Adrian (25 June 2019).

" 'The last milestone' on the journey to full adult suffrage? 50 years of debates about the voting age" .

History & Policy . Retrieved 31 December 2022 .

^ Loughran, Thomas; Mycock, Andrew; Tonge, Jonathan (3 November 2021).

"Lowering the voting age: three lessons from the 1969 Representation of the People's Act" .

British Politics and Policy at LSE . Retrieved 31 December 2022 .

^ "Australian Electoral Commission, "Voting Overseas – Frequently Asked Questions", 20 November 2007" . Aec.gov.au. 10 January 2011 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ "Lov om valg til Folketinget – Valgret og valgbarhed", 10 April 2014" . Retrieved 24 October 2015 .

^ Delcour, M.C., Traité théorique et pratique du droit électoral appliqué aux élections communales, Louvain, Ickx & Geets, 1842, p. 16 ^ Lambert, Pierre-Yves (1999), La participation politique des allochtones en Belgique – Historique et situation bruxelloise , Academia-Bruylant (coll. Sybidi Papers), Louvain-la-Neuve , retrieved 6 December 2007 ^ "Patrick Weil, Nationalité française (débat sur la)" , dans Jean-François Sirinelli (dir.), Dictionnaire historique de la vie politique française au XXe siècle, Paris, PUF, 1995, pp. 719–721 ^ Nadia Bernoussi, L'évolution du processus électoral au Maroc, 22 December 2005 Archived 25 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "art. 3, al. 3, Loi Organique portant code électoral guinéen" . Ife.org.mx. Archived from the original on 2 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ "Federated States of Micronesia" . Inter-Parliamentary Union . Retrieved 12 December 2007 .

^ "Nicaragua" . Inter-Parliamentary Union . Retrieved 12 December 2007 .

^ "Peru" . Inter-Parliamentary Union . Retrieved 12 December 2007 .

^ "Philippines" . Inter-Parliamentary Union . Retrieved 12 December 2007 .

^ "Uruguay" . Inter-Parliamentary Union . Retrieved 12 December 2007 .

^ Plénitude de la République et extension du suffrage universel (in French), Assemblée nationale ( National Assembly of France ), archived from the original on 19 December 2007 , retrieved 5 December 2007 ^ "Electoral Act, 1923, Section 5" .

Irish Statute Book . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ "Electoral Act, 1960" .

Irish Statute Book . pp. sec.3 and Schedule . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ "Private Members' Business. – Garda Síochána Franchise—Motion" .

Dáil Éireann debates . Oireachtas. 2 November 1955 . Retrieved 8 December 2015 .

^ Blaney, Neil (6 December 1960).

"Electoral Bill, 1960 – Second Stages" .

Dáil Éireann debates . Oireachtas . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

One of the important proposals is contained in Section 3 and in the Schedule which provides for the repeal of the prohibition on the registration of Gardaí as voters at Dáil elections. In future, if this provision is enacted, Gardaí can vote at Dáil and Presidential elections and at referendums.

^ Constitution of the State of Texas (1876) , Tarlton Law Library, The University of Texas School of Law , archived from the original on 29 January 2008 , retrieved 8 December 2007 ^ "Universal suffrage granted to women" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved 6 March 2020 .

^ a b "Women and the Right to Vote in Australia" . Australian Electoral Commission. 28 January 2011 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ "Electoral Milestones for Women" . Australian Electoral Commission. 8 March 2013 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ "Women win the vote : Digital Resources on Manitoba History" .

manitobia.ca . Archived from the original on 27 August 2011 . Retrieved 16 March 2017 .

^ Canada, Elections.

"A History of the Vote in Canada" . Retrieved 16 March 2017 .

^ "The Famous Five – Timeline" . Abheritage.ca. 8 December 2010 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ Indian Act of Canada S.C. 1938 chap 46 sec 14(2)(i)/Dominion Elections Act S.C.1948 chap 46 ^ a b "Canada – Women's Vote – Women Suffrage" . Faculty.marianopolis.edu. 27 January 1916 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ "CBC Digital Archives" . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ a b Canada, Elections.

"A History of the Vote in Canada" . Retrieved 16 March 2017 .

^ a b c Noel Dyck; Tonio Sadik (15 April 2016).

"Aboriginal people, political organization and activism" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia . Retrieved 21 August 2019 .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Canada, Elections.

"The Evolution of the Federal Franchise" . Retrieved 16 March 2017 .

^ "The Evolution of the Federal Franchise" .

Elections Canada . 9 December 2020.

^ "CBC Digital Archives" . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ Sauvé v. Canada (Chief Electoral Officer) ^ "Frank v. Canada (Attorney General), 2019 SCC 1" .

Lexum . January 2001 . Retrieved 27 January 2019 .

^ "Council Directive 94/80/EG" .

EUR-Lex .

^ Mylly, Juhani (2006).

Edustuksellisen kansanvallan läpimurto . Suomen eduskunta 100 vuotta. Helsinki: Edita.

ISBN 978-951-37-4541-7 .

OCLC 77267222 .

^ "The Constitution of Finland" (PDF) . 11 June 1999. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 February 2002 . Retrieved 10 December 2007 .

^ "France lowers age of minors to 18".

Kitchener-Waterloo Record . Ontario. 10 July 1974. p. 36.

^ "Geschichte des Wahlrechts" .

bundestagswahl-bw.de (in German) . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ "Verfassungen und Gesetze des Rheinbundes und des Deutschen Bundes (1806-1866)" .

verfassungen.de . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ "documentArchiv.de - Gesetz, betreffend die Wahlen der Abgeordneten zum Volkshause ["Frankfurter Reichswahlgesetz"] (12.04.1849)" .

documentarchiv.de . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ "Wahlgesetz für den konstituierenden Reichstag des Norddeutschen Bundes (1866" .

verfassungen.de . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ "Wahlgesetz für den Reichstag des Norddeutschen Bundes – Wikisource" .

de.wikisource.org (in German) . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ "Deutsches Reichsgesetzblatt 1918 Nr. 167 – Wikisource" .

de.wikisource.org (in German) . Retrieved 18 March 2022 .

^ "Plenarprotokoll Deutscher Bundestag 60. Sitzung" (PDF) .

Deutscher Bundestag (in German) . Retrieved 18 March 2022 .

^ Wahlrechtsausschlüsse für Betreute in allen Angelegenheiten und wegen Schuldunfähigkeit untergebrachte Straftäter verfassungswidrig , exclusion from suffrage is unconstitutional, 29 January 2019.

^ Buonomo, Giampiero (2000).

"Nel passaggio Usl-Asl solo tre dirigenti restano ineleggibili negli enti locali" .

Diritto&Giustizia Edizione Online . Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2016 .

^ "選挙のあゆみ" .

pref.yamaguchi.lg.jp . Archived from the original on 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ a b c "川崎市：日本の選挙権拡大の歴史" .

city.kawasaki.jp . 7 April 2010 . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ a b "わが国の選挙権の拡大" .

gakusyu.shizuoka-c.ed.jp . Archived from the original on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ "選挙の歴史を学ぼう｜選挙フレンズ｜京都市選挙管理委員会事務局" .

www2.city.kyoto.lg.jp . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ "Stemmerettens historie i Norge" (in Norwegian). Espend Søbye. 19 March 2021.

^ "Stemmerettens historie" (in Norwegian). Laila Ø. Bakken, NRK. 12 June 2007.

^ Ruin, Olof (1990).

Tage Erlander: serving the welfare state, 1946–1969 . Pitt series in policy and institutional studies, 99-0818751-1. Pittsburgh, Pa.: University of Pittsburgh Press. p.

93 .

ISBN 9780822936312 .

SELIBR 5791923 .

riksdag bicameral.

^ History of the Riksdag Official Riksdag Website. Retrieved 19 May 2018 ^ "Origins and growth of Parliament" . The National Archives . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ "Getting the vote" . The National Archives . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ "Ancient voting rights" , The History of the Parliamentary Franchise , House of Commons Library, 1 March 2013, p. 6 , retrieved 16 March 2016 ^ Heater, Derek (2006).

Citizenship in Britain: A History . Edinburgh University Press. p. 107.

ISBN 9780748626724 .

^ "The History of the Parliamentary Franchise" . House of Commons Library. 1 March 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ "Key dates" .

UK Parliament .

^ Loughran, Thomas; Mycock, Andrew; Tonge, Jonathan (3 November 2021).

"Lowering the voting age: three lessons from the 1969 Representation of the People's Act" .

British Politics and Policy at LSE . Retrieved 31 December 2022 .

^ "Expansion of Rights and Liberties – The Right of Suffrage" .

Online Exhibit: The Charters of Freedom . National Archives. Archived from the original on 6 July 2016 . Retrieved 21 April 2015 .

^ Janda, Kenneth; Berry, Jeffrey M.; Goldman, Jerry (2008).

The challenge of democracy : government in America (9. ed., update ed.). Houghton Mifflin. p.

207 .

ISBN 9780618990948 ; Murrin, John M.; Johnson, Paul E.; McPherson, James M.; Fahs, Alice; Gerstle, Gary (2012).

Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American People (6th ed.). Wadsworth, Cengage Learning. p. 296.

ISBN 9780495904991 .

^ Engerman, Stanley L.; Sokoloff, Kenneth L. (February 2005).

"The Evolution of Suffrage Institutions in the New World" (PDF) . pp. 16, 35. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 10 March 2016 .

By 1840, only three states retained a property qualification, North Carolina (for some state-wide offices only), Rhode Island, and Virginia. In 1856 North Carolina was the last state to end the practice. Tax-paying qualifications were also gone in all but a few states by the Civil War, but they survived into the 20th century in Pennsylvania and Rhode Island.

^ "U.S. Voting Rights" . Infoplease . Retrieved 21 April 2015 .

^ Scher, Richard K. (2015).

The Politics of Disenfranchisement: Why is it So Hard to Vote in America?

.

Routledge . p. viii–ix.

ISBN 9781317455363 .

^ "Civil Rights in America: Racial Voting Rights" (PDF) . A National Historic Landmarks Theme Study. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 July 2015.

Bibliography [ edit ] See also: Women's suffrage in the United Kingdom § Further reading , and List of suffragists and suffragettes § Women's suffrage publications Adams, Jad.

Women and the vote: A world history (Oxford University Press, 2014); wide-ranging scholarly survey.

excerpt Atkinson, Neill.

Adventures in Democracy: A History of the Vote in New Zealand (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2003).

Banyikwa, A.K., "Gender and Elections in Africa" in The Routledge Handbook of Gender and Elections (2019) Banyikwa, A.K., and G.L. Brown. "Women's Suffrage in Africa" in Encyclopedias of Contemporary Women's Issues (2020) Barnes, Joel. "The British women's suffrage movement and the ancient constitution, 1867–1909." Historical Research 91.253 (2018): 505-527.

Crook, Malcolm. "Universal Suffrage as Counter‐Revolution? Electoral Mobilisation under the Second Republic in France, 1848–1851." Journal of Historical Sociology 28.1 (2015): 49-66.

Daley, Caroline, and Melanie Nolan, eds.

Suffrage and beyond: International feminist perspectives (NYU Press, 1994).

Edwards, Louise P. and Mina Roces, eds.

Women's Suffrage in Asia: Gender, Nationalism, and Democracy (Routledge, 2004).

Kenney, Anne R.

Women's Suffrage and Social Politics in the French Third Republic (1984).

Mukherjee, Sumita.

Indian Suffragettes: Female Identities and Transnational Networks (Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 2018) Mukherjee, Sumita. "Sisters in Arms" History Today (Dec 2018) 68#12 pp. 72–83. Short popular overview woman suffrage of major countries.

Oguakwa, P.K. "Women's suffrage in Africa" in The Oxford Encyclopedia of Women in World History (2008) Juhani Mylly: Edustuksellisen kansanvallan läpimurto. Helsinki: Suomen eduskunta (Edita), 2006. ISBN 951-37-4541-4 Pedroza, Luicy. "The democratic potential of enfranchising resident migrants." International Migration 53.3 (2015): 22-35.

online Purvis, June, and June Hannam, eds.

The British Women's Suffrage Campaign: National and International Perspectives (Routledge, 2021) Rose, Carol. "The Issue of Parliamentary Suffrage at the Frankfurt National Assembly." Central European History 5.2 (1972): 127-149. regarding universal suffrage in German history.

Sangster, Joan.

One Hundred Years of Struggle: The History of Women and the Vote in Canada (2018) Seghezza, Elena, and Pierluigi Morelli. "Suffrage extension, social identity, and redistribution: the case of the Second Reform Act." European Review of Economic History 23.1 (2019): 30-49. on 1867 law in Britain Senigaglia, Cristiana. "The debate on democratization and parliament in Germany from 1871 to 1918." Parliaments, Estates and Representation 40.3 (2020): 290-307.

Smith, Paul. "Political parties, parliament and women's suffrage in France, 1919–1939." French History 11.3 (1997): 338-358.

Teele, Dawn Langan.

Forging the Franchise (Princeton University Press, 2018); why US and Britain came early.

Towns, Ann. "Global Patterns and Debates in the Granting of Women's Suffrage." in The Palgrave Handbook of Women's Political Rights (Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2019) pp. 3–19.

Willis, Justin, Gabrielle Lynch, and Nic Cheeseman. "Voting, Nationhood, and Citizenship in late-colonial Africa." Historical Journal 61.4 (2018): 1113–1135.

online United States [ edit ] Englert, Gianna.

" 'Not more democratic, but more moral': Tocqueville on the suffrage in America and France." The Tocqueville Review 42.2 (2021): 105-120.

Keyssar, Alexander.

The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States (New York: Basic Books, 2000).

ISBN 0-465-02968-X .

Lichtman, Allan J.

The Embattled Vote in America: From the Founding to the Present (Harvard UP. 2018) U.S. Commission on Civil Rights: Reports on Voting (2005) ISBN 978-0-8377-3103-2 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Suffrage .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Suffrage .

Scholia has a topic profile for Suffrage .

A History of the Vote in Canada , Chief Electoral Officer of Canada, 2007.

Suffrage in Canada Women's suffrage in Germany —19 January 1919—first suffrage (active and passive) for women in Germany "Suffrage" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

v t e Suffrage Basic topics Universal suffrage Right to run for office Age of candidacy banned Women Suffragette Women's liberation movement Men Black Youth Demeny voting Non-citizen Non-resident citizen One man, one vote Multiple citizenship Voting age Free and fair election Secret ballot Compulsory voting Disfranchisement Voter turnout Wasted vote By country Austria Australia 1902 Commonwealth Franchise Act aboriginal women Canada Chile Colombia Ecuador Hong Kong India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein Mexico New Zealand Spain (Civil War, Francoist) Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom women Cayman Islands Scotland Wales laws 1832 1918 1928 United States women African Americans Native Americans felons foreigners District of Columbia Puerto Rico states Constitutional amendments: 15th , 19th , 23rd , 24th , 26th Indian Citizenship Act 1965 Voting Rights Act Events International International Woman Suffrage Alliance conferences 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th Hong Kong Hong Kong 1 July marches 2014 Hong Kong protests 2019–2020 Hong Kong protests United Kingdom WSPU march (1906) Mud March (1907) Women's Sunday (1908) Black Friday (1910) Battle of Downing Street (1910) Women's Coronation Procession (1911) Great Pilgrimage (1913) Open Christmas Letter (1914) Suffragette bombing and arson campaign United States Seneca Falls Convention (1848) Declaration of Sentiments (1848) Rochester Convention (1848) Ohio Women's Convention (1850) Ohio Women's Convention (1851) National Women's Rights Convention (1850–1869) Trial of Susan B. Anthony (1872–1873) Suffrage Hikes (1912–1914) Woman Suffrage Procession (1913) Suffrage Torch Suffrage Special (1916) Silent Sentinels (1917–1919) Night of Terror Prison Special 1920 United States presidential election "Give Us the Ballot" (1957) Freedom Summer (1964) Selma to Montgomery marches (1965) Women (memorials) List of suffragists and suffragettes Timeline of women's suffrage US in majority-Muslim countries Historiography of the Suffragettes Women's suffrage organizations and publications Women's rights activists Leser v. Garnett Belmont–Paul Monument Rise up, Women (Emmeline Pankhurst statue) Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst Memorial Elizabeth Cady Stanton statue Suffragette Memorial Portrait Monument Women's Rights Pioneers Monument Forward statue Kate Sheppard National Memorial Millicent Fawcett statue Great Petition (2008 sculpture) Centenary of Women's Suffrage Commemorative Fountain Resilience Turning Point Suffragist Memorial Eagle House Pankhurst Centre Paulsdale Suffragette Handkerchief Holloway banner Holloway brooch Holloway Jingles Hunger Strike Medal Justice Bell Suffrage jewellery Suffragette penny Suffrage Oak Women's Rights National Historical Park Women's Suffrage National Monument International Women's Day Susan B. Anthony Day Women's Equality Day Popular culture " The Women's Marseillaise " "The March of the Women" (1910 song) The Mother of Us All (1947 opera) "Sister Suffragette" (1964 song) Suffrage plays Women's suffrage in film Votes for Women (1912 film) Shoulder to Shoulder (1974 series) Not for Ourselves Alone (1999 documentary) Iron Jawed Angels (2004 film) Up the Women (2013 sitcom) Selma (2014 film) Suffragette (2015 film) Sylvia (2018 musical) Suffs (2022 musical) Lioness (upcoming film) Susan B. Anthony dollar National Voting Rights Museum (US) New Zealand ten-dollar note Women's Suffrage Centennial silver dollar (2020 U.S. commemorative) 2020 US ten-dollar bill Art in the women's suffrage movement in the United States Music and women's suffrage in the United States v t e Human rights Humans Children Intersex people Women Fundamental concepts and philosophies Natural law Positive law Sovereignty Universal jurisdiction Distinctions Claim rights and liberty rights Individual and group rights Natural rights and legal rights Negative and positive rights Aspects Corporal punishment Organizations List of human rights organisations National human rights institutions By continent Africa Middle East Asia Europe North America South America Oceania Human rights abuses Atrocity crime Crime of apartheid Crimes against humanity Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Enforced disappearances Forced migration Genocide Human rights abuses against Palestinians by Israel at Guantánamo Bay detention camp during the Battle of Mosul (2016–2017) during the Gaddafi regime during the Libyan civil war (2011) in Afghanistan in Algeria in Angola in Argentina in Armenia in Australia in Austria in Azad Kashmir in Azerbaijan in Bahrain in Balochistan in Bangladesh in Belarus in Bolivia in Botswana in Brazil in Burkina Faso in Burundi in Cambodia in Canada in Chile in Chile under Augusto Pinochet in China in Cuba in Egypt in El Salvador in Ethiopia in France in Gabon in Ghana in Germany in Guatemala in Hong Kong in Egypt in Haiti in India in Indonesia in Iran in Iraq in Ireland in Israel in Italy in Jammu and Kashmir in Japan in Kashmir in Kazakhstan in Kenya in Kuwait in Kyrgyzstan‎ in Lebanon in Libya in Lithuania in Malawi in Malaysia in Manipur in Mexico in Morocco in Myanmar in Nepal in New Zealand in Nigeria in North Korea in Pakistan in Palestine in Panama in Papua New Guinea in Peru in Poland in Punjab, India in Romania in the Russia in Saudi Arabia in Sierra Leone in Sindh in South Africa in South Korea in Sri Lanka in Sudan in Switzerland in Syria in Taiwan in Thailand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Dominican Republic in the Philippines in the Soviet Union in the United Arab Emirates in the United States in Turkey in Uganda in Ukraine in Uzbekistan in Venezuela in Vietnam in Yemen in Zimbabwe of the Marcos dictatorship of the military dictatorship in Brazil (1964–1985) Incitement to genocide List of human rights abuses by country Murder Persecution Rape Slavery Torture Victims War crimes Related History of human rights List of global issues List of human rights awards Three generations Universal Declaration of Human Rights United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Korea Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kzvvs
Cached time: 20250817112250
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.708 seconds
Real time usage: 1.996 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8922/1000000
Revision size: 104588/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 390175/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6090/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 49/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 500945/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.066/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19030217/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1578.111      1 -total
 51.89%  818.930      2 Template:Reflist
 27.95%  441.014     83 Template:Cite_web
  6.93%  109.308      5 Template:Lang
  6.03%   95.087      1 Template:Youth_rights_sidebar
  5.88%   92.847      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  4.80%   75.734      1 Template:Cite_American_Heritage_Dictionary
  4.58%   72.293     15 Template:Citation
  4.43%   69.942      9 Template:Cite_book
  4.20%   66.333      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:70322:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817112250 and revision id 1306240119. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suffrage&oldid=1306240119 " Categories : Suffrage Political law Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from May 2018 All Wikipedia articles needing context Wikipedia articles needing context from May 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 18:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Suffrage 61 languages Add topic

