Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 By country Toggle By country subsection 2.1 Afghanistan 2.2 Canada 2.3 France 2.4 Germany 2.5 India 2.6 Indonesia 2.7 Netherlands 2.8 Pakistan 2.9 Poland 2.10 Romania 2.11 Spain 2.12 Switzerland 2.13 United Kingdom 2.13.1 England 2.13.2 Northern Ireland 2.13.3 Scotland 2.13.4 Wales 2.14 United States 2.14.1 Mississippi 2.14.2 New York 2.14.3 Oregon 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hamlet (place) 61 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Коми Ladin Latina Latviešu Limburgs Lombard مصرى Minangkabau Мокшень Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon Zeêuws 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Small human settlement in a rural area This article is about the type of settlement. For other uses, see Hamlet (disambiguation) .

This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The hamlet Weiler Oberwil in Waldkirch , Switzerland A hamlet is a human settlement that is smaller than a town or village .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This is often simply an informal description of a smaller settlement or possibly a subdivision or satellite entity to a larger settlement.

[ citation needed ] Sometimes  a hamlet is defined for official or administrative purposes.

[ citation needed ] The word and concept of a hamlet can be traced back to Norman England , where the Old French hamelet came to apply to small human settlements.

Etymology [ edit ] The word comes from Anglo-Norman hamelet , corresponding to Old French hamelet , the diminutive of Old French hamel meaning a little village.  This, in turn, is a diminutive of Old French ham , possibly borrowed from ( West Germanic ) Franconian languages . It is related to the modern French hameau , Dutch heem , Frisian hiem , German Heim , Old English hām , and Modern English home .

[ 3 ] By country [ edit ] Afghanistan [ edit ] In Afghanistan , the word "hamlet" may be used to translate the term " qala " ( Dari : قلعه, Pashto : کلي).

[ 4 ] The Afghan qala is a fortified group of houses, generally with its community building such as a mosque, but without its marketplace. The qala is the smallest type of settlement in Afghan society, outsized by the village ( Dari / Pashto : ده), which is larger and includes a commercial area.

Canada [ edit ] In Canada's three territories , hamlets are officially designated municipalities .

[ 5 ] Northwest Territories had 11 hamlets , [ 5 ] each of which had a population of less than 900 people as of the 2016 census ; [ 6 ] Nunavut had 24 hamlets , [ 5 ] with populations ranging from 129 to 2,842 as of the 2016 census; [ 7 ] and Yukon had two hamlets , [ 5 ] both of which had a population of less than 450 people as of the 2016 census.

[ 8 ] In Canada's provinces, hamlets are usually small unincorporated communities within a larger municipality (similar to civil townships in the United States), such as many communities within the single-tier municipalities of Ontario , [ citation needed ] Alberta 's specialized and rural municipalities, [ 9 ] and Saskatchewan 's rural municipalities.

[ 10 ] Canada's two largest hamlets— Fort McMurray (formerly incorporated as a city) [ 11 ] and Sherwood Park —are located in Alberta. They each have populations, within their main urban area, over 60,000—well over the 10,000-person threshold that can choose to incorporate as a city in Alberta.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] As such, these two hamlets have been further designated by the Province of Alberta as urban service areas .

[ 14 ] An urban service area is recognized as equivalent to a city for provincial and federal program delivery and grant eligibility.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] France [ edit ] A cottage in the Hameau de Chantilly A hamlet ( French : hameau ) is a group of rural dwellings, usually too small to be considered a village. The term Lieu-dit is also applied to hamlets, but this can also refer to uninhabited localities.

During the 18th century, it was fashionable for rich or noble people to create their hameau in their gardens . This was a group of houses or farms with a rustic appearance, but very comfortable. The best known are the Hameau de la Reine , built by Queen Marie-Antoinette in the park of the Palace of Versailles , and the Hameau de Chantilly , built by Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé in Chantilly, Oise .

Germany [ edit ] You can help expand this section with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(October 2024) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Weiler]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Weiler}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

The word "hamlet" may be used to translate the term Weiler ( German: [ˈva͡ɪlɐ] ).

[ citation needed ] Compared to a Dorf (village), a Weiler [ de ] has no infrastructure (i.e. no inn, no school, no store, no church). The houses and farms of a Weiler can be grouped (in the hills and the mountains) or scattered (more often in the plains). In North West Germany, a group of scattered farms is called Bauerschaft . In a Weiler, there are no street names, the houses are just numbered.

There is no legal definition of a Weiler in Germany. In Bavaria, like in Austria, a Weiler is defined as a settlement with 3 to 9 dwellings, from 10 houses it is called a village.

[ citation needed ] India [ edit ] In different states of India , there are different words for hamlet. In Haryana and Rajasthan , it is called " dhani " ( Hindi : ढाणी ḍhāṇī ) or "Thok" .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] In Gujarat , a hamlet is called a "nesada" , which are more prevalent in the Gir forest . In Maharashtra , it is called a "pada" . In southern Bihar, especially in the Magadh division , a hamlet is called a "bigha" . In the state of Karnataka , a hamlet is known by different names like Palya , Hadi (Haadi), Keri , and Padi (Paadi). In the olden days, the human population of hamlet was less than Halli (Village) or Ooru (Uru). But in the 20th century with the tremendous increase in population, some of these hamlets became villages, towns and cities or merged with them.

Indonesia [ edit ] The hamlet Kampung Naga in West Java Province, Indonesia All over Indonesia , hamlets are translated as "small village", desa or kampung . They are known as dusun in Central Java and East Java, banjar in Bali, jorong or kampuang in West Sumatra .

[ citation needed ] Netherlands [ edit ] The Dutch words for hamlet are gehucht or buurtschap . A gehucht or buurtschap has, compared to a dorp (village), no infrastructure (i.e. no inn, no school, no store) and contains often only one street, bearing the same name. The houses and farms of a gehucht or a buurtschap can be scattered. Though there are strong similarities between a gehucht and buurtschap , the words are not interchangeable. A gehucht officially counts as an independent place of residence (e.g.

Wateren ), while a buurtschap officially is a part of another place (e.g.

Bartlehiem , part of Wyns ).

Pakistan [ edit ] In Pakistan, a hamlet is called a gaaon گاؤں or mauza موضع in Urdu , giraaan گراں or pind پنڈ in Punjabi , and kalay کلې in Pashto . It is almost synonymous with 'village'.

Poland [ edit ] In Poland, the law recognises several different kinds of rural settlements .

Przysiółek (which can be translated as "hamlet") refers to a cluster of farms.

Osada (which is typically translated as "settlement" but also can be translated as "hamlet") includes smaller settlements especially differing by type of buildings or inhabited by population connected with some place or workplace (like mill settlements, forest settlements, fishing settlements, railway settlements, former State Agricultural Farm settlements). They can be an independent settlement, or a part of another settlement, like a village.

[ 21 ] Romania [ edit ] You can help expand this section with text translated from the corresponding article in Italian .

(October 2024) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Italian Wikipedia article at [[:it:Borgata]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|it|Borgata}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Main article: Administrative divisions of Romania In Romania , hamlets are called cătune (singular: cătun ), and they represent villages that contain several houses at most. They are legally considered villages, and statistically, they are placed in the same category. Like villages, they do not have a separate administration, and thus are not an administrative division, but are part of a parent commune .

Spain [ edit ] In Spain , a hamlet is called lugar , aldea or cortijada ( Spanish: [koɾtiˈxaða] ). The word comes from the Spanish term cortijo («estate»). In the South of Spain, the term caserío ( Spanish: [kaseˈɾi.o] ) is also used for designating small groups of rural dwellings or farmhouses.

A hamlet in Spain is a human settlement, usually located in rural areas, and typically smaller in size and population than a village (called in Spain, pueblo Spanish: [ˈpweβlo] ). The hamlet is a common territorial organisation in the North West of Spain ( Asturias , Cantabria and Galicia ) dependent on a larger entity (e.g.

parish or municipality ).

In Spain, the hamlet is one of the categories in the official gazetteer of population entities. In the Royal Order and Instruction of the 8 of March 1930, [ 22 ] issued for the elaboration of the Annual gazetteer, the hamlet ( aldea ) is defined as the population entity with the smallest population and neighbourhood, usually more disseminated than the lugar , though its buildings can be also organised in streets and plazas.

Switzerland [ edit ] In the four national languages, hamlets are known as Weiler (German), hameaux (French), frazioni (Italian) and fracziun ( Romansh ). A hamlet is always part of a larger municipality or may be shared between two municipalities. The difference between a hamlet and a village is that typically a hamlet lacks a compact core settlement and lacks a central building such as a church or inn. However, some hamlets ( Kirchwiler ) may have grown up as an unplanned settlement around a church.

[ 23 ] No population limit defines a hamlet and some hamlets have a larger population than some of the smallest municipalities. Generally, there are no street names in a hamlet; rather, addresses are given by hamlet name and a number. House numbers might start at one side of the hamlet and continue to the other side or may have no clear organization.

A hamlet may form or have formed a Bürgergemeinde (legal place of citizenship regardless of where a person was born or currently lives) and may own common property for the Bürgergemeinde .

United Kingdom [ edit ] England [ edit ] Haynes Church End in Bedfordshire In England , the word hamlet (having the French origin given at the top of this article) means (in current usage) simply a small settlement, maybe of a few houses or farms, smaller than a village. However, traditionally and legally, it means a village or a town without a church, [ 24 ] although hamlets are recognised as part of land use planning policies and administration. Historically, it may refer to a secondary settlement in a civil parish , after the main settlement (if any); such an example is the hamlet of Chipping which is the secondary settlement within the civil parish of Buckland . Hamlets may have been formed around a single source of economic activity such as a farm, mill, mine or harbour that employed its working population. Some hamlets may be the result of the depopulation of a village ; examples of such a hamlet are Graby and Shapwick .  Because of the hilly topography of the parish, the village of Clent , situated on the Clent Hills , consists of five distinct hamlets.

Northern Ireland [ edit ] In Northern Ireland , the common Irish place name element baile is sometimes considered equivalent to the term hamlet in English, baile would actually have referred to what is known in English today as a townland : that is to say, a geographical locality rather than a small village.

Scotland [ edit ] In the Scottish Highlands , the term clachan , of Gaelic derivation, may be preferred to the term hamlet .

[ 25 ] Also found in Scotland more generally is ferm toun , used in the specific case of a farm settlement, including outbuildings and agricultural workers' homes.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Wales [ edit ] The term hamlet was used in Wales to denote a geographical subdivision of a parish (which might or might not contain a settlement). Elsewhere, mostly in England, these subdivisions were called "townships" or "tithings".

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The Welsh word for "hamlet" is pentrefan [ 30 ] (also pentrefyn ). Both these words are diminutives of pentref ("village") with the loose meaning of "small village".

United States [ edit ] Mississippi [ edit ] In Mississippi , a 2009 state law (§ 17-27-5) set aside the term "municipal historical hamlet" to designate any former city, town, or village with a current population of less than 600 inhabitants that lost its charter before 1945. The first such designation was applied to Bogue Chitto, Lincoln County .

New York [ edit ] Further information: Administrative divisions of New York (state) § Hamlet In New York, hamlets are unincorporated settlements within towns . Hamlets are not legal entities and have no local government or official boundaries. Their approximate locations will often be noted on road signs, however, a specific service, such as water, sewer, or lighting provides only that hamlet with services. A hamlet could be described as the rural or suburban equivalent of a neighborhood in a city or village. The area of a hamlet may not be exactly defined; it may be designated by the Census Bureau , or it may rely on some other form of border (such as a ZIP Code , school district or fire district for more urbanized areas; rural hamlets are typically only demarcated by speed zones on the roads serving them). Others, such as Forestville, New York , will be the remnants of former villages, with borders coextant with the previously defined borders of the defunct or dissolved village. Some hamlets proximate to urban areas are sometimes continuous with their cities and appear to be neighborhoods, but they still are under the jurisdiction of the town. Some localities designated as hamlets, such as Levittown in the Town of Hempstead , with a population of over 50,000, are more populous than some incorporated cities in the state.

Oregon [ edit ] Main article: Hamlet (Oregon) In Oregon , specifically in Clackamas County , a hamlet is a form of local government for small communities that allows the citizens therein to organize and coordinate community activities. Hamlets do not provide services, such as utilities or fire protection, and do not have the authority to levy taxes or fees. There are four hamlets in Oregon: Beavercreek , Mulino , Molalla Prairie , and Stafford .

See also [ edit ] Developed environments Dhani and villages Frazione Manorialism Types of inhabited localities in Russia References [ edit ] ^ "What is a Hamlet?" .

Cultural World . Retrieved 2022-12-15 .

^ "Difference Between Hamlet and Village" .

Compare the Difference Between Similar Terms . 14 February 2018 . Retrieved 2022-12-15 .

^ T. F. Hoad, English Etymology , Oxford University Press, 1993, ISBN 0-19-283098-8 .

^ "A dictionary of the Puk'hto, Pus'hto, or language of the Afghans" .

dsalsrv02.uchicago.edu . Archived from the original on 2021-02-24 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ a b c d Statistics Canada (2010).

"Interim List of Changes to Municipal Boundaries, Status, and Names (From January 2, 2009 to January 1, 2010)" (PDF) . Retrieved 2010-11-17 .

^ "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2016 and 2011 censuses – 100% data (Northwest Territories)" .

Statistics Canada . February 8, 2017 . Retrieved April 19, 2018 .

^ "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2016 and 2011 censuses – 100% data (Nunavut)" .

Statistics Canada . February 8, 2017 . Retrieved April 19, 2018 .

^ Statistics Canada (2018-02-08).

"Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2006 and 2001 censuses – 100% data (Yukon Territory)" . Retrieved 2018-04-18 .

^ Alberta Municipal Affairs (2010-04-01).

"Specialized and Rural Municipalities and Their Communities" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-11-17 . Retrieved 2010-11-17 .

^ "Hamlets and Organized Hamlets" .

Government of Saskatchewan . Retrieved August 18, 2024 .

^ Alberta Municipal Affairs (2010-11-15).

"Municipal Profile – Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo" . Retrieved 2010-11-17 .

^ Alberta Municipal Affairs (2009-09-15).

"2009 Official Population List" (PDF) . Retrieved 2010-11-17 .

^ Alberta Queen's Printer (2009-09-15).

"2009 Official Population List" . Retrieved 2010-11-17 .

^ "2020 Municipal Codes" (PDF) .

Alberta Municipal Affairs . December 18, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2021 .

^ Province of Alberta (1994-12-21).

"Order in Council 817/94 (R.M. of Wood Buffalo status change to specialized municipality)" (PDF) . Retrieved 2010-11-17 .

^ Province of Alberta (1995-12-06).

"Order in Council 761/95 (Strathcona County status change to specialized municipality)" (PDF) . Retrieved 2010-11-17 .

^ Sukhvir Singh Gahlot: Rural Life in Rajasthan , page 4.Rajasthani Granthagar, Giani Press Delhi 1986 ^ Ashutosh Goyal, 2015, "RBS Visitors Guide India - Rajasthan: Rajasthan Travel guide".

, Data & Expo India Pvt Ltd, ISBN 9380844786 .

^ Rann Singh Mann, K. Mann, 1989, "Tribal Cultures and Change".

, pp. 23.

^ S. H. M. Rizvi, 1987 "Mina, the ruling tribe of Rajasthan: socio-biological appraisal".

, pp. 34.

^ " Ustawa z dnia 29 sierpnia 2003 r. o urzędowych nazwach miejscowości i obiektów fizjograficznych (Dz.U. 2003 nr 166 poz. 1612" . Archived from the original on 2020-06-03 . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

^ España. Ministerio de Trabajo y Previsión. Jefatura del Servicio General de Estadística (8 March 1930).

"Real orden e instrucción de 8 de marzo de 1930 para llevar a efecto la estadística de edificios y albergues de España y sus posesiones" .

classic.europeana.eu (in Spanish). Spain: Europeana Collections. An initiative of the European Union. p. 8,9 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Projektteam SINUS.

Landschaftsökologische Strukturmerkmale als Indikatoren der Nachhaltigkeit, Spatial INdices for LandUSe Sustainability (SINUS) (PDF) (Report). University of Vienna. pp.

308– 317. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 December 2013 . Retrieved 16 May 2013 .

^ Hardy-Ivamy, E.R. (1993).

Mozley & Whiteley's law dictionary . London: Butterworths. p. 124.

ISBN 978-0-406-01420-7 .

^ "Clachan" . Dictionary of the Scots Language. Archived from the original on 4 April 2012 . Retrieved 2011-10-24 .

^ "Dictionary of the Scots Language:: SND :: ferm n1 v" .

^ "Dictionary of the Scots Language:: SND :: toun" .

^ Kain R J P, Oliver R D, Historic Parishes of England & Wales , HDS, 2001, ISBN 0-9540032-0-9 , p 12 ^ "Status definition: Hamlet" .

A Vision of Britain through Time . Great Britain Historical GIS Project . Retrieved 2007-08-31 .

^ "Pentrefan in English - Welsh-English Dictionary | Glosbe" .

External links [ edit ] Look up hamlet in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hamlets .

Wolfhampcote: A hamlet formed by depopulation Low Mill: A mill hamlet v t e Designations for types of administrative division English terms Common English terms Area Insular area Local government area Special area Unincorporated area Unorganized area Borough County borough Metropolitan borough Canton Half-canton Capital Federal capital Imperial capital City Autonomous city Charter city Independent city Incorporated city Imperial city Free imperial city Royal free city Community Autonomous community Residential community County Administrative county Autonomous county Consolidated city-county County seat County town Metropolitan county Non-metropolitan county Regional county municipality Viscounty Country Overseas country Department Overseas department District Capital district City district Congressional district Electoral district Federal district Indian government district Land district Local government district Metropolitan district Non-metropolitan district Military district Municipal district Police district Regional district Rural district Sanitary district Service district Educational service district Local service district School district Intermediate school district Special district in the US Urban district Division Census division Police division Subdivision of India Indian reserve/reservation Indian reservation (United States) Indian reserve (Canada) Municipality City municipality County municipality Direct-controlled municipality District municipality Neutral municipality Regional municipality Resort municipality Mountain resort municipality Rural municipality Specialized municipality Prefecture Autonomous prefecture Subprefecture Super-prefecture Praetorian prefecture Province Autonomous province Overseas province Roman province Region Administrative region Special administrative region Autonomous region Capital region National capital region Development region Mesoregion Microregion Overseas region Subregion State Proto-state City-state Federal state Free state Sovereign state Territory Capital territory Federal capital territory National capital territory Dependent territory Federal territory Incorporated territory Organized incorporated territory Overseas territory Union territory Town Census town Market town Township Charter township Civil township Paper township Survey township Urban township Unit Regional unit Zone Economic zone Exclusive economic zone Free economic zone Special economic zone Exclusion zone Military exclusion zone Free speech zone Neutral zone Self-administered zone Trade zone Free-trade zone Other English terms Current Alpine resort Bailiwick Banner Autonomous Block Cadastre Circle Circuit Colony Commune Condominium Constituency Duchy District Eldership Emirate Enclave and exclave Federal dependency Governorate Hamlet Manor Royal Muftiate Neighbourhood Parish Precinct Principality Protectorate Quarter Regency Autonomous republic Riding Sector Autonomous Shire Sultanate Suzerainty Townland Village Summer Ward Historical Agency Barony Burgh Exarchate Hide Hundred Imperial Circle March Monthon Presidency Residency Roman diocese Seat Tenth Tithing Viceroyalty Non-English terms or loanwords Current Amt Apskritis Bakhsh Barangay Bashki Bezirk Regierungsbezirk Comarca Comune Frazione Freguesia Fu Gemeinde Austria Germany South Tyrol Switzerland Gemeente Gmina Hromada Județ Kampong Kommun/Kunta Finland Sweden Län (Sweden) Landskap Finland Località Maakunta Megye Muban Mukim Njësi administrative Obec Oblast Autonomous Okrug Ostān Poblacion Purok Qark Raion Savivaldybė Selsoviet Sitio Seniūnija Shahrestān Sum China Sýsla Tehsil Townlet Vingtaine Historical Commote Gau Heerlijkheid Komunë Köping Korale Län/Lääni Landskap Sweden Landskommun Maalaiskunta Nome Egypt Greece Pagus Pargana Plasă Rreth Satrapy Socken Subah Syssel Zhou Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics .

See also Autonomous administration Census division Electoral district List of administrative divisions by country Greek administrative divisions Slavic administrative divisions Authority control databases : National Germany Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐thbdt
Cached time: 20250814215215
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.762 seconds
Real time usage: 0.922 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5213/1000000
Revision size: 26043/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 221030/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9553/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 120571/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.487/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20669952/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  791.781      1 -total
 26.86%  212.697      1 Template:Reflist
 21.14%  167.421     22 Template:Cite_web
 14.96%  118.448     41 Template:Lang
 12.59%   99.702      3 Template:Ambox
 10.44%   82.627      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.69%   76.753      1 Template:Terms_for_types_of_country_subdivisions
  7.77%   61.488      2 Template:Expand_language
  6.95%   55.005      1 Template:Short_description
  6.47%   51.239      1 Template:Original_research Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:396466:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215215 and revision id 1303237012. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hamlet_(place)&oldid=1303237012 " Categories : Hamlets Types of populated places Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from January 2018 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Anglo-Norman-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing West Frisian-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010 Geography articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Pages with German IPA Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles containing Hindi-language text Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016 Geography articles needing translation from Italian Wikipedia Articles containing Romanian-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages with Spanish IPA Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Romansh-language text Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language text Articles containing Scots-language text Articles containing Welsh-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 20:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hamlet (place) 61 languages Add topic

