Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Turkstream pipeline 2 Places of interest 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Kıyıköy 11 languages Български Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Bahasa Melayu Нохчийн Русский Српски / srpski Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°38′07″N 28°05′46″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.63528°N 28.09611°E ﻿ / 41.63528; 28.09611 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the village, see Kıyıköy, Gümüşova .

Municipality in Kırklareli, Turkey Kıyıköy Municipality Kıyıköy Location in Turkey Show map of Turkey Kıyıköy Kıyıköy (Marmara) Show map of Marmara Coordinates: 41°38′07″N 28°05′46″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.63528°N 28.09611°E ﻿ / 41.63528; 28.09611 Country Turkey Province Kırklareli District Vize Government • Mayor Tercan Yatkın ( CHP ) Population (2022) [ 1 ] 2,160 Time zone UTC+3 ( TRT ) Postal code 39480 Area code 0288 Website www .kiyikoy .bel .tr Kıyıköy , historically Medea ( Bulgarian : Мидия ; Greek : Μήδεια ; Turkish : Midye ), is a town ( belde ) in the Vize District , Kırklareli Province , Turkey.

[ 2 ] Its population is 2,160 (2022).

[ 1 ] It is on the Black Sea coast, 36 km (22 mi) from Vize and 95 km (59 mi) away from Kırklareli. It became a municipality in 1987.

Fishing , forestry and tourism are the main local sources of income. The town has a small beach while the surrounding area is covered by dense forest mainly of oak . Two streams, the Kazandere and the Pabuçdere, surround the town in the south and north respectively and flowi into the Black Sea.

The Kasatura Bay Nature Reserve Area is 18 km (11 mi) south of the town along the Black Sea and offers a pristine forest and beach. The only naturally growing grove of black pine ( Pinus nigra ) in Turkish Rumelia is found here.

The town hosts the onshore terminal of the Turkstream pipeline from Russia.

History [ edit ] Kıyıköy is identified with Salmydessus , where according to Greek mythology the Argonauts rescued Phineus from the Harpies . Later it became Medea/Midye, a name which means merely 'Middle' in Greek.

[ citation needed ] It was occupied by Imperial Russian troops after the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–1878, and later by Bulgarians and Greeks following the Balkan Wars of 1912-1913. According to the Treaty of London , the border of the Ottoman Empire passed through the town for a brief period after the First Balkan War; the border was known as the "Midye- Enez Line" ( Turkish : Midye-Enez Hattı ) or the Enos-Midia line since the town's name was still Midye at the time.

[ 3 ] The border was moved further west after the Ottomans regained some territory after the Second Balkan War.

According to the terms of the population exchange between Greece and Turkey that took place in 1923, the mostly Greek and Bulgarian Christian residents of the town were replaced by Turks from Thessaloniki in Greece because of their wide knowledge of maritime matters.

[ 3 ] In 1960, the settlement's name was changed from Midye to Kıyıkent because the former was regarded as a foreign-language name.

[ 3 ] Medea remains a Roman Catholic titular see [ 4 ] .

Turkstream pipeline [ edit ] In 2020 the Turkstream ( Turkish: TürkAkım; Russian: Турецкий поток), a double gas pipeline from Anapa near Krasnodar in Russia, linked up with Kıyıköy and went into service. One pipeline continues to Lüleburgaz and supplies Turkey. The second is intended for other countries although its onward route is yet to be determined. It cost €11.4 billion.

Places of interest [ edit ] St. Nicholas' Monastery ( Turkish : Aya Nikolas Manastırı ) ( Greek : Μονὴ του Ἁγίου Νικόλαου ) is a rock-cut Byzantine era Orthodox monastery , built during the time of Emperor Justinian I (reigned 527-565). It is situated about 800 m (2,600 ft) southwest of the town. The monastery consists of a ground-floor chapel with cells for the monks and storerooms. The basement contains a holy well (hagiasma) ( Turkish : ayazma ) ( Greek : ἁγίασμα ). The monastery was renovated in 1856 by Metropolitan bishop Matthaios, who also built a wooden annex in front of it (it no longer exists). An inscription reading "St. Nikolas" in Greek lettering is engraved over the arched north entrance.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Kıyıköy Fortress ( Turkish : Kıyıkent Kalesi ) is a fortification , also built during the reign of Justinian Il, that surrounds most of the old town. Examination of the mortar used suggests that it was renovated in the 9th and 10th centuries. The fortress is constructed on a hillside stretching to the coast between Pabuçdere in the north and Kazandere in the south. Its eastern part is completely ruined. The walls were built with cut stone and rubble masonry and are, in some places, 2.20 m (7.2 ft) thick and 2.50 m (8.2 ft) high. The walls around the second gate reach a height of 5 m (16 ft). They probably rose to 6 m (20 ft) near the (lost) second watchtower . A 13 m (43 ft) wide defensive moat stretched between the third and the sixth watchtower. A hidden gate to the south of the southern walls was connected to the fortress by 180 steps. The Ministry of Culture and Tourism restored the Vize Gate using stone, bricks and wood in 1991.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Address-based population registration system (ADNKS) results dated 31 December 2022, Favorite Reports" (XLS) .

TÜİK . Retrieved 13 March 2023 .

^ Belde Belediyesi Archived 2023-03-06 at the Wayback Machine , Turkey Civil Administration Departments Inventory. Retrieved 1 March 2023.

^ a b c "Tarihte Kıyıköy" (in Turkish). Kıyıköy Belediyesi. 2011-03-14 . Retrieved 2011-12-17 .

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Medea" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ "Aya Nikola Manastırı" (in Turkish). Kıyıköy. 2011-03-29 . Retrieved 2011-12-17 .

^ "Aya Nikola Manastırı, Kıyıköy" (in Turkish). Gezenbilir. 2009-04-16 . Retrieved 2011-12-17 .

^ "Kıyıköy Kalesi" (in Turkish). Vize. 2006-04-06 . Retrieved 2011-12-17 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kıyıköy, Kırklareli .

External links [ edit ] Official website of the municipality of Kıyıköy (in Turkish) Miscellaneous images of Kırklareli - Kıyıköy History, Beaches, Regional Geography for Kıyıköy Nature and sea photos, Human and house pictures for Kıyıköy v t e Vize District Municipalities Çakıllı Kıyıköy Vize Villages Akıncılar Akpınar Aksicim Balkaya Çavuşköy Çövenli Develi Doğanca Düzova Evrencik Evrenli Hamidiye Hasbuğa Kışlacık Kızılağaç Kömürköy Küçükyayla Müsellim Okçular Pazarlı Sergen Sofular Soğucak Topçuköy v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kıyıköy&oldid=1300863751 " Categories : Populated places in Vize District Catholic titular sees in Europe Fishing communities in Turkey Populated places of the Byzantine Empire Tourist attractions in Kırklareli Province Seaside resorts in Turkey Town municipalities in Turkey Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Bulgarian-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Turkish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Turkish-language sources (tr) This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 20:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kıyıköy 11 languages Add topic

