Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Notable mausoleums Toggle Notable mausoleums subsection 2.1 Africa 2.1.1 Algeria 2.1.2 Others 2.2 Asia, Eastern, Southern, Central, and Southeast 2.2.1 Afghanistan 2.2.2 Bangladesh 2.2.3 China 2.2.4 India 2.2.5 Indonesia 2.2.6 Japan 2.2.7 Malaysia 2.2.8 Pakistan 2.2.9 Philippines 2.2.10 Taiwan 2.2.11 Others 2.3 Asia, western 2.3.1 Iran 2.3.2 Iraq 2.3.3 Israel 2.3.4 Jordan 2.3.5 Palestine 2.3.6 Turkey 2.3.7 United Arab Emirates 2.3.8 Gallery 2.4 Europe 2.5 South America 2.5.1 Argentina 2.5.2 Bolivia 2.5.3 Brazil 2.5.4 Chile 2.5.5 Colombia 2.5.6 Ecuador 2.5.7 Paraguay 2.5.8 Peru 2.5.9 Uruguay 2.5.10 Venezuela 2.6 North America 2.6.1 Canada 2.6.2 Cuba 2.6.3 Dominican Republic 2.6.4 El Salvador 2.6.5 Guatemala 2.6.6 Haiti 2.6.7 Mexico 2.6.8 Nicaragua 2.6.9 Panama 2.6.10 United States 2.7 Oceania 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Footnotes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mausoleum 75 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Burial chamber of a deceased person For other uses, see Mausoleum (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Mausoleum" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Model of the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus (near modern-day Bodrum in Turkey), the grave of King Mausolus , the Persian satrap of Caria from which the word mausoleum was derived.

[ 1 ] The Taj Mahal in Agra , India, a UNESCO World Heritage Site Anıtkabir is the mausoleum of Atatürk , leader of the Turkish National Movement during the Turkish War of Independence , the founder and first President of the Republic of Turkey . It attracts around 3.5 million tourists yearly.

[ 2 ] The Thalmayer mausoleum one, of the many destroyed mausoleums ( Hungary , Budapest , Fiume Road Graveyard ) A mausoleum is an external free-standing building constructed as a monument enclosing the burial chamber of a deceased person or people. A mausoleum without the person's remains is called a cenotaph . A mausoleum may be considered a type of tomb , or the tomb may be considered to be within the mausoleum.

Overview [ edit ] The word mausoleum (from the Ancient Greek : μαυσωλεῖον ) derives from the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus (near modern-day Bodrum in Turkey), the grave of King Mausolus , the Persian satrap of Caria , whose large tomb was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World .

[ 1 ] Mausolea were historically, and still may be, large and impressive constructions for a deceased leader or other person of importance. However, smaller mausolea soon became popular with the gentry and nobility in many countries. In the Roman Empire , these were often in necropoles or along roadsides: the via Appia Antica retains the ruins of many private mausolea for kilometres outside Rome . When Christianity became dominant, mausolea were out of use.

[ 3 ] Later, mausolea became particularly popular in Europe and its colonies during the early modern and modern periods . A single mausoleum may be permanently sealed. A mausoleum encloses a burial chamber either wholly above ground or within a burial vault below the superstructure. This contains the body or bodies, probably within sarcophagi or interment niches. Modern mausolea may also act as columbaria (a type of mausoleum for cremated remains) with additional cinerary urn niches. Mausolea may be located in a cemetery , a churchyard or on private land.

In the United States , the term may be used for a burial vault below a larger facility, such as a church. The Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels in Los Angeles, California, for example, has 6,000 sepulchral and cinerary urn spaces for interments in the lower level of the building. It is known as the "crypt mausoleum". In Europe, these underground vaults are sometimes called crypts or catacombs .

A chapel mausoleum or mausoleum chapel in a cemetery can be used for closed-casket funeral services prior to interments.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Notable mausoleums [ edit ] Main article: List of mausoleums Africa [ edit ] Algeria [ edit ] El Alia Cemetery in Oued Smar .

Jedars , thirteen ancient monumental Berber mausoleums located south of Tiaret .

Madghacen , a royal Numidian mausoleum from the 3rd century, Batna .

Royal Mausoleum of Mauretania , monumental grave of the Numidian Berber king Juba II and the Queen Cleopatra Selene II located on the road between Cherchell and Algiers , in Tipaza Province .

The tomb of Masinissa (Soumâa) in El Khroub Mausoleum of Sidi Abderrahmane Et-Thaalibi in Algiers .

Royal Mausoleum of Mauretania (Tipaza) Madghacen, a royal Numidian mausoleum (Batna) Frenda Jedars ( Frenda ) The tomb of Massinissa (El Khroub) Mausoleum of Sidi Abderrahmane Et-Thaalibi (Algiers) Others [ edit ] Mausoleum of Mohammed V , monumental grave of the Moroccan sultan and king Mohammed V and his two sons, late King Hassan II and Prince Abdallah , in Rabat , Morocco .

Agostinho Neto 's mausoleum in Luanda , Angola Mausoleum of Hubert Maga in Parakou , Benin Mathieu Kerekou 's mausoleum in Natitingou , Benin Mausolée du Guide Suprême du Patriotisme in Gitega , Burundi Domoni , Comoros , burial place and location of Ahmed Abdallah 's mausoleum, first president of Comoros Fulbert Youlou 's mausoleum in Madibou , Marien Ngouabi 's mausoleum and Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza 's mausoleum in Brazzaville , Republic of Congo Laurent Kabila 's mausoleum in Kinshasa , Democratic Republic of Congo Mausoleum of Joseph Kasa-Vubu in Singini, Tshela , Kongo Central , Democratic Republic of Congo Gamal Abdel Nasser Mosque is a shrine and mausoleum in Cairo , Egypt , and the burial place of Gamal Abdel Nasser , second president of Egypt.

The Unknown Soldier Memorial is a pyramid-shaped monument in Nasr City , Egypt Mastabas dating from ancient Egypt Al-Hussein Mosque is a shrine and mausoleum in Cairo, Egypt, and the purported burial place of Muhammad 's grandson, Husayn ibn Ali Qalawun complex , contains the mausoleum of Qalawun in Cairo, Egypt King Sobhuza II Memorial Park in Lobamba , Eswatini Meles Zenawi 's grave in the Holy Trinity Cathedral , Addis Ababa , Ethiopia Omar Bongo 's mausoleum, a replica of the mausoleum of Mohammed V , in Franceville , Gabon Léon M'ba 's mausoleum in Libreville , Gabon Kwame Nkrumah Mausoleum in Accra , Ghana Atta Mills 's mausoleum at Asomdwee Park in Accra , Ghana Burma Camp military cemetery in Accra , Ghana Camayanne Mausoleum, monumental grave of Guinea 's national heroes Samori Ture , Sekou Toure , and Alfa Yaya in the Grand Mosque of Conakry Amilcar Cabral 's mausoleum in Bissau , Guinea-Bissau .

Mausoleum of Félix Houphouët-Boigny , first president of Ivory Coast, in Yamoussoukro , Ivory Coast Mausoleum of Mzee Jomo Kenyatta , late president of Kenya, in Nairobi , Kenya Jaramogi Oginga Odinga 's mausoleum in Bondo , Kenya Tom Mboya Mausoleum, Rusinga Island , Homa Bay County , Kenya Palm Grove Cemetery in Monrovia , Liberia National Hall , mausoleum of the late president William Tubman in Monrovia , Montserrado , Liberia Kamuzu Banda 's mausoleum in Lilongwe , Malawi Bingu wa Mutharika , third president of Malawi, built a mausoleum in which his late first wife and Bingu himself are buried.

The Heroes Square in Maputo , Mozambique Heroes' Acre in Windhoek , Namibia Nnamdi Azikiwe 's mausoleum in Onitsha , Nigeria Tafawa Balewa's tomb in Bauchi , Nigeria Mausoleum of Obafemi Awolowo in Ogun State , Nigeria Sani Abacha 's mausoleum in Kano , Nigeria John Garang De Mabior 's mausoleum in Juba , South Sudan Julius Nyerere 's mausoleum in Mwalimu Nyerere Museum Centre , Butiama , Tanzania Eyadema 's family mausoleum in Kara , Togo Bourguiba mausoleum , monumental grave of Habib Bourguiba , first president of Tunisia, in Monastir , Tunisia Mausoleum of Levy Mwanawasa , Frederick Chiluba , and Michael Sata at the Embassy Park Presidential Burial in Lusaka , Zambia National Heroes' Acre in Harare , Zimbabwe Mausoleum of Mohammed V in Rabat , Morocco Habib Bourguiba 's mausoleum in Monastir, Tunisia Gamal Abdel Nasser Mosque in Cairo , Egypt Agostinho Neto 's Mausoleum in Luanda , Angola Mathieu Kerekou 's mausoleum in Natitingou , Benin Kwame Nkrumah Memorial Park and Mausoleum in Accra , Ghana Mausoleum of the late President of Kenya Mzee Jomo Kenyatta in Nairobi , Kenya Kamuzu Banda Mausoleum in Lilongwe , Malawi Amilcar Cabral 's mausoleum in Bissau , Guinea-Bissau Nnamdi Azikiwe 's burial site, Onitsha , Nigeria .

Sani Abacha 's mausoleum in Kano , Nigeria.

Eyadema 's family mausoleum in Kara , Togo .

Mausoleum of late President Levy Mwanawasa at Embassy Park Presidential Burial in Lusaka , Zambia .

Mausoleum of late President Frederick Chiluba at Embassy Park Presidential Burial in Lusaka , Zambia .

Mausoleum of late President Michael Sata at Embassy Park Presidential Burial in Lusaka , Zambia .

Asia, Eastern, Southern, Central, and Southeast [ edit ] Afghanistan [ edit ] Tomb of Ahmad Shah Durrani in Kandahar , Afghanistan Mausoleum of Mohammad Zaher Shah (Hill of Teppe Maranjan) in Kabul Abdur Rahman Khan 's Mausoleum in Kabul Bagh-e Babur , mausoleum of the founder of the Mughal Empire Bangladesh [ edit ] Mausoleum of Kazi Nazrul Islam Mausoleum of Lalon Shah Mausoleum of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Mausoleum of Three Leaders Mausoleum of Ziaur Rahman Mausoleum of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Mausoleum of Three Leaders Mausoleum of Lalon Shah China [ edit ] List of mausoleums of Chinese monarchs Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor biggest underground mausoleum The pyramids of ancient China are also types of mausolea.

Qianling Mausoleum in China, houses the remains of Emperor Gaozong of Tang and the ruling Empress Wu Zetian , along with 17 others in auxiliary tombs.

Tomb and Mausoleum of Genghis Khan in Ordos City , Inner Mongolia .

Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties Ming Xiaoling Mausoleum , Nanjing Thirteen Imperial Mausoleums of Ming Dynasty Emperors , Beijing Fuling Tomb , Shenyang Zhao Mausoleum (Qing Dynasty) Eastern Qing Tombs Western Qing Tombs Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum , Nanjing .

Mausoleum of Yuan Shikai , Beiguan , Anyang .

Mausoleum of Mao Zedong , Beijing .

Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor in Xi'an , China Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum , Nanjing , China Mausoleum of Yuan Shikai , Beiguan , Anyang , China Mausoleum of Mao Zedong in Beijing , China India [ edit ] Akbar's tomb , Agra Taj Mahal , Agra Qutb Shahi Tombs , Hyderabad Gol Gumbaz , Bijapur Humayun's Tomb , Delhi Tomb of Sher Shah Suri , Sasaram , Bihar Safdarjung's Tomb , Delhi Bibi Ka Maqbara , Aurangabad , Maharashtra Taj Mahal in Agra , India Indonesia [ edit ] Grave of Sukarno at Blitar , East Java , Indonesia Astana Giribangun at Karanganyar , Central Java , Indonesia Imogiri complex in Imogiri, Central Java is the cemetery for Mataram royals and the Hamengkubuwana Royals of Yogyakarta and Pakubuwono of Surakarta Mausoleum O. G. Khouw at Jakarta , Indonesia Grave of Sukarno Astana Giribangun Japan [ edit ] Mausoleums of Emperors of Japan Mozu Tombs in Sakai , Osaka Prefecture Fukakusa no kita no Misasagi (深草北陵) in Kyoto Sennyū-ji , Kyoto Tsuki no wa no misasagi (月輪陵) Fushimi Momoyama no Misasagi (伏見桃山陵), Kyoto Musashi Imperial Graveyard , is a mausoleum complex at Hachiōji , Tokyo Toyokuni Shrine at Higashiyama-ku, Kyoto . Mausoleum of Kampaku Toyotomi Hideyoshi , which was later destroyed by the Tokugawa clan.

Nikkō Tōshō-gū at Nikkō , Tochigi Prefecture . It is part of the " Shrines and Temples of Nikkō ", Mausoleum of Tokugawa Ieyasu , Tokugawa shōguns .

Rinnō-ji at Nikkō , Tochigi Prefecture . The temple also administers the Taiyū-in Reibyō (大猷院霊廟), which is the mausoleum of Tokugawa Iemitsu , the third Tokugawa shōgun . Together with Nikkō Tōshō-gū and Futarasan Shrine .

Zuihōden at Sendai , Miyagi Prefecture is the mausoleum complex of Date Masamune and his heirs, daimyō of the Sendai Domain Tamaudun , at Shuri, Okinawa Taiyū-in Reibyō at Nikkō , Tochigi Prefecture Tsuki no wa no misasagi in Sennyū-ji , Kyoto Fushimi Momoyama no Misasagi in Kyoto, Kyoto Prefecture The entrance to Higashi Otani Mausoleum , Kyoto Malaysia [ edit ] Makam Pahlawan at National Mosque of Malaysia , Kuala Lumpur Makam Diraja Mahmoodiah at Bukit Mahmoodiah in Jalan Mahmoodiah, Johor Bahru , Johor Hang Kasturi Mausoleum at Jonker Walk , Melaka City , Melaka Kedah Royal Mausoleum at Langgar , Kota Setar District , Kedah Kelantan Royal Mausoleum Al-Ghufran Royal Mausoleum at Bukit Chandan in Jalan Istana , Kuala Kangsar Hang Jebat Mausoleum in Melaka City , Melaka Shah Alam Royal Mausoleum Tun Teja Mausoleum in Merlimau , Jasin District , Melaka Seri Menanti Royal Mausoleum Sultan Abdul Samad Mausoleum in Jugra , Banting , Selangor Makam Diraja Mahmoodiah at Bukit Mahmoodiah in Jalan Mahmoodiah, Johor Bahru , Johor Pakistan [ edit ] Tomb of Jahangir at Shahdara , near Lahore , Pakistan.

Mazar-e-Quaid at Karachi , Pakistan Tomb of Allama Iqbal at Lahore , Pakistan Data Durbar at Lahore , Pakistan Samadhi of Maharaja Ranjit Singh in Lahore, Pakistan Bhutto family mausoleum , Garhi Khuda Bakhsh , Sindh , Pakistan Muhammad Ali Jinnah Mausoleum in Karachi , Pakistan Samadhi of Ranjit Singh , founder of the Sikh Empire at Lahore , Pakistan Tomb of Qutb ud-Din Aibak , founder of the Delhi Sultanate at Lahore , Pakistan Shrine of Islamic Naqshbandi saints of Allo Mahar Sharif.

Tomb of Allama Iqbal at Lahore , Pakistan The exterior view of the Mausoleum of Emperor Jahangir, located in Punjab, Pakistan Philippines [ edit ] Rizal Monument at Rizal Park in Manila , Philippines, houses the remains of Dr. Jose Rizal , national hero of the Philippines.

Aguinaldo Shrine in Kawit , Cavite , Philippines.

Mausoleum of the Veterans of the Revolution , enshrining participants in the 1896 revolution against the Spanish Empire .

Quezon Memorial , in Quezon City , Philippines, houses the remains of President Manuel L. Quezon and his wife, Aurora .

Marcos Museum and Mausoleum in Batac, Ilocos Norte , Philippines, housing the remains of President Ferdinand Marcos .

Taiwan [ edit ] National Dr. Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall , Taipei , Taiwan .

Mausoleum of late President Chiang Kai-shek , Taoyuan , Taiwan .

Mausoleum of late President Chiang Ching-kuo , Taoyuan , Taiwan .

Chen Tsyr-shiou Memorial Park , Former Mausoleum and Memorial of late Vice President Chen Cheng , Taishan District, New Taipei , Taiwan .

Mausoleum of late President Chiang in Taoyuan , Taiwan Others [ edit ] Konbaung tombs are a collection of mausoleums built by Konbaung Dynasty kings in Mandalay , Amarapura , and Inwa , Myanmar .

Kandawmin Garden Mausolea , Myanmar .

Martyrs' Mausoleum , Myanmar .

Royal Cemetery at Wat Ratchabophit , Thailand Royal Tombs of the Joseon Dynasty , Korea Kim Koo Museum and Hyochang Park , Seoul , Republic of Korea (South Korea) Bandaranaike family Estate in Horagolla Bandaranaike Samadhi , Sri Lanka Kurjey Lhakhang , Bumthang Valley , Bumthang District , Bhutan Silver Pagoda, Phnom Penh , Cambodia Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum , Hanoi , Vietnam Kumsusan Palace of the Sun or Kim Il Sung Mausoleum, Pyongyang , Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) Yeongneung , King Sejong 's mausoleum in Yeoju , South Korea Kumsusan Palace of the Sun , Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il 's mausoleum in Pyongyang , North Korea Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum in Hanoi , Vietnam Türkmenbaşy Ruhy Mosque in Gypjak , Ashgabat , Turkmenistan Asia, western [ edit ] Iran [ edit ] Further information: List of mausoleums in Iran Mausoleum of Cyrus the Great in Pasargadae Naqsh-e Rustam at Persepolis , containing the tombs of Persian Achaemenid kings (522-486 BCE) Tomb of Ferdowsi in Mashhad Tomb of Hafez (Hāfezieh) in Shiraz Imam Reza shrine in Mashhad Mausoleum of Khomeini in Tehran Iraq [ edit ] Imam Husayn Mosque , Karbala – according to Shī‘ah belief, [ 6 ] the head and body of Husayn ibn Ali , along with all others who fell at the Battle of Karbala are buried there Israel [ edit ] Shrine of the Báb in Haifa Shrine of Bahá'u'lláh in Acre Jordan [ edit ] Al-Khazneh at Petra Mausoleum of Maussollos at Halicarnassus Palestine [ edit ] Mausoleum of Yasser Arafat in Ramallah , West Bank Turkey [ edit ] Anıtkabir mausoleum of Atatürk the founder of the Republic of Turkey at Ankara Celal Bayar Mausoleum in Bursa Adnan Menderes 's Mausoleum, in Istanbul Turgut Özal 's Mausoleum, in Istanbul Süleyman Demirel Mausoleum in Atabey United Arab Emirates [ edit ] Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque in Abu Dhabi Gallery [ edit ] Anıtkabir , the mausoleum of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in Ankara , Turkey Mausoleum of Khomeini in Tehran , Iran Tomb of Hafez (Hāfezieh) in Shiraz , Iran Mausoleum of the Assad family in Qardaha , Syria The Khazneh at Petra is believed to be Nabataean King Aretas IV 's mausoleum.

The Green Dome , mausoleum of Muhammad , Abu Bakr , and Omar I , located in the Prophet's Mosque in Medina , Saudi Arabia The mausoleum of Imam Husayn Shrine in Karbala , Iraq Mausoleum of Cyrus the Great in Pasargadae , Iran Mausoleum of later Abbasid Caliph Ar-Rashid bi-llāh Europe [ edit ] See also: Burial sites of European monarchs and consorts Imperial Crypt in Austria Church of Our Lady of Laeken in Belgium Batenberg Mausoleum in Sofia , Bulgaria Cathedral of Saint Domnius in Split, Croatia Royal Mausoleum and the Duchess of Kent's Mausoleum , Frogmore, Windsor , England Trentham Mausoleum near Stoke-on-Trent , England Juselius Mausoleum in Finland Les Invalides in France Panthéon, Paris in France Bismarck Mausoleum outside Friedrichsruh in northern Germany Lajos Batthyány 's Mausoleum in Budapest , Hungary Mausoleum of Augustus in Rome , Italy.

Mausoleum of Hadrian in Rome , Italy Pantheon, Rome in Italy Mausoleum of Emperor Ferdinand II in Austria Mausoleum of Theodoric in Ravenna , Italy Mausoleum of Galla Placidia in Ravenna , Italy Wilhelm II Mausoleum in Doorn , Netherlands National Pantheon / Church of Santa Engrácia in Lisbon , Portugal Mausoleum of Marasesti in Marasesti , Romania Peter and Paul Cathedral in St. Petersburg , Russia Cathedral of the Archangel in Moscow , Russia Lenin's Mausoleum in Moscow , Russia Hamilton Mausoleum at Hamilton , Scotland Damat Ali-Pasha Mausoleum , Belgrade , Serbia House of Flowers in Belgrade , Serbia House of Karađorđević Mausoleum, St. George's Church, Oplenac in Topola , Serbia Valle de los Caídos in San Lorenzo de El Escorial , Spain Les Invalides in Paris, France The Panthéon in Paris , France Jusélius Mausoleum at the Käppärä Cemetery in Pori , Finland Mausoleum of Njegoš in Lovćen , Montenegro Lenin's Mausoleum in Moscow , Russia House of Flowers in Belgrade, Serbia Oplenac in Topola , Serbia Valle de los Caídos in San Lorenzo de El Escorial , Spain South America [ edit ] Argentina [ edit ] La Recoleta Cemetery , Buenos Aires Buenos Aires Metropolitan Cathedral , mausoleum of José de San Martín Mausoleum of Néstor Kirchner , Río Gallegos , Santa Cruz Cathedral of La Plata , mausoleum of Dardo Rocha Buenos Aires Metropolitan Cathedral , mausoleum of General San Martín in Buenos Aires , Argentina Bolivia [ edit ] Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace, La Paz , mausoleum of Andrés de Santa Cruz Cementerio General de Cochabamba , mausoleum of "general del pueblo" René Barrientos Ortuño Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace, La Paz , mausoleum of Andrés de Santa Cruz , Bolivia Brazil [ edit ] Obelisk of São Paulo , mausoleum to the heroes of the Constitutionalist Revolution in São Paulo , São Paulo Chico Xavier mausoleum in Uberaba , Minas Gerais São João Batista Cemetery , Rio de Janeiro , Rio de Janeiro Monument to the Independence of Brazil in São Paulo JK Memorial in Brasília , Federal District Monument to the dead of World War II , Rio de Janeiro Imperial Mausoleum , the final resting place of Emperor Pedro II of Brazil and other members of the Brazilian imperial family The Monument to the Independence of Brazil in São Paulo houses the sarcophagi of Emperor Pedro I of Brazil (also King of Portugal as Pedro IV) and his two wives The Imperial Mausoleum in the Cathedral of São Pedro de Alcântara in Petrópolis , Brazil. It is the final resting place of Emperor Pedro II of Brazil and other members of the Brazilian imperial family A mausoleum containing the remains of several Brazilian royals , as well as those of Franciscan friars, in the Convent of Santo Antônio, Rio de Janeiro The Monument to the dead of World War II in Rio de Janeiro. The below grade mausoleum holds the remains of 467 servicemen of the Brazilian Expeditionary Force who died in action in Italy during World War II The JK Memorial is the burial place of Brazilian president Juscelino Kubitschek in Brasília , a city founded by Kubitschek himself Chile [ edit ] Altar de la Patria of Chile Cementerio General de Santiago , Chile Altar de la Patria of Chile Colombia [ edit ] Central Cemetery of Bogotá , Colombia Ecuador [ edit ] San Diego Cemetery , Quito Cathedral of Quito Paraguay [ edit ] National Pantheon of the Heroes National Pantheon of the Heroes in Asuncion , Paraguay Peru [ edit ] Panteón de los Próceres Presbítero Maestro , mausoleum and museum in Lima Metropolitan Cathedral of Lima Presbitero Maestro mausoleum and museum in Lima , Peru Uruguay [ edit ] Artigas Mausoleum , mausoleum of José Gervasio Artigas Monument at the entrance of the Artigas Mausoleum in Montevideo , Uruguay.

Inside of the Artigas Mausoleum .

Venezuela [ edit ] National Pantheon of Venezuela , mausoleum of Simón Bolívar National Pantheon of Venezuela , mausoleum of Simón Bolívar in Caracas , Venezuela North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] Beechwood Cemetery in Vanier, Ottawa , Ontario Chapel Lawn Cemetery in Winnipeg , Manitoba [ 7 ] Eaton family mausoleum at Mount Pleasant Cemetery in Toronto , Ontario Fairview Mausoleum in Niagara Falls, Ontario [ 8 ] Francis Nicholson Darke 's mausoleum at Regina Cemetery in Regina, Saskatchewan Hamilton Cemetery in Hamilton, Ontario Hart Massey 's mausoleum at Mount Pleasant Cemetery in Toronto, Ontario Hillcrest Memorial Gardens in Saskatoon , Saskatchewan [ 9 ] Holy Cross Cemetery (Edmonton) in Edmonton , Alberta [ 10 ] Larson Mausoleum in Lang, Saskatchewan [ 11 ] Mount Royal Cemetery , Outremont, Quebec [ 12 ] Mountain View Cemetery (Vancouver) in Vancouver , British Columbia [ 13 ] Notre Dame des Neiges Cemetery , Cote-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grace , Montreal , Quebec [ 14 ] Queen's Park Mausoleum in Calgary , Alberta [ 15 ] Sir Henry Pellatt 's mausoleum at Park Lawn Cemetery in Etobicoke , Ontario Cuba [ edit ] Santa Ifigenia Cemetery , Santiago de Cuba Dominican Republic [ edit ] Altar de la Patria , mausoleum to the Founding Fathers of the Dominican Republic National Pantheon of the Dominican Republic El Salvador [ edit ] Los Ilustres Cemetery San Salvador Cathedral Guatemala [ edit ] Guatemala City General Cemetery Haiti [ edit ] Haiti 's National Cemetery in Port-au-Prince , where François Duvalier , who ruled from 1957 to 1971, is buried Mexico [ edit ] El Ángel Victory column and mausoleum to the heroes of the Mexican Independence in Mexico City Monumento a la Revolución monument commemorating and mausoleum to the heroes of the Mexican Revolution in Mexico City Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral , Mexico City Jardines Del Humaya , a cemetery with opulent multi-story and air-conditioned mausoleums of Mexican drug cartel members El Ángel Victory column and mausoleum to the heroes of the Mexican Independence in Mexico City , Mexico Monumento a la Revolución monument commemorating and mausoleum to the heroes of the Mexican Revolution in Mexico City, Mexico Nicaragua [ edit ] Central Park , Managua Panama [ edit ] Omar Torrijos Mausoleum, Amador , Panama City United States [ edit ] Henry Flagler 's mausoleum in St. Augustine, Florida Presidential memorials in the United States and Presidents' graves of the United States Grant's Tomb in New York, New York James A. Garfield Memorial in Cleveland, Ohio Abraham Lincoln's tomb in Springfield, Illinois MacArthur Memorial in Norfolk, Virginia Crown Hill Memorial Park in Dallas , Texas Elmwood Cemetery and Mausoleum in Birmingham, Alabama Miles Mausoleum in Arlington National Cemetery Ferncliff Cemetery and Mausoleum in Hartsdale, New York Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California Hillcrest Memorial Park in Augusta, Georgia Macon Memorial Park in Macon, Georgia Queen of Heaven Mausoleum in Queen of Heaven Cemetery , Hillside, Illinois Rose Hills Memorial Park , Whittier, California Wilhelm's Portland Memorial Funeral Home in Portland, Oregon Tacoma Mausoleum in Tacoma, Washington Tombs of the Uga mascots inside Sanford Stadium in Athens, Georgia Brigadier General Egbert Ludovicus Viele 's Egyptian-style pyramid mausoleum in West Point, New York Rapper XXXTentacion 's mausoleum at The Gardens of Boca Raton in Boca Raton, Florida Rapper Juice Wrld 's mausoleum at Beverly Cemetery in Blue Island, Illinois Mausoleo a los Heroes de El Polvorín , at Cementerio Civil de Ponce in Ponce, Puerto Rico Mausolea in Cemetery of the Holy Rood on Long Island , New York The interior of the Spring Valley Mausoleum in Minnesota , listed on the National Register of Historic Places Percival Lowell – Mausoleum 2013 at the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona Oceania [ edit ] Massey Memorial in Wellington , New Zealand, where New Zealand Prime Minister William Massey and his wife are interred.

Savage Memorial at Bastion Point in Auckland , New Zealand, where New Zealand Prime Minister Michael Joseph Savage is interred.

Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in the Hall of Memory at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra , Australian Capital Territory .

See also [ edit ] List of types of funerary monument Morgue or mortuary National Cemetery Ohel (grave) Sepulchre Guard mounting Notes [ edit ] ^ The plurals mausoleums and mausolea are both used in English, although mausoleums is more common.

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b Toms, J. Mason (Winter 2019). "Arkansas Listings in the National Register of Historic Places: The Community Mausoleums of Cecil E. Bryan".

Arkansas Historical Quarterly .

78 (4): 423– 431.

ISSN 0004-1823 .

^ "Anıtkabir'de yabancı ziyaretçi rekoru kırıldı" .

www.sozcu.com.tr (in Turkish). 28 October 2019 . Retrieved 2022-05-12 .

^ Paul Veyne, in A History of Private Life: I. From Pagan Rome to Byzantium , Veyne, ed. (Harvard University Press) 1987:416.

^ Crowther, Linnea (April 18, 2025).

"The Pros and Cons of a Mausoleum" .

Legacy.com .

^ Keister, Doug (April 20, 2013).

"Inside the Chapel Mausoleum" .

Mausoleums.com .

^ al-Qummi, Ja'far ibn Qūlawayh (2008).

Kāmil al-Ziyārāt . trans. Sayyid Mohsen al-Husaini al-Mīlāni. Shiabooks.ca Press. p. 63.

^ "Chapel Lawn Funeral Home & Cemetery" . Archived from the original on 2023-11-28 . Retrieved 2025-07-01 .

^ "Fairview Mausoleum" .

^ "Mausoleums and Crypts" . Archived from the original on 2025-02-23 . Retrieved 2025-07-01 .

^ https://ecc.caedm.ca/our-cemeteries-holy-cross/ [ permanent dead link ] ^ "HistoricPlaces.ca - HistoricPlaces.ca" .

www.historicplaces.ca . Retrieved 2024-11-15 .

^ "The crypts and mausoleums of Mount Royal Cemetery - Mount Royal Commemorative Services" .

mountroyalcem.com . 2024-07-08 . Retrieved 2024-11-15 .

^ "Discovery Day - Self guided Walk" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-09-06.

^ "Mausoleums" .

Notre-Dame-des-Neiges Cemetery .

^ "Queen's Park Mausoleum" .

www.calgary.ca .

External links [ edit ] Look up mausoleum in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mausoleums .

Mausolea and Monuments Trust, gazetteer of mausolea in England Marvelous Mausoleums Around The World – slideshow at The Huffington Post v t e Sufism terminology Sufis Abdal Ahl al-Khutwa Al-Insān al-Kāmil Bash Hezzab Dervish Fakir Hafiz Hezzab Imam Khatib Majzoob Marabout Mudaqiq [ ar ] Muqaddam Muqarrab Murshid Mutahaqiq [ ar ] Murid Nass al-Houdhour Pir Qalandar Qāriʾ Qutb Rabbani Salik Sheikh Siddiq Sufis ranks Talibe The Seven ranks [ ar ] Wali Wasil Concepts Aayane [ ar ] Aayane Thabita [ ar ] Aql Baqaa Dhawq Fana Ghaflah Hal Hijab Huwa Ihsan Ishq Ismul Azam Lataif-e-Sitta Maqam Nafs Qalb Ran Rūḥ Sadr Yaqeen Awrad Dhikr Djamaa [ ar ] Djoua [ ar ] Dua Ibara [ ar ] Ichara [ ar ] Latifa Lazimi Muhasabah Muraqabah Raising hands in Dua Sabr Sahar [ ar ] Salat al-Fatih Salawat Samt [ ar ] Shuhud [ ar ] Shukr Sufism pillars Tafakur Tahara [ ar ] Tahlia [ ar ] Takhlia [ ar ] Tawajud [ ar ] Tawakkul Tawassul Tazkiah Uzla [ ar ] Wajd Wazifa Zarruqiyya Wird Zuhd Waridates Barakah Basirah Bast [ ar ] Djadba [ ar ] Fath [ ar ] Haqiqa Hidayah Ilham Irfan Ishrak Karamat Kashf Khatir Ma'rifa Nūr Qabdh [ ar ] Rabita [ ar ] Ru'ya Secret Tajalli Thawab Uns [ ar ] Walayah Warid Misconducts Antinomianism Rahbaniya Shath Taqabbur Zandaqa Ceremonies Ashura Bay'ah Hadra Hizb Rateb Idjaza Mawlid Mawsim Salka Sbooa [ fr ] Sebiba Silsila Sufi orders Tariqa Tweeza Wezeea Ziyarat Arts Ashewiq [ ar ] Madih nabawi Nasheed Naʽat Qawwali Sama Sufi cosmology Sufism history Sufi literature Sufi metaphysics Sufi music Sufis persecution Sufi philosophy Sufi poetry Sufi psychology Sufi whirling Places Daara Dargah Datuk Keramat Eidgah Gonbad Gongbei Jama masjid Jama'at Khana Khalwa Khalawi Khanqah Külliye Kuttab Madrasa Maqam Maqbara Mausoleum Mazar Mosque Musalla Qubba Rauza Ribat Surau Takya Turbah Türbe Zawiya Objects Ammama Balgha Burnous Djellaba Gandoura Jellabiya Khirqa Misbaha Miswak Prayer rug Qashabiya Tagelmust Taqiyah Tarboosh Turban Portals : Religion Islam Education Psychology Art Architecture Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Korea Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐g8gdq
Cached time: 20250815010746
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.907 seconds
Real time usage: 1.219 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5908/1000000
Revision size: 40360/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 88520/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4217/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 37/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 147076/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.444/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16993459/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  956.303      1 -total
 18.74%  179.198      1 Template:Reflist
 16.50%  157.823      1 Template:Sufism_terminology
 16.20%  154.950      1 Template:Navbox
 11.27%  107.820      1 Template:Langx
  9.52%   91.002      1 Template:Cite_journal
  8.08%   77.222     25 Template:Illm
  6.67%   63.741      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  6.22%   59.451      1 Template:Ambox
  5.74%   54.875     11 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:231168:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815010746 and revision id 1305944782. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mausoleum&oldid=1305944782 " Categories : Mausoleums Burial monuments and structures Hidden categories: Articles containing French-language text CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 01:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mausoleum 75 languages Add topic

