Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Pantheism controversy 1.3 Later life 1.3.1 Atheism dispute 1.3.2 President of Academy of sciences and retirement 2 Influence on his contemporaries Toggle Influence on his contemporaries subsection 2.1 Controversy with Schelling 2.2 Influences on Fichte's 1794 Wissenschaftslehre 3 Philosophical work 4 Reception 5 Works 6 Notes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi 31 languages العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Friedrich Jacobi ) German philosopher, literary figure, and socialite (1743–1819) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi Portrait of Jacobi, sometimes erroneously identified as portrait of Immanuel Kant Born ( 1743-01-25 ) 25 January 1743 Düsseldorf , Electorate of the Palatinate , Holy Roman Empire Died 10 March 1819 (1819-03-10) (aged 76) Munich , Kingdom of Bavaria , German Confederation Children Carl Wigand Maximilian Jacobi Relatives Johann Georg Jacobi (brother) Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School German idealism Main interests Common sense realism , religious philosophy , metaphysics , moral philosophy Notable ideas Glaube , Offenbarung , nihilism Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi ( / dʒ ə ˈ k oʊ b i / ; [ 1 ] German: [jaˈkoːbi] ; 25 January 1743 – 10 March 1819) was a German philosopher, writer and socialite. He is best known for popularizing the concept of nihilism . He promoted the idea that it is the necessary result of Enlightenment thought and the philosophical systems of Baruch Spinoza , Immanuel Kant , Johann Gottlieb Fichte and Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling .

[ 2 ] Jacobi advocated Glaube (variously translated as faith or "belief") and Offenbarung ( revelation ) instead of speculative reason . According to one view, Jacobi can be seen to have anticipated present-day writers who criticize secular philosophy as relativistic and dangerous for religious faith. His aloofness from the Sturm and Drang movement was the basis of a brief friendship with Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . However, belief can also be understood in terms of a commonsense realism or as a proto-phenomenolgical approach to the given, aimed at avoiding the pitfalls of dogmatic foundationism on the one hand and a pure subjectivism on the other. These interpretative debates around Jacobi's thought continue to this day.

He was the younger brother of poet Johann Georg Jacobi and the father of the great psychiatrist Maximilian Jacobi .

Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] He was born at Düsseldorf , the second son of a wealthy sugar merchant, and was educated for a commercial career, which included a brief apprenticeship at a merchant house in Frankfurt-am-Main during 1759. Following, he was sent to Geneva for general education. Jacobi, of a retiring, meditative disposition, associated himself at Geneva mainly with the literary and scientific circle (of which the most prominent member was Georges-Louis Le Sage ).

[ 3 ] He studied  closely the works of Charles Bonnet , as well as the political ideas of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Voltaire . In 1763 he was recalled to Düsseldorf, and in the following year he married Elisbeth von Clermont and took over the management of his father's business.

[ 3 ] After a short time, he gave up his commercial career, and in 1770 he became a member of the council for the duchies of Jülich and Berg.  He distinguished himself by his ability in financial affairs and his zeal in social reform. Jacobi kept up his interest in literary and philosophic matters by an extensive correspondence. His mansion at Pempelfort, near Düsseldorf, was the centre of a distinguished literary circle. He helped to found a new literary journal with Christoph Martin Wieland . Some of his earliest writings, mainly on practical or economic subjects, were published [ 3 ] in Der Teutsche Merkur .

Here too appeared in part the first of his philosophic works, Edward Allwill's Briefsammlung (1776), a combination of romance and speculation. This was followed in 1779 by Woldemar , a philosophic novel, of very imperfect structure, but full of genial ideas, and giving the most complete picture of Jacobi's method of philosophizing.

[ 3 ] In 1779, he visited Munich following his appointment as minister and privy councillor for the Bavarian department of customs and commerce. He opposed the mercantilistic policies of Bavaria and intended to liberalize local customs and taxes; but, after a short stay there, differences with his colleagues and with the authorities of Bavaria , as well as his unwillingness to engage in a power struggle, drove him back to Pempelfort. The experience as well as its aftermath led to the publication of two essays in which Jacobi defended Adam Smith 's theories of political economy . These essays were followed in 1785 by the work which first brought Jacobi into prominence as a philosopher.

[ 3 ] Pantheism controversy [ edit ] Main article: Pantheism controversy Jacobi painting by Johann Friedrich Eich, 1780 A conversation with Gotthold Lessing in 1780 in which Lessing avowed that he knew no philosophy in the true sense of that word, save Spinozism, led him to a protracted study of Spinoza 's works. After Lessing's death, just a couple of months later, Jacobi continued to engage with Spinozism in an exchange of letters with Lessing's close friend Moses Mendelssohn , which began in 1783. These letters, published with commentary by Jacobi as Briefe über die Lehre Spinozas (1785; 2nd ed., much enlarged and with important Appendices, 1789), expressed sharply and clearly Jacobi's strenuous objection to a dogmatic system in philosophy, and drew upon him the vigorous enmity of the Aufklärer .

[ 3 ] Jacobi was ridiculed for trying to reintroduce into philosophy the antiquated notion of unreasoning belief, was denounced as an enemy of reason, as a pietist, and as a Jesuit in disguise, and was especially attacked for his use of the ambiguous term "belief". His next important work, David Hume über den Glauben, oder Idealismus und Realismus (1787), was an attempt to show not only that the term Glaube had been used by the most eminent writers to denote what he had employed it for in the Letters on Spinoza , but that the nature of the cognition of facts as opposed to the construction of inferences could not be otherwise expressed. In this writing, and especially in the Appendix, Jacobi came into contact with the critical philosophy, and subjected the Kantian view of knowledge to searching examination.

[ 3 ] In 1787, Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi addressed, in his book On Faith, or Idealism and Realism, Kant's concept of "thing-in-itself." Jacobi agreed that the objective thing-in-itself cannot be directly known. However, he stated, it must be taken on faith. A subject must believe that there is a real object in the external world that is related to the representation or mental idea that is directly known. This faith or belief is a result of revelation or immediately known, but logically unproved, truth. The real existence of a thing-in-itself is revealed or disclosed to the observing subject. In this way, the subject directly knows the ideal, subjective representations that appear in the mind, and strongly believes in the real, objective thing-in-itself that exists outside of the mind. By presenting the external world as an object of faith, Jacobi legitimized belief and its theological associations.

Schopenhauer would later state: "…[B]y reducing the external world to a matter of faith, he wanted merely to open a little door for faith in general…." [ 4 ] Ironically, the Pantheism Controversy led later German philosophers and writers to take an interest in pantheism and Spinozism . Jacobi's fideism remained unpopular, and instead his critique of Enlightenment rationalism led more German philosophers to explore atheism and wrestle with the perceived loss of philosophical foundations for theism , myth , and morality . Jacobi and the Pantheism Controversy he ignited remain important in European intellectual history, because he formulated (albeit critically) one of the first systematic statements of nihilism and represents an early example of the death of God discourse.

[ 5 ] Later life [ edit ] The Pempelfort era came to an end in 1794 when the French Revolution spilled over into Germany following the outbreak of war with the French Republic. The occupation of Düsseldorf by French Troops forced him to resettle and for nearly ten years live in Holstein. There he became intimately acquainted with Karl Leonhard Reinhold (in whose Beitrage his important work, Uber das Unternehmen des Kriticismus, die Vernunft zu Verstande zu bringen , was first published), and with Matthias Claudius , the editor of the Wandsbecker Bote .

[ 3 ] Atheism dispute [ edit ] Main article: Atheism dispute Gottlieb Fichte was dismissed from Jena in 1799 as a result of a charge of atheism. He was accused of this in 1798, after publishing his essay "Ueber den Grund unsers Glaubens an eine göttliche Weltregierung" ("On the Ground of Our Belief in a Divine World-Governance"), which he had written in response to Friedrich Karl Forberg 's essay "Development of the Concept of Religion", in his Philosophical Journal . For Fichte, God should be conceived primarily in moral terms: "The living and efficaciously acting moral order is itself God. We require no other God, nor can we grasp any other" ("On the Ground of Our Belief in a Divine World-Governance"). Fichte's intemperate "Appeal to the Public" ("Appellation an das Publikum", 1799) as well as a more thoughtful response entitled “From a Private Letter” (1799), provoked F. H. Jacobi to publish Letter to Fichte (1799), in which he equated philosophy in general and Fichte's transcendental philosophy in particular with nihilism and the relation of his own philosophic principles to theology .

[ 6 ] President of Academy of sciences and retirement [ edit ] Soon after his return to Germany, Jacobi received a call to Munich in connection with the new academy of sciences just founded there. The loss of a considerable portion of his fortune induced him to accept this offer; he settled in Munich in 1804, and in 1807 became president of the academy.

[ 3 ] In 1811 appeared his last philosophic work, directed against Friedrich Schelling specially ( Von den göttlichen Dingen und ihrer Offenbarung ), the first part of which, a review of the Wandsbecker Bote , had been written in 1798. A bitter reply from Schelling was left without answer by Jacobi, but gave rise to an animated controversy in which Fries and Baader took prominent part.

[ 3 ] In 1812 Jacobi retired from the office of president, and began to prepare a collected edition of his works. He died before this was completed. The edition of his writings was continued by his friend F. Koppen, and was completed in 1825. The works fill six volumes, of which the fourth is in three parts. To the second is prefixed an introduction by Jacobi, which is at the same time an introduction to his philosophy. The fourth volume has also an important preface.

[ 3 ] Influence on his contemporaries [ edit ] Controversy with Schelling [ edit ] Jacobi and Schelling knew each other before the controversy. After being anointed as the president of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences ( Bavarian Akademie der Wissenschaften ), Jacobi worked along with Schelling as colleagues.

[ 7 ] As illustrated above, a great portion of Jacobi's work focused on opposing the Spinozist pantheism as well as fatalism . From Jacobi's perspective, Schelling, his colleague as well as one of the most viral philosophers at that time, matches his criteria of pantheism perfectly. Jacobi holds a viewpoint that the Naturphilosophie of Schelling is essentially a philosophy without the transcendental realm: everything emerges from a unconditional nature ( natura naturans ), which leads to a conclusion that God is nature that is graspable by human reason , while not the "total other" in Christian traditions; in the meantime, the realm of faith, which is the central conception that Jacobi intended to restore, is faded in Schelling's rationalism .

[ 7 ] Jacobi consequently published On the Divine Things (Von den göttlichen Dingen) in 1811, initiated the controversy towards Schelling. In this treatise, Jacobi condemns Schelling for he eliminates the freedom of God by integrating God into nature, whilst nature is a "whole" ( Ganzes ) that is manipulated by logical necessity or causality. According Christian tradition, God ought to be totally independent of all necessity. As for himself, Jacobi insists that the freedom of God manifests itself when God is acting as a ultimate cause, that operates free action ( handlung ), instead of being framed in logical necessity (nature, in this context).

[ 8 ] Correspondingly, Schelling responded Jacobi by his last publication Denkmal in next year. The way Schelling defended himself is re-emphasize his idea in his 1809 Philosophical Inquiries into the Essence of Human Freedom ( Freiheitschrift ). According to Schelling, the relationship between God and nature must be taken account to philosophy, or it will leave "an unnatural God and a godless nature".

[ 9 ] In other words, Schelling's reaction based on this viewpoint: freedom does not expel necessity but contains it. Schelling holds a quite Kantian position , claiming that freedom implies self-determination while not merely actions. Therefore, freedom does not present itself on actions, but on the obedience to certain rules that is not imposed from outside, but from within. To Schelling, since these rules emerge without the interference from outside, this is the indication of self-determinance of the nature, namely, freedom; additionally, it is this self-determinance that made freedom actions emphasized by Jacobi possible. In other words, in Schelling's discourse, freedom and necessity do not essentially expel each other, rather, freedom and necessity are ultimately one.

[ 8 ] Jacobi responded Schelling's self-defense in 1815, however, they did not reach any immediate result, because Jacobi died a few years later. Nonetheless, Schelling moved on to the construction of his late philosophy of revelation and mythology, whereas reflected his early system and reconsidered the value of Jacobi's thought--in his 1833 lectures on modern philosophy, and recognized him as a pioneer of the "positive philosophy".

[ 7 ] As Schelling notes [ 10 ] , As such he [Jacobi] is perhaps the most instructive personality in the
whole history of modern philosophy.

— Friedrich Schelling, Jacobi and Theosophy, On The History of Modern Philosophy Influences on Fichte's 1794 Wissenschaftslehre [ edit ] Although J.G. Fichte never directly mentioned Jacobi's name or cited his work in 1794 version of Wissenschaftslehre , according to Wood, Fichte's work in fact explicitly expresses some proximity to Jacobi's thought.

[ 11 ] In Jacobi's 1785 work On the teachings of Spinoza in letters to Moses Mendelssohn ( Über die Lehre des Spinoza in Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendelssohn ), he declared [ 12 ] Denn wir empfinden doch nur unseren Körper, so oder anders beschaffen; und indem wir ihn so oder anders beschaffen fühlen, werden wir nicht allein seine Veränderungen, sondern noch etwas davon ganz verschiedenes, das weder bloß Empfindung noch Gedanke ist, andre würkliche Dinge gewahr, und zwar mit | eben der Gewißheit, mit der wir uns selbst gewahr werden; denn ohne Du, ist das Ich unmöglich.

For we only feel our body, one way or another; and by feeling it is created in one way or another, we will not only perceive its changes, but something quite different from it, which is neither mere sensation nor thought, aware of other things, and with the very certainty with which we become self-aware; for without Thou, the I is impossible.

— Friedrich Jacobi, Über die Lehre des Spinoza Here the structure we observed from Jacobi's text could be summurized as following: we as beings who possess "I", only manifest the "I" (namely, selfhood) when encounters Thou, that is the "other" surrounds us. Only when we encounter something other than ourselves, our sense of "self" could be confirmed. Hence, we may perceive a nexus and mutual dependency between I and Thou: I always come first, and then Thou confirms the existence of it.

This pair of reflective determination echoes Fichte's work. In his 1794 Foundations of Science of Knowledge ( Grundlage der gesamten Wissenschaftslehre ), Fichte adopted a methodology that he called "synthetic method". In the context of Foundations , it presents itself in a mode of " thesis-antithesis-synthesis ": "I" is absolutely posited at first, and then "Not-I" is posited as the antithesis of the former. Nevertheless, this process would be incomplete if it lacks the final step of synthesis. The synthesis method guarantees the relations between I and Not-I. In Fichtean discourse, this may possibly contain interpersonal relationships.

[ 11 ] Here we could tell the similarity between Jacobi and Fichte: Thou as in Jacobi's work is basically replaced by "Not-I" in Fichte's work. Even though Fichte never shown his source of idea, in a letter from him to Jacobi in April 1796, he expressed his appreciation of alignment between him and Jacobi. This could be seen as an evidence that Fichte's theory is inspired by Jacobi to a great extent.

Jacobi's influence on Fichte is more explicit and openly admitted by Fichte himself on the topic of certainty and faith. Still, in Jacobi's Spinoza text, he wrote: [ 12 ] Wie können wir nach Gewißheit streben, wenn uns Gewißheit nicht zum voraus schon bekannt ist; und wie kann sie uns bekannt sein, anders als durch etwas das wir mit Gewißheit schon erkennen? Dieses führt zu dem Begriffe einer unmittelbaren Gewißheit, welche nicht allein keiner Gründe bedarf, sondern schlechterdings alle Gründe ausschließt, und einzig und allein die mit dem vorgestellten Dinge übereinstimmende Vorstellung selbst ist.

How can we strive for certainty if certainty is not already known to us in advance; and how can it be known to us other than through something we already know with certainty? This leads to the concept of an immediate certainty, which not only requires no reasons, but simply excludes all reasons, and is the only idea itself that agrees with the thing presented.

— Friedrich Jacobi, Über die Lehre des Spinoza To Jacobi, the concept he chosen to put in the position of unconditional certainty is God. By means of this presuppostion, Jacobi leaves room for faith in his philosophy, whereas this element already dissolved in reason in many proceeding philosophers. This move prevents, at least from Jacobi's point of view back in the time, the ontological infinite regress . Fichte adopted the same strategy as well.

[ 11 ] In §1 of the Foundations, Fichte stated [ 13 ] : ...[H]uman beings must possess some truth that neither 
can nor needs to be proven and from which all other truths can be derived. If not, then there is no truth at all, and we are driven into an infinite regress.

— J.G. Fichte, Foundations of Transcendental Philosophy As we shall tell from the use of certain terms, Fichte concerned the same topic with Jacobi. Furthermore, this proximity in ways of searching for unconditional ontological foundation was directly acknowledged by Fichte [ 14 ] : Auch darüber hätten sie sich bei ]acobi belehren können, welcher diesen Punkt, sowie noch viele andere Punkte, von denen sie gleichfalls nichts wissen, völlig ins reine gebracht.

They could also have learned about this at Jacobi, which brought this point, as well as many other points, of which they also know nothing, completely in the clear.

— J.G. Fichte, Zweite Einleitung in die Wissenschaftslehre, Versuch einer neuen Darstellung der Wissenschaftslehre (1797/98) Philosophical work [ edit ] Jacobi's philosophy is essentially unsystematic. A fundamental view which underlies all his thinking is brought to bear in succession upon those systematic doctrines which appear to stand most sharply in contradiction to it, and any positive philosophic results are given only occasionally. The leading idea of the whole is that of the complete separation between understanding [comprehension] and apprehension of real fact. For Jacobi, Understanding, or the logical faculty, is purely formal or elaborative, and its results never transcend the given material supplied to it. From the basis of immediate experience or perception thought proceeds by comparison and abstraction, establishing connections among facts, but remaining in its nature mediate and finite.

[ 3 ] The principle of reason and consequent, the necessity of thinking each given fact of perception as conditioned, impels understanding towards an endless series of identical propositions, the records of successive comparisons and abstractions. The province of the understanding is therefore strictly the region of the conditioned; to it the world must present itself as a mechanism . If, then, there is objective truth at all, the existence of real facts must be made known to us otherwise than through the logical faculty of thought; and, as the regress from conclusion to premises must depend upon something not itself capable of logical grounding, mediate thought implies the consciousness of immediate truth.

[ 3 ] It is impossible that there should be a God, for if so he would of necessity be finite. But a finite God, a God that is known, is no God. It is impossible that there should be liberty, for if so the mechanical order of phenomena, by means of which they are comprehensible, would be disturbed, and we should have an unintelligible world, coupled with the requirement that it shall be understood. Cognition, then, in the strict sense, occupies the middle place between sense perception, which is belief in matters of sense, and reason, which is belief in supersensuous fact.

[ 3 ] The passage presents a one-sided portrayal of Jacobi, emphasizing his advocacy for Glaube (faith or belief) and revelation over speculative reason while aligning him with contemporary critics of secular philosophy. However, this interpretation is reductive and lacks nuance. Jacobi's philosophical contributions cannot be reduced to a binary opposition between faith and reason; his work also engaged deeply with Enlightenment thought, challenging its premises without wholly rejecting its intellectual rigor.

For instance, while Jacobi critiqued pure rationalism, he did not dismiss reason outright but rather sought to balance it with other dimensions of human experience. This nuanced position is often overlooked, leading to an oversimplified narrative that portrays him as solely a precursor to modern critiques of secularism. Moreover, the passage's selective emphasis on his relationships—such as his brief friendship with Goethe or his familial connections—overshadows the complexity of his philosophical legacy.

A more balanced account would acknowledge not only Jacobi's critique of Enlightenment rationalism but also his contributions to existential questions and his influence on thinkers like Kierkegaard. By omitting these facets, the text risks portraying Jacobi as an emblem of anti-secularism rather than as a multifaceted thinker grappling with the tensions between reason, faith, and revelation.

Reception [ edit ] According to Stefan Schick, Jacobi was always "defamed as an apologist of religious faith and an enemy of reason" in both the 19th and 20th century. It was not until 1990s and 2000s, that the work of scholars such as Dieter Henrich , and specially Birgit Sandkaulen in her book Grund und Ursache (2000) revitalized the systematic reading of Jacobi for the first time. Moreover influential works such as Frederick Beiser 's Fate of Reason (1987) still portray Jacobi as an anti-enlightenment, religious thinker.

[ 15 ] Works [ edit ] Early essays in Der Teutsche Merkur . Available online .

Edward Allwill’s Briefsammlung (1781).

Etwas das Lessing gesagt hat (1782).

Werke , vol. 2, pp. 325-388 .

Über die Lehre des Spinoza in Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendelssohn (1785). 2nd edition, 1789.

NYPL .

Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi wider Mendelssohns Beschuldigungen betreffend die Briefe über die Lehre des Spinoza (1786).

Oxford .

David Hume über den Glauben, oder Idealismus und Realismus (1787).

University of Lausanne .

Woldemar (1794). 2 volumes.

Oxford . 2nd edition, 1796.

NYPL .

Jacobi an Fichte (1799).

University of Michigan . Text 1799/1816, Italian Translation, 3 Appendices with Jacobi's and Fichte's complementary Texts, Commentary by A. Acerbi): La Scuola di Pitagora, Naples 2017, ISBN 978-88-6542-553-4 .

Ueber das Unternehmen des Kriticismus (1801).

Werke , vol. 3, pp. 59-195 .

Ueber Gelehrte Gesellschaften, ihren Geist und Zweck (1807).

Harvard .

Von den göttlichen Dingen und ihrer Offenbarung (1811).

University of California .

Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi's Werke (1812–1825).

Volume 1 , 1812.

Harvard ; NYPL ; University of Michigan ; University of Michigan (Morris) .

Volume 2 , 1815.

Harvard ; NYPL ; University of Michigan ; University of Michigan (Morris) .

Volume 3 , 1816.

Harvard ; NYPL ; University of Michigan ; University of Michigan (Morris) .

Volume 4 , 1819.

Harvard .

Parts 1 & 2 : Oxford ; University of Michigan (Morris) .

Part 1 .

NYPL ; University of Michigan .

Part 2 .

NYPL ; University of Michigan .

Part 3 .

NYPL ; University of Michigan (Morris) .

Volume 5 , 1820.

Harvard ; NYPL ; University of Michigan ; University of Michigan (Morris) .

Volume 6 , 1825.

NYPL ; University of Michigan (Morris) .

Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi's auserlesener Briefwechsel (1825–27). 2 volumes.

Volume 1 , 1825.

Harvard ; University of Michigan .

Volume 2 , 1827.

Harvard ; University of Michigan .

Notes [ edit ] ^ "Jacobi" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 15 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

115– 116.

^ Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation , Vol. II, Ch. I ^ Josephson-Storm, Jason (2017).

The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and the Birth of the Human Sciences . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

69– 74.

ISBN 978-0-226-40336-6 .

^ "Johann Gottlieb Fichte" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 30 August 2001 . Retrieved 20 February 2024 .

^ a b c McGrath, Sean J. (2023). "6 - The Jacobi–Schelling Debate". In Hampton, Alexander J. B. (ed.).

Friedrich Jacobi and the end of the enlightenment: religion, philosophy, and reason at the crux of modernity . Cambridge ; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. pp.

104– 123.

ISBN 978-1-009-24494-7 .

^ a b Jacobs, Wilhelm G. (2021). "Das Wesen der Freiheit in der Auseinandersetzung zwischen Jacobi und Schelling". In Cornelia Ortlieb, Friedrich Vollhardt (ed.).

Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi (1743-1819): Romancier - Philosoph - Politiker . Werkprofile. Berlin Boston (Mass.): De Gruyter. pp.

207– 219.

ISBN 978-3-11-072724-1 .

^ Schelling, F.W.J. (1860). "Denkmal der Schrift von den göttlichen Dingen, etc. des Herrn Friederich Heinrich Jacobi und der ihm in derselben gemachten Beschuldigung eines absichtlich täuschenden, Lügen redenden Atheismus.". In Schelling, K.F.A (ed.).

Sämtliche Werke . Vol. 8. Stuttgart: Cotta. pp.

19– 138.

^ Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von (1994).

On the history of modern philosophy . Texts in German philosophy. Translated by Bowie, Andrew. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-40861-5 .

^ a b c Wood, David W. (2023). "13 - Jacobi's Philosophy of Faith in Fichte's 1794 Wissenschaftslehre". In Hampton, Alexander J.B. (ed.).

Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi and the ends of the enlightenment: religion, philosophy, and reason at the crux of modernity . Cambridge New York (N.Y.): Cambridge University press. pp.

245– 266.

ISBN 978-1-009-24494-7 .

^ a b Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich (2004).

Über die Lehre des Spinoza . Philosophische Bibliothek (Unverändertes eBook der 1. Aufl. von 2004 ed.). Hamburg: Meiner, F.

ISBN 978-3-7873-1706-6 .

^ Fichte, Johann Gottlieb; Breazeale, Daniel; Breazeale, Daniel (2018).

Fichte: Foundations of Transcendental Philosophy (Wissenschaftslehre) Nova Methodo (1796-99) . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-2767-1 .

^ Fichte, Johann Gottlieb; Baumanns, Peter (1984). Baumanns, Peter (ed.).

Versuch einer neuen Darstellung der Wissenschaftslehre: Vorerinnerung, Erste und Zweite Einleitung, Erstes Kapitel (1797/98) . Philosophische Bibliothek (Unverändertes eBook der 2. verb. Aufl. von 2014 ed.). Hamburg: Meiner, F.

ISBN 978-3-7873-0612-1 .

^ Schick, Stefan (9 December 2024).

"Birgit Sandkaulen, The Philosophy of Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi: On the Contradiction between System and Freedom (Bloomsbury Studies in Modern German Philosophy), translated by Matt Erlin. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2023. ISBN 978-1-350-23571-7. Pp. 280. Hardback 90.00 Pound, Paperback 28.99 Pound, Ebook 26.09 Pound" .

Hegel Bulletin : 1– 5.

doi : 10.1017/hgl.2024.48 .

ISSN 2051-5367 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi .

Works by or about Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi at the Internet Archive Works by Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) "Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Carl von Prantl (1881). " Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich ".

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 13. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

577– 584.

Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, George Di Giovanni (1994).

"The Main Philosophical Writings and the Novel Allwill" . McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP, .

ISBN 0-7735-1018-4 .

"Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich" .

Encyclopedia Americana . 1920.

"Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

"Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich" .

The American Cyclopædia . 1879.

v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Order of the Illuminati History Age of Enlightenment Liberalism ( Liberalism in Germany ) Rationalism Freemasonry ( Freemasonry in Germany ) Anti-clericalism Secularism French Revolution ( Jacobinism ) Congress of Wilhelmsbad Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria Members Full list of members A–F Jacob Friedrich von Abel Franz von Albini August von Sachsen-Gotha-Altenburg Jens Baggesen Karl Friedrich Bahrdt Aloys Basselet von La Rosée August Batsch Rudolph Zacharias Becker Johann Joachim Bellermann Johann Erich Biester Aloys Blumauer Johann von Böber Johann Joachim Christoph Bode Johann Michael Böck Ignaz von Born Karl Böttiger Joachim Heinrich Campe Christian Cannabich Karl August, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach Philipp von Cobenzl Hieronymus von Colloredo Ignaz Cornova Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg Anton Dereser Johann Georg von Dillis Christian Wilhelm von Dohm Karl von Eckartshausen Rudolf Eickemeyer Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg Johann Georg Heinrich Feder Ferdinand, Prince of Brunswick-Lüneburg Junius Frey Frederick Christian II, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg Frederick V, Landgrave of Hesse-Homburg Friedrich Ferdinand Constantin von Sachsen-Weimar-Eisenach G–M Christian Garve Friedrich Gedike Otto Heinrich von Gemmingen-Hornberg Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Leopold Friedrich Günther von Goeckingk Johann Casimir Häffelin Karl August von Hardenberg Lorenz Leopold Haschka August Adolph von Hennings Johann Gottfried Herder Andreas Joseph Hofmann Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland Gottlieb Hufeland Isaak Iselin Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi Karl von Hesse-Kassel Wenzel Anton, Prince of Kaunitz-Rietberg Martin Gottlieb Klauer Johann Friedrich Kleuker Adolph Knigge Christian Gottfried Körner Karl Heinrich Lang Franz Michael Leuchsenring Justus Christian Loder Ludwig I, Grand Duke of Hesse Jakob Mauvillon Beda Mayr Christoph Meiners August Gottlieb Meißner Ludwig August Mellin Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau Daniel Gotthilf Moldenhawer Maximilian von Montgelas Johannes von Müller Friedrich Münter Johann Karl August Musäus N–Z Christian Gottlob Neefe Christoph Friedrich Nicolai Franz Oberthür Dietrich Heinrich Ludwig von Ompteda Christian Adolph Overbeck Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi Karl Leonhard Reinhold Franz Anton Ries Christian Gotthilf Salzmann Friedrich Schlichtegroll Johann Georg Schlosser Ernst Friedrich von Schlotheim Nikolaus Simrock Samuel Thomas von Sömmerring Joseph von Sonnenfels Ludwig Timotheus Spittler Anton Matthias Sprickmann Johan Philip Stadion von Warthausen Maximilian Stoll Gottfried van Swieten Johann Nepomuk von Triva François-Charles de Velbrück Franz Michael Vierthaler Wilderich of Walderdorf Adam Weishaupt Lorenz von Westenrieder Franz Xaver von Zach See also Owl of Minerva Rite of Strict Observance Josephinism Enlightened absolutism Weimar Classicism Sturm und Drang Anti-Catholicism New World Order (conspiracy theory) Augustin Barruel 's Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism John Robison Illuminati in popular culture Category Society portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hj8fc
Cached time: 20250817051127
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.958 seconds
Real time usage: 1.230 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5762/1000000
Revision size: 35903/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 210034/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10638/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 101852/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.649/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20475749/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1063.551      1 -total
 20.76%  220.816      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 14.99%  159.424      1 Template:Reflist
 10.26%  109.084      1 Template:IPA
  9.63%  102.384      1 Template:Age_of_Enlightenment
  9.42%  100.219      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  6.69%   71.122      1 Template:Short_description
  5.96%   63.400      1 Template:Birth_date
  5.84%   62.127      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  5.63%   59.829      1 Template:Commonscat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:204022:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051127 and revision id 1290923678. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Heinrich_Jacobi&oldid=1290923678 " Categories : 1743 births 1819 deaths Writers from Düsseldorf 19th-century German writers 19th-century German male writers 18th-century German novelists 18th-century German philosophers German Protestants People from Berg (state) Members of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences German male novelists Spinoza scholars 19th-century German philosophers German idealists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages with German IPA Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Use dmy dates from August 2019 This page was last edited on 17 May 2025, at 23:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi 31 languages Add topic

