Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Development 3 Horticultural considerations 4 Gallery 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Taproot 37 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Latina മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dominant root from which other roots sprout laterally / horizontal This article is about the plant root system. For other uses, see Taproot (disambiguation) .

The two types of root systems in plants. The fibrous-root system (A) is characterized by many roots with similar sizes. In contrast, plants that use the taproot system (B) grow a main root, with smaller roots branching off. The letters indicate where the root systems begin.

A taproot is a large, central, and dominant root from which other roots sprout laterally / horizontal . Typically a taproot is somewhat straight and very thick, is tapering in shape, and grows directly downward.

[ 1 ] In some plants, such as the carrot , the taproot is a storage organ so well developed that it has been cultivated as a vegetable.

The taproot system contrasts with the adventitious- or fibrous-root system of plants with many branched roots, but many plants that grow a taproot during germination go on to develop branching root structures, although some that rely on the main root for storage may retain the dominant taproot for centuries—for example, Welwitschia .

Description [ edit ] A dandelion taproot (left) with the rest of the plant (right) Dicots , one of the two divisions of flowering plants (angiosperms), start with a taproot, [ 2 ] which is one main root forming from the enlarging radicle of the seed. The tap root can be persistent throughout the life of the plant but is most often replaced later in the plant's development by a fibrous root system.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] A persistent taproot system forms when the radicle keeps growing and smaller lateral roots form along the taproot.
The shape of taproots can vary but the typical shapes include: Conical root: this type of root tuber is conical in shape, i.e. widest at the top and tapering steadily towards the bottom: e.g.

carrot .

Fusiform root: this root is widest in the middle and tapers towards the top and the bottom: e.g.

radish .

Napiform root: the root has a top -like appearance. It is very broad at the top and tapers suddenly like a tail at the bottom: e.g.

turnip .

The edible, orange part of the carrot is its taproot Many taproots are modified into storage organs .
Some plants with taproots: Beetroot Burdock Carrot Sugar beet Dandelion Parsley Parsnip Poppy mallow Radish Sagebrush Turnip Common milkweed trees such as oaks , elms , pines and firs Development [ edit ] Taproots develop from the radicle of a seed, forming the primary root. It branches off to secondary roots, which in turn branch to form tertiary roots. These may further branch to form rootlets. For most plants species the radicle dies some time after seed germination, causing the development of a fibrous root system, which lacks a main downward-growing root. Most trees begin life with a taproot, [ 3 ] but after one to a few years the main root system changes to a wide-spreading fibrous root system with mainly horizontal-growing surface roots and only a few vertical, deep-anchoring roots. A typical mature tree 30–50 m tall has a root system that extends horizontally in all directions as far as the tree is tall or more, but as much as 100% of the roots are in the top 50 cm of soil.

Soil characteristics strongly influence the architecture of taproots; for example, deep and rich soils favour the development of vertical taproots in many oak species such as Quercus kelloggii , while clay soils promote the growth of multiple taproots.

[ 4 ] Horticultural considerations [ edit ] This section includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this section by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Many plants with taproots are difficult to transplant , or even to grow in containers, because the root tends to grow deep rapidly and in many species comparatively slight obstacles or damage to the taproot will stunt or kill the plant. Among weeds with taproots dandelions are typical; being deep-rooted, they are hard to uproot and if the taproot breaks off near the top, the part that stays in the ground often resprouts such that, for effective control, the taproot needs to be severed at least several centimetres below ground level.

Gallery [ edit ] A tree taproot A taproot References [ edit ] ^ "Botany Manual" .

Ohio State University . Archived from the original on 2004-08-06.

^ a b James D. Mauseth (2009).

Botany: an introduction to plant biology . Jones & Bartlett Learning. pp. 145–.

ISBN 978-0-7637-5345-0 . Retrieved 28 September 2010 .

^ a b Linda Berg; Linda R. Berg (23 March 2007).

Introductory Botany: Plants, People, and the Environment . Cengage Learning. pp. 112–.

ISBN 978-0-534-46669-5 . Retrieved 28 September 2010 .

^ C. Michael Hogan (2008). N. Stromberg (ed.).

"Quercus kelloggii" .

Globaltwitcher.com . Archived from the original on 2009-09-24 . Retrieved 2008-10-17 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Taproots .

"Deep-rooted Plants Have Much Greater Impact On Climate Than Experts Thought" .

Sciencedaily . 2006-01-13.

The tap roots transfer rainwater from the surface to reservoirs deep underground and redistribute water... increases photosynthesis and the evaporation of water... by 40 percent in the dry season ... During the wet season, these plants can store as much as 10 percent of the annual precipitation as deep as 13 meters (43 feet) underground, to be tapped during the dry months... tree roots acting like pipes to allow water to shift around much faster than it could otherwise percolate through the soil .

Fullerton Arboretum on taproots Archived 2008-03-08 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taproot&oldid=1306212612 " Category : Plant roots Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Commons link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 14:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Taproot 37 languages Add topic

