Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Theophylact Simocatta 38 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Early 7th-century Byzantine historian This article is about the historian. For the bishop and biblical commentator of the same name, see Theophylact of Ohrid .

Theophylact Simocatta ( Byzantine Greek : Θεοφύλακτος Σιμοκάτ(τ)ης Theophýlaktos Simokát(t)ēs ; Latin : Theophylactus Simocatta ) [ 1 ] was an early seventh-century Byzantine historiographer, arguably ranking as the last historian of Late Antiquity , writing in the time of Heraclius (c. 630) about the late Emperor Maurice (582–602).

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Byzantine Emperor Heraclius receiving the submission of the Sassanid king Khosrau II – during Simocatta's times (plaque from a cross. Champlevé enamel over gilt copper, 1160–1170, Meuse Valley). Housed at the Louvre .

Simocatta is best known as the author of History , a work split into eight books, about the reign of the emperor Maurice (582–602), for which period he is the best and oldest authority. Though his work is of lesser stature than that of Procopius and his self-consciously classicizing style is pompous, he is an important source of information concerning the seventh-century Slavs , the Avars and the Persians , and the emperor's tragic end.

[ 3 ] He mentions the war of Heraclius against the Persians (610–628), but not that against the Arabs (beginning 629), so it is likely that he was writing around 630. Among his sources he used the history of John of Epiphania .

Edward Gibbon wrote: His want of judgement renders him diffuse in trifles and concise in the most interesting facts.

[ 4 ] This notwithstanding, Simocatta's general trustworthiness is admitted. The history contains an introduction in the form of a dialogue between History and Philosophy .

Nicolaus Copernicus translated Greek verses by Theophylact into Latin prose and had his translation, dedicated to his uncle Lucas Watzenrode , published in Kraków in 1509 by Johann Haller . It was the only book that Copernicus ever brought out on his own account.

[ 5 ] Simocatta was also the author of Physical Problems , a work on natural history , [ 6 ] and of a collection of 85 essays in epistolary form.

[ 7 ] In regards to the Far East, Simocatta wrote a generally accurate depiction of the reunification of China by Emperor Wen (r. 581–604 AD) of the Sui dynasty , with the conquest of the rival Chen dynasty in southern China , correctly placing these events within the reign period of Byzantine ruler Maurice .

[ 8 ] Simocatta also provided cursory information about the geography of China along with its customs and culture , deeming its people "idolatrous" but wise in governance.

[ 8 ] He also related how the ruler was named Taisson , the meaning of which was "Son of God", possibly derived from Chinese Tianzi ( Son of Heaven , a title of the emperor of China ) or even the name of the contemporaneous ruler Emperor Taizong of Tang .

[ 9 ] Works [ edit ] Quaestiones physicae , 1597 Quaestiones physicae (in Latin). Leiden: Jan Paedts Jacobszoon. 1597.

Theophylact Simocatta.

The History of Theophylact Simocatta - An English Translation with Introduction and Notes . Translated by Michael Whitby; Mary Whitby.

Notes [ edit ] ^ "Snub-nosed cat". Other forms of the name are Simocattos and Simocatos .

^ J.D.C. Frendo, "History and Panegyric in the Age of Heraclius: The Literary Background to the Composition of the 'Histories' of Theophylact Simocatta", Dumbarton Oaks Papers , 1988.

^ Important editions published in 1609, ed. pr. by J. Pontanus , and C.G. de Boor in 1887.

^ E. Gibbon, The History Of The Decline And Fall Of The Roman Empire , The Folio Society (1997), s.v. "Simocatta" .

^ Angus Armitage, The World of Copernicus , pp. 75–77.

^ Cf. ed. J. Ideler in Physici et medici Graeci minores , i. 1841.

^ The best edition is published in the prestigious Bibliotheca Teubneriana : Zanetto, Ioseph [Giuseppe] (1985). "Theophylacti Simocatae epistulae" [The Letters of Theophylactus Simocata].

Bibliotheca Scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana (in Greek and Latin). Leipzig: BSB B.G. Teubner Verlagsgesellschaft.

ISSN 0233-1160 .

The letters were translated into Latin by Copernicus in 1509, reprinted in 1873 by F. Hipler in Spicilegium Copernicanum . See also Zanetto, Giuseppe (2013). "Romanzo greco ed epistolografia: il caso di Teofilatto Simocatta".

Lettere, mimesi, retorica: studi sull'epistolografia letteraria greca di età imperiale e tardoantica . Lecce–Brescia: Pensa Multimedia. pp.

469– 491.

ISBN 978-88-6760-097-7 .

^ a b Yule (1915), pp 29-31.

^ Yule (1915), p. 29, footnote #4.

References [ edit ] Michael and Mary Whitby, translators, The History of Theophylact Simocatta: An English Translation with Introduction , Oxford University Press, 1986, ISBN 0-19-822799-X , 9780198227991 Angus Armitage, The World of Copernicus , New York, Mentor Books, 1947.

Yule, Henry (1915). Henri Cordier (ed.), Cathay and the Way Thither: Being a Collection of Medieval Notices of China, Vol I: Preliminary Essay on the Intercourse Between China and the Western Nations Previous to the Discovery of the Cape Route . London: Hakluyt Society. Accessed 21 September 2016.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Simocatta, Theophylact ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 124.

External links [ edit ] Whitby, Michael (2015).

"Theophylact Simocatta" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica .

Greek Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes Raw Greek OCR of Carl de Boor's Teubner edition Theophylacti Simocattae Historiae (1887) from the Lace collection at Mount Allison University .

v t e Byzantine historians 5th century Annianus of Alexandria Eunapius John Rufus Malchus Olympiodorus of Thebes Panodorus of Alexandria Philostorgius Priscus Sabinus of Heraclea Socrates of Constantinople Sozomen Theodoret 6th century Agathias Cyril of Scythopolis Eustathius of Epiphania Evagrius Scholasticus Hesychius of Miletus John Diakrinomenos John of Ephesus John of Epiphania Pseudo-Joshua the Stylite Pseudo-Zacharias Rhetor Jordanes John Malalas Liberatus of Carthage Marcellinus Comes Menander Protector Nonnosus Peter the Patrician Procopius Theodorus Lector Theophanes of Byzantium Zacharias Rhetor Zosimus 7th century John of Antioch Trajan the Patrician Theophylact Simocatta 8th century Hippolytus of Thebes 9th century Theophanes the Confessor George Syncellus Nikephoros I of Constantinople George Hamartolos Scriptor Incertus 10th century Constantine VII Joseph Genesius John Kaminiates Leo the Deacon Pseudo-Simeon Symeon Logothete Theophanes Continuatus 11th century Michael Attaleiates George Kedrenos Michael Psellos John Skylitzes John Xiphilinus Yahya of Antioch 12th century Nikephoros Bryennios the Younger Niketas Choniates Eustathius of Thessalonica Michael Glykas Anna Komnene John Kinnamos Constantine Manasses Joannes Zonaras 13th century George Akropolites Theodore Skoutariotes 14th century Nicephorus Gregoras Nikephoros Kallistos Xanthopoulos John VI Kantakouzenos George Pachymeres Michael Panaretos 15th century John Anagnostes John Cananus Laonikos Chalkokondyles Michael Critobulus Doukas George Sphrantzes Pseudo-George Kodinos v t e Nicolaus Copernicus Scientific career Copernican heliocentrism Copernican Revolution Works Commentariolus De revolutionibus orbium coelestium Locationes mansorum desertorum " Monetae cudendae ratio " Translations of Theophylact Simocatta Family Lucas Watzenrode the Elder (grandfather) Lucas Watzenrode (uncle) Related Scientific Revolution Nicolaus Copernicus Gesamtausgabe Copernicus law Copernican principle Frombork Cathedral Astronomer Copernicus, or Conversations with God Monuments Chicago Los Angeles Montreal Toruń Kraków Warsaw Copernicium Copernicus (lunar crater) Copernicus (Martian crater) Films Copernicus Copernicus' Star Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain 2 3 Netherlands 2 Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican 2 3 Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theophylact_Simocatta&oldid=1253280256 " Categories : 7th-century Byzantine historians Nicolaus Copernicus Hidden categories: CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 25 October 2024, at 05:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theophylact Simocatta 38 languages Add topic

