Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 History 3 Gene pool concept in crop breeding 4 Gene pool centres 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Gene pool 47 languages العربية বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latviešu Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of all genes in a population For the guitarist named Gene Pool, see Greg Flesch .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Gene pool" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The gene pool is the set of all genes , or genetic information , in any population , usually of a particular species .

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] A large gene pool indicates extensive genetic diversity , which is associated with robust populations that can survive bouts of intense selection . Meanwhile, low genetic diversity (see inbreeding and population bottlenecks ) can cause reduced biological fitness and an increased chance of extinction , although as explained by genetic drift new genetic variants, that may cause an increase in the fitness of organisms, are more likely to fix in the population if it is rather small.

When all individuals in a population are identical with regard to a particular phenotypic trait, the population is said to be 'monomorphic'. When the individuals show several variants of a particular trait they are said to be polymorphic .

History [ edit ] The Russian geneticist Alexander Sergeevich Serebrovsky first formulated the concept in the 1920s as genofond (gene fund), a word that was imported to the United States from the Soviet Union by Theodosius Dobzhansky , who translated it into English as "gene pool." [ 2 ] Gene pool concept in crop breeding [ edit ] Harlan and de Wet (1971) proposed classifying each crop and its related species by gene pools rather than by formal taxonomy.

[ 3 ] Primary gene pool (GP-1): Members of this gene pool are probably in the same " species " (in conventional biological usage) and can intermate freely. Harlan and de Wet wrote, "Among forms of this gene pool, crossing is easy; hybrids are generally fertile with good chromosome pairing; gene segregation is approximately normal and gene transfer is generally easy.".

[ 3 ] They also advised subdividing each crop gene pool in two: Subspecies A: Cultivated races Subspecies B: Spontaneous races (wild or weedy) Secondary gene pool (GP-2): Members of this pool are probably normally classified as different species than the crop species under consideration (the primary gene pool). However, these species are closely related and can cross and produce at least some fertile hybrids. As would be expected by members of different species, there are some reproductive barriers between members of the primary and secondary gene pools: hybrids may be weak hybrids may be partially sterile chromosomes may pair poorly or not at all recovery of desired phenotypes may be difficult in subsequent generations However, "The gene pool is available to be utilized, however, if the plant breeder or geneticist is willing to put out the effort required." [ 3 ] Tertiary gene pool (GP-3): Members of this gene pool are more distantly related to the members of the primary gene pool. The primary and tertiary gene pools can be intermated, but gene transfer between them is impossible without the use of "rather extreme or radical measures" [ 3 ] such as: embryo rescue (or embryo culture, a form of plant organ culture ) induced polyploidy (chromosome doubling) bridging crosses (e.g., with members of the secondary gene pool).

Gene pool centres [ edit ] Gene pool centres refers to areas on the earth where important crop plants and domestic animals originated. They have an extraordinary range of the wild counterparts of cultivated plant species and useful tropical plants.
Gene pool centres also contain different sub tropical and temperate region species.

See also [ edit ] Evolutionary biology portal Biodiversity Conservation biology Founder effect Gene flow Genetic drift Small population size Australian Grains Genebank References [ edit ] ^ "Gene pool | genetics | Britannica" .

^ Graham, Loren (2013).

Lonely Ideas: Can Russia Compete?

. MIT Press. p. 169.

ISBN 978-0-262-01979-8 .

^ a b c d Harlan, J.R.; Wet, J.M.J.d. (1971). "Toward a Rational Classification of Cultivated Plants".

Taxon .

20 (4): 509– 517.

doi : 10.2307/1218252 .

JSTOR 1218252 .

Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gene_pool&oldid=1182374570 " Categories : Ecology Conservation biology Selection Genetics concepts Classical genetics Population genetics Evolutionary biology Biorepositories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2008 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 28 October 2023, at 23:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gene pool 47 languages Add topic

