Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Political roots Toggle Political roots subsection 1.1 Socialism from above 1.2 Utopian socialism 1.3 Austrian and Chicago schools of economics 1.3.1 Response 2 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 2.1 Theory and rationale 2.2 Formation of industry 2.3 Single-party system 2.4 Propaganda 3 Economics Toggle Economics subsection 3.1 Central planning 3.1.1 Economy of the Soviet Union 3.1.2 Economy of the Eastern Bloc 3.1.3 Economy of China 3.2 Economic challenges and legacy 4 Development Toggle Development subsection 4.1 Soviet Union 4.1.1 Vladimir Lenin 4.1.2 Joseph Stalin 4.2 China 4.2.1 Maoism 4.2.2 Post-Maoism 4.3 Arab world 4.3.1 Resistance to democratisation 4.4 Africa 4.4.1 Senegal 4.4.2 Ghana 4.4.3 Tanzania 4.5 Latin America 4.5.1 Venezuela 5 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 5.1 Left-wing 5.1.1 Anarchism and Marxism 5.1.2 Left communism 5.1.3 Libertarian communism and socialism 5.1.4 Trotskyism 5.2 Right-wing 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Authoritarian socialism 7 languages العربية فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia پښتو Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Authoritarian socialist ) Socialist economic-political system rejecting political liberalism Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Authoritarian socialism , or socialism from above , [ 1 ] is an economic and political system supporting some form of socialist economics while rejecting political pluralism . As a term, it represents a set of economic-political systems describing themselves as "socialist" and rejecting the liberal-democratic concepts of multi-party politics , freedom of assembly , habeas corpus , and freedom of expression , either due to fear of counter-revolution or as a means to socialist ends. Journalists and scholars have characterised several countries , most notably the Soviet Union , China , Cuba , and their allies, as authoritarian socialist states.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Contrasted to democratic socialist , social democratic , anti-statist , and libertarian forms of socialism, authoritarian socialism encompasses some forms of African , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Arab [ 7 ] and Latin American socialism.

[ 8 ] Although considered an authoritarian or illiberal form of state socialism , often referred to and conflated as socialism by critics and argued as a form of state capitalism by left-wing critics, those states [ which?

] were ideologically Marxist–Leninist and declared themselves to be workers' and peasants' or people's democracies .

[ 9 ] [ failed verification ] Academics, political commentators and other scholars tend to distinguish between authoritarian socialist and democratic socialist states, with the first represented in the Soviet Bloc and the latter represented by Western Bloc countries which have been democratically governed by socialist parties - such as Britain, France, Sweden and Western social-democracies in general, among others.

[ 10 ] Those who support authoritative socialist regimes are pejoratively known as tankies .

[ 11 ] While originating with the utopian socialism advocated by Edward Bellamy (1850–1898) [ 12 ] and identified by Hal Draper (1914–1990) as a "socialism from above", [ 13 ] [ 1 ] authoritarian socialism has been overwhelmingly associated with the Soviet model and contrasted or compared to authoritarian capitalism .

[ 14 ] Authoritarian socialism has been criticised by the left and right both theoretically and for its practice.

[ 15 ] Political roots [ edit ] Socialism from above [ edit ] Authoritarian socialism is derived from the concept of socialism from above. Hal Draper defined socialism from above as the philosophy which employs an elite administration to run the socialist state . The other side of socialism is a more democratic socialism from below.

[ 1 ] The idea of socialism from above is much more frequently discussed in elite circles than socialism from below—even if that is the Marxist ideal—because it is more practical.

[ 16 ] Draper viewed socialism from below as being the purer, more Marxist version of socialism.

[ 16 ] According to Draper, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels were devoutly opposed to any socialist institution that was "conducive to superstitious authoritarianism". Draper makes the argument that this division echoes the division between "reformist or revolutionary, peaceful or violent, democratic or authoritarian, etc." [ 1 ] and further identifies elitism as being one of the six major varieties of socialism from above, among them "Philanthropism", "Elitism", "Pannism", "Communism", "Permeationism" and "Socialism-from-Outside".

[ 17 ] According to Arthur Lipow, Marx and Engels were "the founders of modern revolutionary democratic socialism", described as a form of "socialism from below" that is "based on a mass working-class movement, fighting from below for the extension of democracy and human freedom". This type of socialism is contrasted to that of the "authoritarian, antidemocratic creed" and "the various totalitarian collectivist ideologies which claim the title of socialism" as well as "the many varieties of 'socialism from above' which have led in the twentieth century to movements and state forms in which a despotic ' new class ' rules over a statified economy in the name of socialism", a division that "runs through the history of the socialist movement". Lipow identifies Bellamyism and Stalinism as two prominent authoritarian socialist currents within the history of the socialist movement.

[ 18 ] The authoritarian– libertarian struggles and disputes within the socialist movement go back to the First International and the expulsion in 1872 of the anarchists , who went on to lead the Anti-authoritarian International and then founded their own libertarian international, the Anarchist St. Imier International .

[ 19 ] In 1888, the individualist anarchist Benjamin Tucker , who proclaimed himself to be an anarchistic socialist and libertarian socialist in opposition to the authoritarian state socialism and the compulsory communism, included the full text of a "Socialistic Letter" by Ernest Lesigne [ 20 ] in his essay on "State Socialism and Anarchism". According to Lesigne, there are two types of socialism: "One is dictatorial, the other libertarian".

[ 21 ] Tucker's two socialisms were the authoritarian state socialism which he associated to the Marxist school and the libertarian anarchist socialism, or simply anarchism, that he advocated. Tucker noted that the fact that the authoritarian "State Socialism has overshadowed other forms of Socialism gives it no right to a monopoly of the Socialistic idea".

[ 22 ] According to Tucker, what those two schools of socialism had in common was the labor theory of value and the ends, by which anarchism pursued different means.

[ 23 ] According to George Woodcock , the Second International turned "into a battleground over the issue of libertarian versus authoritarian socialism. Not only did they effectively present themselves as champions of minority rights; they also provoked the German Marxists into demonstrating a dictatorial intolerance which was a factor in preventing the British labour movement from following the Marxist direction indicated by such leaders as H. M. Hyndman".

[ 24 ] According to anarchists such as the authors of An Anarchist FAQ , forms of socialism from above such as authoritarian socialism or state socialism are the real oxymorons and the libertarian socialism from below represents true socialism. For anarchists and other anti-authoritarian socialists, socialism "can only mean a classless and anti-authoritarian (i.e., libertarian) society in which people manage their own affairs, either as individuals or as part of a group (depending on the situation). In other words, it implies self-management in all aspects of life", including at the workplace.

[ 25 ] Historian Herbert L. Osgood described anarchism as "the extreme antithesis" of authoritarian communism and state socialism.

[ 26 ] Socialists in general and socialist writers, including Dimitri Volkogonov , acknowledged that the actions of authoritarian socialist leaders have damaged "the enormous appeal of socialism generated by the October Revolution".

[ 27 ] While some right-wing authors have described conservative socialism , fascism and Prussian socialism , among other forms of paternalistic conservatism and right-wing politics , as authoritarian socialism, [ 28 ] scholars have described their nature as decidedly capitalist and conservative rather than socialist.

[ 29 ] Utopian socialism [ edit ] The economy of the 3rd century BCE Mauryan Empire of India was described as "a socialized monarchy" and "a sort of state socialism".

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Elements of authoritarian socialist thought were discerned in the politics of ancient Greek philosophers such as Aristotle [ 32 ] and Plato .

[ 33 ] The first advocates of modern socialism favoured social levelling in order to create a meritocratic or technocratic society based on individual talent.

Henri de Saint-Simon is regarded as the first individual to coin the term socialism .

[ 34 ] Saint-Simon was fascinated by the enormous potential of science and technology and advocated a socialist society that would eliminate the disorderly aspects of capitalism and would be based on equal opportunities .

[ 35 ] He advocated the creation of a society in which each person was ranked according to his or her capacities and rewarded according to his or her work .

[ 34 ] The key focus of Saint-Simon's socialism was on administrative efficiency and industrialism and a belief that science was the key to progress.

[ 36 ] [ page needed ] This was accompanied by a desire to implement a rationally organised economy based on planning and geared towards large-scale scientific progress and material progress.

[ 34 ] The first major fictional work that proposed an authoritarian socialist state was Edward Bellamy's novel Looking Backward , which depicted a bureaucratic socialist utopia . Bellamy distanced himself from radical socialist values, and in many ways, his ideal society still imitated many of the systems in the late 19th century United States. However, his book inspired a mass political movement called nationalism within the United States in the late 1800s. Those Nationalist Clubs , so named because of their desire to nationalize industry , were strong supporters of the populists , who wanted the nationalisation of the railroad and telegraph systems. Despite their propaganda and involvement in politics, the nationalist movement began to decline in 1893 due to the financial difficulties of its main publications and Bellamy's failing health, which essentially disappeared by the turn of the century.

[ 16 ] In the society depicted in the novel, private property has been abolished in favor of state ownership, social classes were eliminated, and all minimal and relatively easy work was done voluntarily by all citizens between the ages of 21 and 45. Workers were rewarded and recognized via a ranking system based on the army.

[ 37 ] The government is the most powerful and respected institution, necessary for providing and maintaining this utopia .

[ 16 ] Arthur Lipow identifies the bureaucratic ruling of this ideal society as a quasi-military organisation of both economic and social relations.

[ 12 ] Bellamy elevated the modern military as a catalyst for national interest.

[ 37 ] The biggest critique of Bellamy's society is that it is based on the idea of socialism from above. The regime is imposed on the people by an expert elite, and there is no democratic control or individual liberty. Lipow argues that this inherently leads to authoritarianism , writing: "If the workers and the vast majority were a brutish mass, there could be no question of forming a political movement out of them nor of giving them the task of creating a socialist society. The new institutions would not be created and shaped from below but would, of necessity, correspond to the plan laid down in advance by the utopian planner".

[ 12 ] In his preface to Peter Kropotkin 's book The Conquest of Bread , Kent Bromley considered the ideas of utopian socialists such as the French François-Noël Babeuf and the Italian Philippe Buonarroti to be representative of authoritarian socialism as opposed to the French socialist Charles Fourier , described as the founder of the libertarian socialism.

[ 38 ] Austrian and Chicago schools of economics [ edit ] While distinguishing between "voluntary and coercive strands", [ 39 ] the Austrian and Chicagoan understanding and characterisation of socialism is one based on authoritarianism and statism . One Austrian definition of socialism is based on the state socialist notion of "state ownership of capital goods".

[ 39 ] Another is that socialism "must be conceptualized as an institutional interference with or aggression against private property and private property claims. Capitalism, on the other hand, is a social system based on the explicit recognition of private property and of nonaggressive, contractual exchanges between private property owners".

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Friedrich Hayek , an Austrian School economist, was one of the leading academic critics of collectivism in the 20th century. He recognized and was acutely critical of the trends of socialism from above in collectivism, including theories based on voluntary cooperation.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Unlike Bellamy, who praised the idea of elites implementing policies, Hayek made the argument that socialism inherently leads to tyranny, claiming that "[i]n order to achieve their ends, the planners must create power – power over men wielded by other men – of a magnitude never before known. Democracy is an obstacle to this suppression of freedom which the centralized direction of economic activity requires. Hence arises the clash between planning and democracy".

[ 43 ] Hayek argued that both fascism and socialism are based in central economic planning and value the state over the individual. According to Hayek, it is in this way that it becomes possible for totalitarian leaders to rise to power as happened in the years following World War I.

[ 43 ] Austrian School economists such as Hayek and his mentor Ludwig von Mises also used the word socialism as a synonym for authoritarian socialism, central planning and state socialism, falsely linking it to fascism, [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] with Hayek writing that "[a]lthough our modern socialists' promise of greater freedom is genuine and sincere, in recent years observer after observer has been impressed by the unforeseen consequences of socialism, the extraordinary similarity in many respects of the conditions under 'communism' and 'fascism'".

[ 47 ] Chicago School economists such as Milton Friedman also equated socialism with centralized economic planning as well as authoritarian socialist states and command or state-directed economies, referring to capitalism as the free market.

[ 48 ] However, fascism and its variants such as Falangism and Nazism , among other fascist-inspired military regimes, are considered by scholars to be a far-right , anti-socialist ideologies that largely adopted corporatist , liberal market economic policies, with economic planning relegated to war efforts .

[ 49 ] Mises criticised left-leaning , social liberal policies such as progressive taxation as socialism, getting up during a Mont Pelerin Society meeting and referring to those "expressing the view that there could be a justification" for them as "a bunch of socialists".

[ 50 ] On the other hand, Hayek argued that the state can play a role in the economy, specifically in creating a social safety net , [ 51 ] [ 52 ] criticising the right and conservatism , [ 53 ] even inspiring some towards a form of market socialism or Hayekian socialism.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Hayek advocated "some provision for those threatened by the extremes of indigence or starvation due to circumstances beyond their control". Hayek argued that the "necessity of some such arrangement in an industrial society is unquestioned", be it "only in the interest of those who require protection against acts of desperation on the part of the needy", [ 56 ] with some also noting that "he advocated mandatory universal health care and unemployment insurance, enforced, if not directly provided, by the state" [ 57 ] and that "Hayek was adamant about this".

[ 58 ] Mises also equated central banking with socialism and central planning. According to Mises, central banks enable the commercial banks to fund loans at artificially low interest rates, thereby inducing an unsustainable expansion of bank credit and impeding any subsequent contraction.

[ 59 ] However, Hayek disagreed and stated that the need for central banking control was inescapable.

[ 60 ] Similarly, Friedman concluded that the government does have a role in the monetary system [ 61 ] and believed that the Federal Reserve System should ultimately be replaced with a computer program .

[ 62 ] While critical of social welfare, especially Social Security , arguing that it had created welfare dependency , [ 63 ] Friedman was supportive of the state provision of some public goods that private businesses are not considered as being able to provide, [ 63 ] advocated a negative income tax in place of most welfare [ 62 ] [ 63 ] and his views were grounded in a belief that while "market forces [...] accomplish wonderful things", they "cannot ensure a distribution of income that enables all citizens to meet basic economic needs.

[ 64 ] Some Austrian School economists follow Mises in arguing that policies supported by Hayek and Friedman constituted a form of socialism.

[ 39 ] [ 65 ] The Austrian and Marxian schools of economics agree in their criticism of the mixed economy , but they reach different conclusions regarding authoritarian socialist states. In Human Action , Mises argued that there can be no mixture of capitalism and socialism—either market logic or economic planning must dominate an economy.

[ 66 ] Mises elaborated on this point by contending that even if a market economy contained numerous state-run or nationalized enterprises, this would not make the economy mixed because such organizations do not alter the market economy's fundamental characteristics. These publicly owned enterprises would still be subject to market sovereignty as they would have to acquire capital goods through markets, strive to maximize profits, or at the least try to minimize costs and utilize monetary accounting for economic calculation.

[ 67 ] Similarly, classical and orthodox Marxist theorists dispute the viability of a mixed economy as a middle ground between socialism and capitalism. Irrespective of enterprise ownership, either the capitalist law of value and accumulation of capital drive the economy or conscious planning and non-monetary forms of valuation such as calculation in kind ultimately drive the economy. From the Great Depression onward, extant mixed economies in the Western world are still functionally capitalist because they operate on the basis of capital accumulation .

[ 68 ] On this basis, some Marxists and non-Marxists alike, including academics, economists, and intellectuals, argue that the Soviet Union et al.

were state capitalist countries and that rather than being socialist planned economies, they represented an administrative-command system . Already in 1985, John Howard argued that the common description of the Soviet-type economic planning as planned economy was misleading because while central planning did play an important role, the Soviet economy was de facto characterized by the priority of highly centralized management over planning. Therefore, the correct term would be that of an economy that is centrally managed rather than centrally planned .

[ 69 ] This has been attributed to both the economy of the Soviet Union and that of its allies which closely followed the Soviet model.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] On the other hand, while describing wealthy mixed economies as still "capitalist", Austrian School economists routinely describe mixed-economy policies as "socialism". Similarly, they describe fascist regimes such as Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany as "socialist", [ 39 ] although scholars describe them as being capitalist regimes.

[ 49 ] Response [ edit ] The Austrian-Chicagoan concept of authoritarian socialism has been criticized. In particular, it has been criticised for conflating social democracy and other forms of reformist and democratic socialism with authoritarian and state socialism. In the United Kingdom, British Conservative politicians such as Margaret Thatcher "loosely labelled socialism" and conflated what "others would call social democracy, corporatism, Keynesianism or the mixed economy" with authoritarian socialism, defined as "[g]overnment support for inefficient industries, punitive taxation, regulation of the labour market, price controls – everything that interfered with the functioning of the free economy".

[ 71 ] This is particularly relevant in the United States, where the term socialization has been mistakenly used to refer to any state or government-operated industry or service (the proper term for such being either municipalization or nationalization ). It has also been incorrectly used to mean any tax-funded programs, whether privately run or government-run.

[ 72 ] Similarly, socialism has become a pejorative used in the United States by conservatives and libertarians to taint liberal and progressive policies, proposals and public figures.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] People such as Hayek, Mises, and Friedman have also been criticised for hypocrisy due to claiming to oppose authoritarian socialism yet supporting liberal dictatorships such as that of the military dictatorship of Chile under Augusto Pinochet . Mises comments about fascism [ 76 ] have been criticized, [ 77 ] [ 78 ] although others have defended him.

[ 79 ] Similarly, Hayek's involvement in dictatorships has been criticized.

[ 80 ] Hayek has stated: "As long term institutions, I am totally against dictatorships. But a dictatorship may be a necessary system for a transitional period. [...] Personally I prefer a liberal dictatorship to democratic government devoid of liberalism. My personal impression – and this is valid for South America – is that in Chile, for example, we will witness a transition from a dictatorial government to a liberal government".

[ 81 ] Hayek defended himself arguing that he had "not been able to find a single person even in much maligned Chile who did not agree that personal freedom was much greater under Pinochet than it had been under [Salvador] Allende ", [ 82 ] [ 83 ] the democratic socialist [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Chilean President democratically elected in 1970 as the first self-professed Marxist to be elected president in a country with liberal democracy [ 87 ] [ 88 ] and ousted in a CIA -backed military coup .

[ 89 ] For Hayek, the distinction between authoritarianism and totalitarianism has much importance and he was at pains to emphasise his opposition to totalitarianism, noting that the concept of transitional dictatorship which he defended was characterised by authoritarianism, not totalitarianism. When he visited Venezuela in May 1981, Hayek was asked to comment on the prevalence of totalitarian regimes in Latin America. In reply, Hayek warned against confusing "totalitarianism with authoritarianism" and said he was unaware of "any totalitarian governments in Latin America. The only one was Chile under Allende". For Hayek, totalitarian signifies something very specific, namely the intention to "organize the whole of society" to attain a "definite social goal," which is stark in contrast to "liberalism and individualism".

[ 80 ] Friedman's involvement in the Chilean military dictatorship has also been criticized as he served as an economic advisor.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] Under Pinochet, Chile followed the economic policies of Friedman and his Chicago Boys .

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] While Friedman did not criticize Pinochet's dictatorship at the time, nor the assassinations, illegal imprisonments, torture, or other atrocities that were well known by then, [ 96 ] he defended his unofficial adviser position, arguing: "I do not consider it as evil for an economist to render technical economic advice to the Chilean Government, any more than I would regard it as evil for a physician to give technical medical advice to the Chilean Government to help end a medical plague".

[ 97 ] Although Friedman criticized Chile's political system, [ 91 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] he argued that "free markets would undermine [Pinochet's] political centralization and political control", [ 100 ] [ 101 ] that criticism over his role in Chile missed his main contention that freer markets resulted in freer people and that Chile's unfree economy had caused the military government. Friedman advocated for free markets, which undermined "political centralization and political control".

[ 102 ] However, some economists have argued that the experience of Chile in this period indicated a failure of Friedman's policies, claiming that there was little net economic growth from 1975 to 1982 (during the so-called "pure Monetarist experiment"). After the crisis of 1982 , the state controlled more of the economy than it had under the previous socialist regime, and sustained economic growth only came after the later reforms that privatized the economy while social indicators remained poor. Pinochet's dictatorship made the unpopular economic reorientation possible by repressing opposition. Rather than a triumph of the free market, it has been described as "combining neo-liberal sutures and interventionist cures".

[ 103 ] By the time of sustained growth, the Chilean government had "cooled its neo-liberal ideological fever" and "controlled its exposure to world financial markets and maintained its efficient copper company in public hands".

[ 104 ] Another criticism is that proponents of the theory overstate the strength of their case by describing socialism as impossible rather than inefficient.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] In explaining why he is not an Austrian School economist, Bryan Caplan argues that while the economic calculation problem is a problem for socialism, he denies that Mises has shown it to be fatal or that it is this particular problem that led to the collapse of authoritarian socialist states.

[ 108 ] Kristen Ghodsee , ethnographer and Professor of Russian and East European Studies at the University of Pennsylvania, posits that the triumphalist attitudes of Western powers at the end of the Cold War in particular the fixation with linking all socialist political ideals with the excesses of authoritarian socialism such as Stalinism had marginalized the left's response to the fusing of democracy with neoliberal ideology which helped undermine the former. This allowed the anger and resentment that came with the ravages of neoliberalism (i.e. economic misery, hopelessness, unemployment and rising inequality throughout the former Eastern Bloc and much of the West) to be channeled into right-wing nationalist movements in the decades that followed.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] David L. Hoffmann , Distinguished Professor of History at Ohio State University, raises the issue of whether authoritarian socialist practices of state violence derived from socialist ideology. Placing authoritarian socialist ideologies such as Stalinism in an international context, he argues that many forms of state interventionism used by the Stalinist government, including social cataloging, surveillance, and concentration camps, predated the Soviet regime and originated outside of Russia. He further argues that technologies of social intervention developed in conjunction with the work of 19th-century European reformers and were greatly expanded during World War I, when state actors in all the combatant countries dramatically increased efforts to mobilize and control their populations. As the Soviet state was born at this moment of total war, it institutionalized practices of state intervention as permanent features of governance.

[ 111 ] Writing two The Guardian articles in 2002 and 2006, British journalist Seumas Milne wrote that the impact of the post-Cold War narrative that Stalin and Hitler were twin evils and therefore communism is as monstrous as Nazism "has been to relativize the unique crimes of Nazism, bury those of colonialism and feed the idea that any attempt at radical social change will always lead to suffering, killing and failure".

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Theory and rationale [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Stalinism Concepts Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-revisionism Collectivization Cult of personality Five-year plans Great Break Korenizatsiia Marxism–Leninism New Soviet man Popular front Self-criticism Socialism in one country Socialist realism Soviet patriotism Stakhanovite Transformation of nature Vanguardism People Stalin Andreyeva Andreyev Berman Bierut Beria Ceaușescu Chervenkov Choibalsan Dimitrov Dugin Firin Foster Frinovsky Frenkel Kaganovich Kalinin Kim Kirov Khrulyov Khrushchev Kolmogorov Kotkin Kosygin Kryuchkov Kuybyshev Malenkov Merkulov Molotov Ochab Ordzhonikidze Petrovsky Pollitt Raikhman Rákosi Rosengolts Serov Sholokhov Thälmann Ulbricht Vyshinsky Voznesensky Yagoda Yenukidze Yezhov Yaroslavsky Zyuganov Theoretical works About the anti-Soviet elements Dialectical and Historical Materialism Dizzy with Success Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR Falsifiers of History Foundations of Leninism History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Marxism and the National Question History Stalinist Era First five-year plan Great Break Collectivisation Industrialisation Great Purge Moscow trials Azerbaijan repressions Mongolia repressions Spanish Civil War World War II Soviet atomic bomb project Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Cominform Chinese Communist Revolution First Indochina War Korean War Doctors' plot Death and funeral of Stalin De-Stalinization 20th Congress of the Communist Party Khrushchev Thaw Parties Communist Party of Great Britain (Marxist–Leninist) All-Union Communist Party Bolsheviks Albanian Party of Labour Communist Party of Germany Communist Party of Greece Italian Marxist–Leninist Party CARC Party Communist Party of New Zealand Romanian Communist Party Workers' Party of Korea Communist Party of the Russian Federation National Bolshevik Party The Other Russia Stalin Bloc – For the USSR American Communist Party (2024) Related topics Anti-Stalinist left Joseph Stalin's rise to power Stalin and antisemitism Stalin Society Stalinist architecture Neo-Stalinism Anti-Soviet agitation Authoritarian socialism Comparison to Nazism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Juche Maoism National communism Red fascism Sino–Albanian split Sino–Soviet split Soviet–Albanian split Soviet–Yugoslav split Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Soviet Union portal v t e Authoritarian socialism is a political-economic system that can be generally described as socialist, but one that rejects the liberal-democratic concepts of multi-party politics, freedom of assembly, habeas corpus and freedom of expression. Other features that are common to modern authoritarian socialist states starting in the 20th century include an emphasis on heavy industry for development , a single-party system to propel the goals of the state forward, the extensive use of propaganda to do the same and more.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Soviet advocates and socialists responded to this type of criticism by highlighting the ideological differences in the concept of freedom and liberty . It was noted that "Marxist–Leninist norms disparaged laissez-faire individualism (as when housing is determined by one's ability to pay)" and condemned "wide variations in personal wealth as the West has not" whilst emphasizing equality, by which they meant "free education and medical care, little disparity in housing or salaries, and so forth".

[ 114 ] When asked to comment on the claim that former citizens of socialist states now enjoy increased freedoms, Heinz Kessler , former East German Minister of National Defence , replied: "Millions of people in Eastern Europe are now free from employment, free from safe streets, free from health care, free from social security".

[ 115 ] Formation of industry [ edit ] As authoritarian powers enforce socialist economics, the process often goes hand in hand with supporting the growth of heavy industry as a means of reaching industrialization (as can be seen with Joseph Stalin 's control of the Soviet Union). Stalin's goals brought about a rapid industrialization of the Soviet economy that increased the urban population up by another 30 million people by 1930 and the production of automobiles to 200,000 per year by 1940.

[ 116 ] Outside of the Soviet Union, two rising global participants of the early 20th century were the young states of Germany and Italy . Although many of the policies put in place by German fascist Adolf Hitler and Italian fascist Benito Mussolini , who also formed these cults of personality , were contradictory and poorly understood, there were a few centrally planned work projects under their states.

[ 117 ] The Reichsautobahn in Nazi Germany was an example of this. The construction of the Autobahn and industries surrounding highway construction elevated the percentage of employed Germans throughout the construction.

[ 118 ] In Fascist Italy, projects such as the Battle for Grain or the Battle for Land are public work projects that socialism would traditionally support. However, the Axis powers , among other fascist regimes, favoured a corporatist mixed economy instead of socialism and were all radical anti-communists , anti-Marxists and anti-socialists . Rather, they have been described as an example of authoritarian [ 49 ] and totalitarian capitalism , [ 119 ] with Mussolini choosing to link private businesses and the state to organize economic policies.

[ 120 ] Common among authoritarian socialist regimes was autarky . While also adopted by other authoritarian regimes, it was pursued for vastly different reasons. Authoritarian socialist states pursued autarky [ 121 ] to reach a post-scarcity economy to guarantee a communist society whereas fascist regimes pursued it for nationalist and imperialist goals such as for Nazi Germany's living space , with fascist and far-right movements claiming to strive for autarky in platforms or in propaganda, but in practice they crushed existing movements towards self-sufficiency.

[ 122 ] They established extensive capital connections in efforts to ready for expansionist war and genocide [ 123 ] while allying with traditional business and commerce elites.

[ 124 ] Authoritarian socialist states and fascist regimes also differed in that the latter shifted a focus on class conflict to a focus on conflict between nations and races .

[ 125 ] A Marxist societal analysis puts forth that the process of industrialization in the 19th century placed the current metropoles in their current positions of power. In theory, industrialization should allow the regime of non-metropoles to raise the standard of living and competitiveness of their populations to be on economic par with these metropoles.

[ 126 ] However, aside from Russia and a number of former Eastern Bloc members, many post-Soviet states and both former and current authoritarian socialist states are not categorized as industrialized countries .

[ 127 ] Single-party system [ edit ] Authoritarian socialist states often oppose the multi-party system to instill power of the government into a single party that could be led by a single head of state. The rationale behind this being that elites have the time and resources to enforce socialist theory because in this socialist state the interests of the people are represented by the party or head of the party. Hal Draper referred to this as socialism from above.

[ 128 ] According to Draper, socialism from above comes in six strains or forms that rationalize and require an elite group at the top of a socialist system. This differs from a Marxist perspective that would advocate for socialism from below, a more pure and democratically run form of socialism.

[ 128 ] Outside of Europe, Eritrea , Mozambique and Vietnam stand as examples of states that were socialist and ruled by a single-party at some point in the 20th century. In Eritrea, the ruling party emerging in 1970 was the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) and with control of the state the EPLF began work on socialist ideals such as broadening women's rights and expanding education.

[ 129 ] In Mozambique, the single-state rule of FRELIMO occurred while the state was still ideologically socialist right after Portuguese rule was ending in 1975.

[ 130 ] In Vietnam, the Communist Party of Vietnam considers itself to be in transition to socialism and also the "vanguard of the working people and the whole nation".

[ 131 ] Propaganda [ edit ] Departments of propaganda are not at all rare in these regimes. The extensive use of propaganda is spills into art , cinema , posters , newspapers , books . In the Soviet Union, a byproduct of strict censorship was the blossoming of Russian science fiction and fantasy as well as socialist realism .

[ 132 ] In Latin America, Che Guevara represented and acted on the idea that socialism was an international struggle by operating Radio Rebelde and having his station transmitted from Cuba to as far north as Washington D.C.

[ 133 ] Economics [ edit ] See also: Socialist economics There are several elemental characteristics of the authoritarian socialist economic system that distinguish it from the capitalist market economy , namely the communist party has a concentration of power in representation of the working class and the party's decisions are so integrated into public life that its economic and non-economic decisions are part of their overall actions; state ownership of the means of production in which natural resources and capital belong to society; central economic planning, the main characteristic of an authoritarian-state socialist economy; the market is planned by a central government agency, generally a state planning commission; and socially equitable distribution of the national income in which goods and services are provided for free by the state that supplement private consumption. This economic model is greatly characterized by the government's central planning.

[ 134 ] Ideally, society would be the owner as in the social ownership of the means of production, but in practice the state is the owner of the means of production. If the state is the owner, the idea is that it would work for the benefit of the working class and society as a whole.

[ 135 ] In practice, society is the owner only in theory and the political institutions governing society are completely set up by the state.

[ 136 ] While Marxist–Leninists maintain that workers in the Soviet Union and other socialist states had genuine control over the means of production through institutions such as trade unions, [ 137 ] democratic and libertarian socialists argue that these states had only a limited number of socialist characteristics and in practice were state capitalists that followed the capitalist mode of production .

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] In Socialism: Utopian and Scientific , Friedrich Engels argued that state ownership does not do away with capitalism by itself, [ 141 ] but rather it would be the final stage of capitalism, consisting of ownership and management of large-scale production and communication by the bourgeois state .

[ 142 ] In Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism and Imperialism and World Economy , both Vladimir Lenin and Nikolai Bukharin , respectively, had similarly "identified the growth of state capitalism as one of the main features of capitalism in its imperialist epoch".

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] In The State and Revolution , Lenin wrote that "the erroneous bourgeois reformist assertion that monopoly capitalism or state-monopoly capitalism is no longer capitalism, but can now be called 'state socialism' and so on, is very common".

[ 146 ] Several economists and scholars have argued that authoritarian socialist states did not follow a planned economy, but were rather described as following an administrative-command system and called command economies , a term that highlights the central role of hierarchical administration and public ownership of production in guiding the allocation of resources in these economic systems, [ 69 ] [ 147 ] [ 70 ] where important allocation decisions are made by government authorities rather than by the workers themselves and are imposed by law.

[ 148 ] This goes against the Marxist understanding of conscious planning.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] Central planning [ edit ] See also: Soviet-type economic planning In a centrally planned economy , there is a central planning authority usually named the State Planning Commission that is in charge of acting within the framework of social goals and the priorities designated by the party.

[ 134 ] The planning was done under the idea that leaving market indicators would allow for social advancement.

[ 151 ] The central planning authority is responsible for five specific tasks, namely determining the criteria for the economic calculations of the planning decisions; determining and quantifying targets to be achieved within the a specified period; "coordinating targets to ensure the plan is consistent and reliable; determining the methods to ensure the realization of the plan; and revising targets in accordance to changing economic calculations.

[ 134 ] The planning process involved the creation of one-year plans, five-year plans and long-term plans. The one-year plans contained schedules and details that addressed current production and market equilibrium issues. The five-year plans integrated the political, military and economic strategy that would be pursued in the next five years as well as changes in capacity and production rates. It was done by a team of around the fifty leading experts from all the departments, ministries, professional and scientific organizations. The long-term plans encompassed a global strategy development. This plan was about goals for the state and society, not about individual responsibilities. Structural changes were a main theme.

[ 134 ] [ 152 ] Nevertheless, centrally planned economies provided a better quality of life than market economies at the same level of economic development in nearly all cases.

[ 153 ] Some economists have argued that the major reason for the economic shortcomings of authoritarian socialist states which adopted Soviet-type planning was due to their authoritarian and administrative, command nature rather than socialism itself or planning as a whole and that both economic planning and government direction of the economy through non-coercive means such as dirigisme have been practiced with success during the post-war consensus . It has been argued that authoritarian socialist states failed because they did not create rules and operational criteria for the efficient operation of state enterprises in their administrative-command allocation of resources and commodities and the lack of democracy in the political systems that the authoritarian socialist economies were combined with. A form of competitive socialism that rejects dictatorship and authoritarian allocation of resources in favour of economic democracy could work and prove superior to the capitalist market economy.

[ 154 ] Others have argued that a central deficiency of such economic planning was that it was not premised on final consumer demand, but that such a system would be increasingly feasible with advances in information technology.

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] Economy of the Soviet Union [ edit ] Main article: Economy of the Soviet Union The essence of Soviet economics is that the communist party is the sole authority of the national interest. The party makes all the decisions, but they should take into account the desires of the population and these desires were then to be weighted into the decision making. According to Article 11 of its 1977 constitution , the main goal of the Soviet Union was to "raise the material and cultural standards of the working people". Marxist thought and its interpretation by the Soviet Union dictated that private ownership was to be banned and the nationalization of all aspects of production a necessity, yet some things were not nationalized for the sake of economic efficiency or production targets. There was an emphasis on rapid industrialization, the development of heavy industry, relegation of consumer production as non-essential and collectivization of agriculture. Soviet-type economies also used a larger proportion of their resources on investment than do market economies. The issue with this was that current consumption was undercut because of the over-investment. All these actions supported the purposes of the state, not the people.

[ 157 ] During the 1940s–1970s, the economy of the Soviet Union grew at a rate that outpaced that of Western European nations, but by the 1980s the Soviet economy was in shambles. This has been attributed to the Era of Stagnation , a more tolerant central government and increasing military spending caused by the nuclear arms race with the United States, especially under Ronald Reagan , whose administration pursued more aggressive relations with the Soviet Union instead of détente that was preferred in the 1970s. The end to the post-war consensus and Keynesianism in the 1970s and the rise of neoliberalism and economic globalization in the 1980s also caused problems as they forced the Soviet Union and other countries to adapt and reform themselves. Unlike China, the Soviet's failure to do so further contributed to its dissolution in December 1991.

[ 158 ] A main problem of the Soviet Union was that it pushed agriculture to the bottom of its priorities and that its central planning scheme inhibited technological innovation.

[ 157 ] [ 159 ] Despite the attempts of the Soviet Union to guarantee employment to all of its labor force, it did not satisfy the human desires of its laborers because "people want land, not collectivization. Consumers want goods, not gigantic industrial enterprise. Workers want better wages and higher living standards, not citations and medals. [And] an economy cannot be politically tailored to perfection".

[ 157 ] [ 160 ] The Soviet Union had a poor overall performance. Although it had high growth rates in productions, many enterprises operated with losses.

[ 161 ] Nevertheless, the Soviet Union's growth in GDP per capita compared favorably with Western Europe. In 1913, prior to both World War I and the Russian Revolution of 1917, the former Soviet Union had a GDP per capita of $1,488 in 1990 international dollars which grew 461% to $6,871 by 1990. After its dissolution in December 1991, this figure fell to $3,893 by 1998. By comparison, Western Europe grew from a higher base of $3,688 international dollars by a comparable 457% to $16,872 in the same period and reached $17,921 by 1998.

[ 162 ] From the Stalin era to the early Brezhnev era , the Soviet economy grew faster than the United States and maintained itself as the second largest economy in both nominal and purchasing power parity values for much of the Cold War until 1988, when Japan took the second place.

[ 162 ] It is also claimed that the Soviet model provided a better quality of life and human development than market economies at the same level of economic development in nearly all cases.

[ 153 ] With the dissolution of the Soviet Union [ 163 ] followed by a rapid decrease of the quality of life, there has been a growing Soviet nostalgia [ 164 ] that has been most prominent in Russia [ 165 ] [ 166 ] and with older people.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] Economy of the Eastern Bloc [ edit ] Main article: Economy of the Eastern Bloc The initial move for socialism was in 1963 after a Central Committee meeting, these countries became the Comecon countries. There were countries that chose to introduce the new economic system gradually ( Bulgaria , East Germany and Poland ) and countries that decided to first prepare theoretically, then experimentation at different levels and then in a large scale ( Hungary and Romania ).

Czechoslovakia was set apart because the first stage of its transition consisted of economic recovery and then socialism was gradually implemented.

Yugoslavia differed from other Eastern European countries in that after 1950 it modified its economic system by making self-management the base of enterprise activity.

[ 161 ] There were also a few differences between the economic model of the Soviet Union and Eastern European countries such as East Germany and Poland. Czechoslovakia and East Germany were administered along regional lines. Poland retained a centralized system similar to the Stalinist centralization of the Soviet Union.

[ 160 ] The Eastern European countries differed from the Soviet Union in that they had greater flexibility in the management of subordinate firms, the market was assigned a greater importance, accessible foreign trade and liberalization of the exchange of capital goods. There was also less bureaucracy than in the Soviet Union involved in the planning of the countries.

[ 161 ] The Eastern Bloc countries achieved high rates of economic and technical progress, promoted industrialization and ensured steady growth rates of labor productivity and rises in the standard of living [ 169 ] despite experiencing misdevelopment by central planners.

[ 170 ] During the 1950s–1960s, growth rates were high, [ 171 ] progress was rapid by European standards and per capita growth within the Eastern European countries increased by 2.4 times the European average, accounting for 12.3 per cent of European production in 1950 and 14.4 in 1970, [ 171 ] but most of their economies were stagnant by the late 1970s and 1980s as the system was resistant to change and did not easily adapt to new conditions.

[ 171 ] For political reasons, old factories were rarely closed, even when new technologies became available.

[ 171 ] Growth rates within the Eastern Bloc experienced relative decline after the 1970s.

[ 170 ] This has also been attributed to the 1970s energy crisis , including the 1973 oil crisis , the 1979 energy crisis and the 1980s oil glut , the post-war displacement of Keynesianism and the rise of neoliberalism and economic globalization. Countries such as China that did not isolate and instead reformed themselves thrived, but this did not happen in most Eastern Bloc countries as they depended upon the Soviet Union, especially for significant amounts of materials.

[ 170 ] From the end of the World War II to the mid-1970s, the economy of the Eastern Bloc steadily increased at the same rate as the economy in Western Europe, with the least none-reforming Stalinist nations of the Eastern Bloc having a stronger economy then the reformist-Stalinist states.

[ 172 ] While most Western European economies essentially began to approach the GDP per capita levels of the United States during the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Eastern Bloc countries did not, [ 170 ] with per capita GDPs trailing significantly behind their comparable Western European counterparts.

[ 170 ] Following the fall of the Eastern Bloc with the Revolutions of 1989 , the economies of post-Soviet states quickly fell apart and took a long time to return to pre-1989 levels.

[ 162 ] Not only growth plummeted following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991, but also living standards declined, drug use, homelessness and poverty skyrocketed and suicides increased dramatically. Growth did not begin to return to pre-reform-era levels for approximately fifteen years. Some scholars have claimed that the Soviet model's industrialization and modernization laid the groundwork for their later economic growth , without which their current market-oriented economy may have not thrived or growth as much, or that it provided a better quality of life than market economies.

[ 153 ] The 1991 Soviet Union referendum (77% on an 80% turnout voted to preserve the Soviet Union and all Soviet republics voters voted in favor, with the Turkmenia Republic showing the most support at 98% and the lowest in the Russian Republic at 73%) [ 173 ] has also been cited to argue that a vast majority of people did not want the Soviet Union dissolved, but rather more autonomy for the states within the union instead of a separation and the massive privatizations which had disastrous effects including giving rise to powerful oligarchs , especially in Russia and Ukraine .

[ 174 ] Mikhail Gorbachev , the last Soviet leader , supported Scandinavian social democracy in the form of the Nordic model .

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] In light of those results, post-Soviet states have seen a growing nostalgia and a constant high number of people have expressed a longing for the Soviet period and its values since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, although the level of Soviet nostalgia varies across the former republics and certain groups of people may blend the Soviet and post-Soviet experience in their daily lives.

[ 177 ] Polls have also showed that a majority of post-Soviet states viewed the collapse of the Soviet Union negatively [ 178 ] and felt that it could have been avoided.

[ 163 ] An even greater number would openly welcome a revival of the Soviet system.

[ 168 ] Nostalgia for the Soviet Union has appeared in the former Eastern Bloc, [ 179 ] especially in eastern Germany, [ 180 ] Poland, [ 181 ] Romania [ 182 ] and the former Yugoslavia.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] The dissolution of the Soviet system was followed by a rapid increase in poverty , [ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 187 ] crime , [ 188 ] [ 189 ] corruption , [ 190 ] [ 191 ] unemployment , [ 192 ] homelessness , [ 193 ] [ 194 ] rates of disease , [ 195 ] [ 196 ] [ 197 ] infant mortality , [ 198 ] domestic violence [ 198 ] and income inequality , [ 199 ] along with decreases in calorie intake, life expectancy , adult literacy and income .

[ 200 ] Many people in post-Soviet states felt that their lives were worse off after 1989, when capitalist markets were made dominant.

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] Subsequent polls and qualitative research across post-Soviet states "confirmed these sentiments as popular discontent with the failed promises of free-market prosperity has grown, especially among older people".

[ 203 ] Economy of China [ edit ] Main article: Economy of China The Maoist economic model of China was designed after the Stalinist principles of a centrally administrated command economy based on the Soviet model.

[ 204 ] In the common program set up by the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference in 1949, in effect the country's interim constitution, state capitalism meant an economic system of corporatism . It provided the maxim "Whenever necessary and possible, private capital shall be encouraged to develop in the direction of state capitalism".

[ 205 ] After the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , Mao Zedong condemned Stalinism and the flaws in the Marxist–Leninist movement that peaked with the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 . This gave Mao space in which to experiment with departure from the Soviet socialist economy. The Maoist economic model was reliant on High Tide of Socialism in the Chinese Countryside , How to Handle Contradictions Among the People and Ten Great Relationships . Mao modeled the Chinese socialist economy in such a way that it led to the Great Leap Forward and the Commune Movement . In High Tide of Socialism in the Chinese Countryside , Mao focused on the industrialization and mechanization of the countryside. In How to Handle Contradictions Among the People , Mao wrote about his thoughts on the problems of socialist states as well as the conflicts of interest in the Chinese socialist society. In Ten Great Relationships , Mao wrote about his vision of China's economy.

[ 206 ] The Maoist model had a dual economic goal, namely the industrialization of the countryside and the socialization of its people. It differed from the Soviet Union's goals in that Mao emphasized the class struggle against the bourgeoisie while the Soviet Union started advocating peaceful coexistence . China also allowed for more flexibility and experimentation than the Soviet Union and the countryside was at the center of its policies.

[ 207 ] Supporters argue that life expectancy greatly improved under Mao and that he rapidly industrialized China and laid the groundwork for the country's later rise to become an economic superpower [ 208 ] while critics see many of Maoist economic policies as impediments to industrialization and modernization that delayed economic development and claim that China's economy underwent its rapid growth only after Maoist policies had been widely abandoned.

[ 209 ] Economic challenges and legacy [ edit ] The problem with the central planning of authoritarian socialist states is that as the state develops, it also grows in complexity and the possible errors grow and the possibilities of dis-allocations and waste of resources.

[ 134 ] As commented by Karl Marx, capitalism works because it is a system of economic force, but in socialist economics this force is insufficient to provide enough incentive. Human needs should be taken into account to make a socialist society function, but there is no necessary connection between the accumulation of capital and human satisfaction.

[ 210 ] Some of the issues that emerged during the socialist phase of Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union and Maoist China included inflation, lagged consumption, fixed prices, production structure and disproportionality.

[ 151 ] There was a lag between when products were fabricated and when they were accessed to by the population, goods tended to stockpile. Yugoslavia raised its industrial prices by 17% and its agricultural prices by 32% from 1964 to 1965 while Czechoslovakia raised the prices of foodstuffs and services by 20% in 1966 and by 1967 prices were up by 30%. The production of consumer products also diminished in Yugoslavia, where the share of consumer products fell from 70% before World War II to 31% in 1965. Prices were fixed under the premise that it would force producers to behave more efficiently and as such the price-controlled products were produced in lower quantities. In Yugoslavia, the market distortion caused by the price fixing was realized and led to the un-freezing of prices in 1967. Hungary also had frozen prices and slowly unfroze them over a period of ten to fifteen years because otherwise the structural disproportions of the Hungarian economy would spin prices out of control. Many factories were kept running through government subsidies and protection despite any economic losses of the factories. This decreased overall efficiency of the socialist economies, increased the financial losses of those economies and caused them to have a disproportionate amount of available jobs and manpower. As argued by Ljubo Sirc, the "Soviet Union and other communist countries have the worst of both worlds: some enterprises or operations are inefficient because they are too capital-intensive, other enterprises or operations because they are too labour-intensive".

[ 151 ] The Stalinist economic model in which the socialist economies were based did not allow for a decrease in growth rates. It did not allow for the flexibility needed to keep up with growing economies.

[ 204 ] According to Paul Roderick Gregory , the collapse of the Soviet Union was due to the inherent drawbacks of the administrative-command system , namely poor planning, low expertise of planners, unreliable supply lines, conflict between planners and producers and the dictatorial chain of command. According to Gregory, "the system was managed by thousands of 'Stalins' in a nested dictatorship". Once the enterprises gained some freedom during perestroika , the rigid administrative-command system imploded.

[ 211 ] [ 212 ] Despite these shortcomings, the Soviet Union's growth in GDP per capita compared favorably with Western Europe.

[ 162 ] It has also been noted that such states compared favorably with Western states in some health indicators such as infant mortality and life expectancy, [ 213 ] making some significant gains and that "one thought [...] bound to occur is that communism is good for poverty removal".

[ 214 ] A lasting legacy of the Soviet Union remains physical infrastructure created during decades of policies geared towards the construction of heavy industry and widespread environmental destruction .

[ 215 ] Under the Soviet system, income, property and social equality was radically increased. Income inequality in Russia dropped, then rebounded after the demise of the Soviet Union in 1991. Similarly, income inequality also dropped rapidly in the Eastern Bloc and after Eastern Europe went under the Soviet sphere of influence at the end of World War II. After the collapse of the Soviet system, economic and social inequality went back up.

[ 216 ] The breakdown of economic ties that followed the collapse of the Soviet Union led to a severe economic crisis and catastrophic fall in living standards in post-Soviet states and the former Eastern Bloc [ 217 ] which was even worse than the Great Depression.

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] Poverty and economic inequality surged between 1988–1989 and 1993–1995, with the Gini ratio increasing by an average of 9 points for all former socialist states.

[ 220 ] Even before Russia's financial crisis in 1998, Russia's GDP was half of what it had been in the early 1990s.

[ 219 ] In the decades following the end of the Cold War, only five or six of the post-communist states are on a path to joining the wealthy capitalist West while most are falling behind, some to such an extent that it will take over 50 years to catch up to where they were before the end of the Soviet system.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] In a 2001 study by economist Steven Rosefielde , he calculated that there were 3.4 million premature deaths in Russia from 1990 to 1998, partly blaming on the "shock therapy" that came with the Washington Consensus .

[ 223 ] According to Klas-Göran Karlsson , discussion of the number of victims of authoritarian socialist regimes has been "extremely extensive and ideologically biased".

[ 224 ] Any attempt to estimate a total number of killings under authoritarian socialist regimes depends greatly on definitions, [ 225 ] ranging from a low of 10–20 millions to as high as 110 millions.

[ 226 ] The criticism of some of the estimates are mostly focused on three aspects, namely that the estimates were based on sparse and incomplete data when significant errors are inevitable; that the figures were skewed to higher possible values; and that those dying at war and victims of civil wars, Holodomor and other famines under authoritarian socialist governments should not be counted.

[ 227 ] [ 228 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] [ 231 ] [ 232 ] Critics also argue that neoliberal policies of liberalization , deregulation and privatisation "had catastrophic effects on former Soviet Bloc countries" and that the imposition of Washington Consensus-inspired "shock therapy" had little to do with future economic growth.

[ 174 ] It has been argued that the establishment of welfare states in the West in the early 20th century could be partly a reaction by elites to the Bolshevik Revolution and its violence against the bourgeoisie which feared violent revolution in its own backyard.

[ 233 ] The welfare states gave rise to the post-war consensus and the post-war economic boom , where the United States, the Soviet Union and Western European and East Asian countries in particular experienced unusually high and sustained economic growth, together with full employment . Contrary to early predictions, this high growth also included many countries that had been devastated by the war such as Japan ( Japanese post-war economic miracle ), West Germany and Austria ( Wirtschaftswunder ), South Korea ( Miracle of the Han River ), France ( Trente Glorieuses ), Italy ( Italian economic miracle ) and Greece ( Greek economic miracle ).

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] Similarly, Michael Parenti holds that the Soviet model played a role in "tempering the worst impulses of Western capitalism and imperialism" and that Western business interests are "no longer restrained by a competing system" in the post-Cold War era and are now "rolling back the many gains that working people in the West have won over the years".

[ 236 ] For Parenti, there were clear differences between fascist and socialist regimes as the latter "made dramatic gains in literacy, industrial wages, health care and women's rights" and in general "created a life for the mass of people that was far better than the wretched existence they had endured under feudal lords, military bosses, foreign colonizers and Western capitalists".

[ 237 ] Other have criticized the linking of all leftist and socialist ideals to the excesses of Stalinism [ 238 ] [ 239 ] by the elites in the West in hope to discredit and marginalize all political ideologies [ 112 ] [ 113 ] that could "threaten the primacy of private property and free markets", [ 109 ] emphasising Stalin and other socialist leaders' crimes and neglecting legitimate achievements such as education, literacy, the modernisation of the economy, social security, the rise in the standard of living and women's rights.

[ 109 ] [ 239 ] Similarly, it has been argued that there is a double standard in emphasising famines, labour camps, mass killings and purges under socialist regimes in a death toll body count, [ 240 ] [ 241 ] but not applying the same standard to capitalist, colonial - imperial regimes.

[ 109 ] [ 242 ] [ 243 ] The collapse of the Soviet system, the Soviet Union in particular, is seen as the proof that communism and socialism can not work, allowing for all left-wing criticism of the excesses of neoliberal capitalism to be silenced, [ 203 ] for the alternatives will supposedly inevitably result in economic inefficiency and violent authoritarianism.

[ 244 ] Some Western academics argue that anti-communist narratives have exaggerated the extent of political repression and censorship in states under authoritarian socialist rule, [ 245 ] or that those states provided human rights such as economic, social and cultural rights not found under capitalist states .

[ 246 ] Development [ edit ] Authoritarian socialism is best understood through an examination of its developmental history, allowing for the analysis and comparison of its various global examples. Although authoritarian socialism was by no means restricted to the Soviet Union, its ideological development occurred in tandem with the Stalinist regimes.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] As the Soviet Union was a developmental model for many socialist states in the post-World War II era, Soviet authoritarian socialism was adopted by a diverse range of states and continued to develop well into the 20th century in the Middle East and North African regions. Those regions, characterized by authoritarian traits such as uncontested party leadership, restricted civil liberties and strong unelected officials with non-democratic influence on policy, share many commonalities with the Soviet Union.

[ 249 ] Authoritarian socialist states were ideologically Marxist–Leninist (the state ideology of the Soviet Union that arose in Imperial Russia within the Bolshevik faction of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party ) or one of its variants such as Maoism, among other national variants and updating, following the Soviet developmental model. While those socialist states saw themselves as a form of democracy opposed to that of Western states and claimed to be workers and peasants' states or people's democratic republics, [ 9 ] they are considered to be authoritarian [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] because they featured external controls such as violent repression and forms of artificial socialization.

[ 250 ] The implementation of authoritarian forms of socialism was accomplished with a dogmatized ideology reinforced by terror and violence. The combination of those external controls served to implement a normality within an authoritarian country that seemed like illusion or madness to someone removed from its political atmosphere.

[ 250 ] For many authoritarian socialist countries, their regimes were a mix of this form of external control-based totalitarianism (for intellectually and ideologically active members of society) and traditional or cultural authoritarianism (for the majority of the population).

[ 250 ] With the fall of the Soviet Union and that of the Eastern Bloc, most former authoritarian socialist regimes reformed themselves. Some of those in Eastern Europe underwent shock doctrine and moved into a free-market capitalist and liberal-democratic direction, although some of them such as Hungary or Russia are described as This article contains weasel words : vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information .

Such statements should be clarified or removed .

( June 2025 ) illiberal democracies and others as hybrid regimes . In Africa, many ruling parties retained power and moved into a democratic socialist or social-democratic direction while others moved into liberal-democratic multi-party politics.

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] Other countries such as Cuba and Vietnam followed the Chinese development in applying economic reforms while maintaining centralised political control. They also include Chinese allies such as the Philippines and Thailand, who were not authoritarian socialist regimes, but are now favouring the Beijing Consensus over the Washington Consensus followed by Eastern European countries.

[ 253 ] [ 254 ] Rather than moving in the direction of democratic capitalism followed by the majority of Eastern European countries, China and its allies, including Hungary, Nicaragua, Russia, Singapore, Turkey and Venezuela, are described as This article contains weasel words : vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information .

Such statements should be clarified or removed .

( June 2025 ) authoritarian capitalist regimes.

[ 255 ] [ 256 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] Despite the Marxian basis of Vladimir Lenin's socialism, the realities of his system were in direct opposition to Karl Marx's belief in the emancipation and autonomy of the working class.

[ 248 ] Those contradictions stemmed primarily from Lenin's implementation of a vanguard or regimented party of committed revolutionaries "who knew exactly what history's mandate was and who were prepared to be its self-ordained custodians".

[ 257 ] The function of this party was meant to be primarily transitional, given that Lenin believed that the working class was politically unprepared for rule and Russia was not yet industrially poised for socialism.

[ 257 ] Lenin adopted state-capitalist policies.

[ 258 ] [ 259 ] [ 260 ] [ 261 ] On seeing the Soviet Union's growing coercive power in 1923, a dying Lenin said Russia had reverted to "a bourgeois tsarist machine [...] barely varnished with socialism".

[ 262 ] Marx coined the term barracks communism ( German : Kasernenkommunismus ) to refer to a form of authoritarian socialism in which all aspects of life are bureaucratically regimented and communal.

[ 263 ] [ 264 ] [ 265 ] Originally, Marx used the expression to criticize the vision of Sergey Nechayev outlined in The Fundamentals of the Future Social System [ 265 ] which had a major influence on other Russian revolutionaries like Lenin and others such as Pyotr Tkachev .

[ 266 ] The term itself did not refer to military barracks , but rather to the workers' barracks-type primitive dormitories in which industrial workers lived in many places in the Russian Empire of the time.

[ 267 ] Political theorists of the Soviet Union later applied the term to China under Mao Zedong.

[ 263 ] During the later perestroika period, it was applied to the history of the Soviet Union .

[ 267 ] Unlike Stalin, who first claimed to have achieved socialism with the Soviet Constitution of 1936 [ 268 ] [ 269 ] [ 270 ] [ 271 ] and then confirmed it in the Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR , [ 272 ] [ 273 ] [ 274 ] [ 275 ] [ 276 ] Lenin did not call the Soviet Union a socialist state, nor did he claim that it had achieved socialism.

[ 277 ] While Stalin's colleagues described him as Asiatic and Stalin himself told a Japanese journalist that "I am not a European man, but an Asian, a Russified Georgian", [ 278 ] Lenin identified ethnically as Russian, [ 279 ] believed that other European countries, especially Germany, were culturally superior to Russia [ 280 ] which he described as "one of the most benighted, medieval and shamefully backward of Asian countries".

[ 281 ] From his youth, Lenin had wanted Russia to become more culturally European and Western.

[ 280 ] [ 282 ] In his testament , Lenin grow concerned about the rise of the bureaucracy and proposed changes to the structure of the Soviet governing bodies. He also made criticism of several Bolshevik leaders, including Stalin and Leon Trotsky , warning of the possibility of a split developing in the party leadership between Trotsky and Stalin if proper measures were not taken to prevent it. In a post-script, Lenin suggested Stalin be removed from his position as General Secretary of the Russian Communist Party 's Central Committee .

Isaac Deutscher , a biographer of both Trotsky and Stalin, argued that "[t]he whole testament breathed uncertainty".

[ 283 ] Leninist socialists remain divided in their views on Stalin. Some view him as Lenin's authentic successor while others believe he betrayed Lenin's ideas by deviating from them.

[ 284 ] The socio-economic nature of Stalin's Soviet Union has also been much debated, varyingly being labelled a form of bureaucratic collectivism , state capitalism, state socialism or a totally unique mode of production .

[ 285 ] Vladimir Lenin [ edit ] Marx chronicled a history of development through a capitalist age of industrialization that resulted in the manipulation of the working class . This development culminated in the empowerment of a proletariat which could benefit from the fruits of industrialization without being exploited. Although he meant his ideology to appeal to the disenfranchised working class of an industrialized society, it was widely accepted by developing countries that had yet to successfully industrialize.

[ 247 ] This resulted in stagnant economies and socialist states without the necessary organization and structure to industrialize.

[ 247 ] Seeing the failure of those models, Lenin concluded that socialism in Russia had to be constructed from above through party dictatorship that appealed to both the working class and peasants.

[ 257 ] Because the working class accounted for only 15% of the population, Lenin was forced to appeal to the much greater peasant class (accounting for nearly 80%) to propel the Bolshevik faction of Russian Social Democratic Labour Party that under Lenin eventually became the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) due to a split within social democracy.

[ 247 ] The Bolsheviks promised "Bread, Peace, and Land" to the peasants and delivered, redistributing land from the landlords and increasing the number of farms in Russia from 427,000 in 1917 to 463,000 in 1919.

[ 247 ] For some, Lenin's legacy was one of violent terror and concentration of power in the hands of few.

[ 257 ] Lenin intentionally employed violence as a means to manipulate the population and tolerated absolutely no opposition, arguing that it was "a great deal better to 'discuss with rifles' than with the theses of the opposition".

[ 257 ] He worked for the ideological destruction of society as a whole so that it could easily adopt the rhetoric and political ideals of the ruling party.

[ 257 ] Lenin's use of terror (instilled by a secret police apparatus) to exact social obedience, mass murder and disappearance, censoring of communications and absence of justice was only reinforced by his successor Joseph Stalin.

[ 257 ] In contrast to those who support this thesis, [ 286 ] others have disputed this characterization and separated Lenin from Stalin and Leninism from Stalinism.

[ 287 ] A controversial figure, Lenin remains both reviled and revered, [ 288 ] a figure who has been both idolised and demonised.

[ 289 ] This has extended into academic studies of Lenin and Leninism which have often been polarised along political lines.

[ 290 ] While there have been both sympathetic and expressly hostile Lenin's biographies, [ 289 ] some sought to avoid making either hostile or positive comments about Lenin, thereby evading politicized stereotypes.

[ 288 ] [ 291 ] Some Marxist activists, who defend both the October Revolution and soviet democracy , emphasise how the Bolsheviks wanted to avoid terror and argue that the Red Terror was born in response to the White Terror which has been downplayed.

[ 292 ] [ 293 ] [ 294 ] Lenin has been variously described as "the century's most significant political leader", [ 295 ] "one of the undeniably outstanding figures of modern history" [ 296 ] and one of the 20th century's "principal actors" [ 297 ] as well as "one of the most widespread, universally recognizable icons of the twentieth century" [ 298 ] and "one of the most significant and influential figures of modern history".

[ 299 ] Some historians have characterized Lenin's administration as totalitarian [ 300 ] [ 301 ] [ 302 ] [ 303 ] or a police state ; [ 302 ] or they have described it as a one-party dictatorship, [ 304 ] with Lenin as its dictator, [ 289 ] [ 300 ] [ 301 ] [ 282 ] [ 305 ] although noting differences between Lenin and Stalin in that under the first there was a dictatorship of the party and under the latter that of one man.

[ 288 ] [ 300 ] [ 303 ] Others have argued against the view that Lenin's government was a dictatorship, viewing it as an imperfect way of preserving elements of democracy without some of the processes found in liberal democratic states.

[ 288 ] [ 291 ] According to the latter view, "the personal qualities that led Lenin to brutal policies were not necessarily any stronger than in some of the major Western leaders of the twentieth century".

[ 288 ] Among sympathisers, Lenin was portrayed as having made a genuine adjustment of Marxist theory that enabled it to suit Russia's particular socio-economic conditions.

[ 306 ] The Soviet view characterised him as a man who recognised the historically inevitable and accordingly helped to make the inevitable happen. Conversely, the majority of Western historians have perceived him as a person who manipulated events in order to attain and then retain political power, moreover considering his ideas as attempts to ideologically justify his pragmatic policies.

[ 307 ] More recently, revisionists in both Russia and the West have highlighted the impact that pre-existing ideas and popular pressures exerted on Lenin and his policies.

[ 308 ] Joseph Stalin [ edit ] Stalin sought to rapidly industrialize the Soviet Union, [ 116 ] but perhaps in a way that was unrealistic, given the aggregate skill level and capital of the population [ 126 ] and Stalin's argument that the Soviet Union had to accomplish in a decade what England had taken centuries to do in terms of economic development in order to be prepared for an invasion from the West.

[ 309 ] Acknowledging this inadequacy, Stalin ordered that resources slotted for consumption be redirected to production or exported as a temporary sacrifice on the part of the population for the sake of rapid growth.

[ 247 ] The model was successful initially, with ideology and nationalism promoting morale despite shortages in resources such as food and construction materials for housing. Presumably, the exploited classes believed that once the rapid and successful industrialization of Russia had taken place, power would be relinquished by the vanguard party and communism would ensue.

[ 257 ] However, Stalin continued to demand even more far-reaching sacrifices. Because of his control over both political and economic arenas which historians argue gave his vanguard party an amount of control surpassing that of Russia's tzars or emperors , citizens were unwilling to challenge his decrees, given that aspects of their lives such as medical care, housing and social freedoms could be restricted according to the discretion of the party.

[ 247 ] Despite failures, Stalin's expectations remained uncontested by the working class and the model was adopted by a multitude of emerging socialist states during that era. The Soviet attempt to collectivize agriculture , transforming the Soviet Union from one of the world's largest exporters of grain to the world's largest importer of grain, was widely replicated despite its failure.

[ 247 ] Many historians claim that extermination was the fate of a wide variety of people during Stalin's regime such as political opponents, ideological rivals, suspect party members, accused military officers, kulaks, lower-class families, former members of the societal elites, ethnic groups, religious groups and the relatives and sympathizers of these offenders.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] [ 257 ] Those deaths occurred as a result of collectivization, famine, terror campaigns, disease, war and mortality rates in the Gulag. As the majority of excess deaths under Stalin were not direct killings, the exact number of victims of Stalinism is difficult to calculate due to lack of consensus among scholars on which deaths can be attributed to Stalin.

[ 310 ] [ 311 ] However, it is far lower than the estimates of 20 million or above which were made before access to the archives.

[ 312 ] [ 313 ] Regarding the Holodomor, part of the greater Soviet famine of 1932–1933 , [ 314 ] [ 315 ] the consensus argues that while Stalin's policies contributed significantly to the high mortality rate, it rejects the view that Stalin or the Soviet government consciously engineered the famine.

[ 109 ] [ 316 ] [ 317 ] [ 318 ] It has been argued that Stalin's "purposive killings" fit more closely into the category of "execution" rather than "murder", given he thought the accused were indeed guilty of crimes against the state and insisted on documentation.

[ 319 ] Among the anti-Stalinist left and anti-communist Russians and Westerners, Stalin's legacy is largely negative, [ 320 ] with the Soviet Union under him characterised as a totalitarian state [ 321 ] [ 322 ] and Stalin as its authoritarian leader.

[ 323 ] Various biographers have described Stalin as a dictator , [ 324 ] an autocrat , [ 321 ] [ 325 ] [ 326 ] an Oriental despot , [ 320 ] [ 320 ] [ 325 ] or accused him of practicing Caesarism .

[ 326 ] A man who "perhaps [...] determined the course of the twentieth century" more than any other individual, [ 325 ] described as "one of the most notorious figures in history" [ 321 ] and possessing "that rare combination: both 'intellectual' and killer", the "ultimate politician" and the "most elusive and fascinating of the twentieth-century titans" [ 327 ] as well as "one of the most powerful figures in human history", [ 326 ] Stalin initially ruled as part of the party oligarchy which he turned into a personal dictatorship in 1934 and became absolute dictator between March and June 1937.

[ 328 ] Stalin later built a "personal dictatorship within the Bolshevik dictatorship", [ 323 ] concentrated an "unprecedented political authority in his hands" [ 320 ] and has been described as "closer to personal despotism than almost any monarch in history".

[ 321 ] Others argued that the campaigns of terror organized by Stalin were driven by his fear of counter-revolution.

[ 329 ] Other historians and scholars cautioned against "over-simplistic stereotypes" that portrayed Stalin as an omnipotent and omnipresent tyrant who controlled every aspect of Soviet life through repression and totalitarianism, [ 320 ] noting that "powerful though he was, his powers were not limitless" and that Stalin's rule depended on his willingness to conserve the Soviet structure he had inherited.

[ 321 ] It has been observed that Stalin's ability to remain in power relied on him having a majority in the Politburo at all times.

[ 323 ] It was noted that at various points, especially in his later years, there were "periodic manifestations" in which the party oligarchy threatened his autocratic control.

[ 322 ] Stalin denied to foreign visitors that he was a dictator, stating that those who labelled him as such did not understand the Soviet governance structure.

[ 325 ] Several historians have criticized the totalitarian twins [ 109 ] [ 319 ] concept and comparisons between communism /socialism and fascism [ 330 ] or Stalinism and Nazism [ 331 ] as Cold War concepts [ 332 ] that focus upon the upper levels of society and which use have obscured the reality of the system.

[ 333 ] [ 334 ] [ 335 ] Others further noted how the concept became prominent in Western anti-communist political discourse during the Cold War era as a tool to convert pre-war anti-fascism into post-war anti-communism.

[ 336 ] With the collapse of the Soviet Union and the release of the archives, some of the heat has gone out of the debate and politicization has been reduced. It has been argued that the Soviet political system was not completely controlled from the center and that both Lenin and Stalin only responded to political events as they arose.

[ 337 ] Some also questioned the previously published findings that Stalin organized himself the murder of Sergey Kirov to justify his campaign of Great Terror.

[ 338 ] Others stated that mass deaths from famines are not a "uniquely Stalinist evil" and compared the behavior of the Stalinist regime vis-à-vis the Holodomor to that of the British Empire (towards Ireland and India) and even the G8 in contemporary times, arguing that the latter "are guilty of mass manslaughter or mass deaths from criminal negligence because of their not taking obvious measures to reduce mass deaths" and that a possible defense of Stalin and his associates is that "their behaviour was no worse than that of many rulers in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries".

[ 339 ] Despite the criticism, Stalin has been considered an outstanding and exceptional politician [ 321 ] [ 326 ] as well as a great statesman and state-builder, [ 320 ] with some suggesting that without Stalin the Soviet Union might have collapsed long before 1991 as he strengthened and stabilized the country.

[ 321 ] In under three decades, Stalin transformed the Soviet Union into a major industrial world power, [ 321 ] [ 326 ] one which could "claim impressive achievements" in terms of urbanisation, military strength, education and Soviet pride.

[ 321 ] Under his rule, the average Soviet life expectancy grew due to improved living conditions, nutrition and medical care [ 340 ] as mortality rates also declined.

[ 341 ] Although millions of Soviet citizens despised him, support for Stalin was nevertheless widespread throughout Soviet society.

[ 321 ] Citing those achievements and highlighting crimes committed by the Western world and its leaders during the colonization and imperialist period as well as war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in the 20th century whilst arguing that Stalin's hatred came mainly from General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev 's Secret Speech read during the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in February 1956, some have attempted to rehabilitate Stalin and its legacy, [ 342 ] or otherwise gave a more neutral and nuanced view.

[ 343 ] [ 344 ] [ 345 ] However, those attempts have been criticized and most of its authors labelled as neo-Stalinists .

[ 346 ] [ 347 ] [ 348 ] [ 349 ] [ 350 ] [ 351 ] In the 21st century, more than half of Russians view Stalin positively and many support restoration of his monuments either dismantled by leaders or destroyed by rioting Russians during the dissolution of the Soviet Union.

[ 352 ] [ 353 ] [ 354 ] Stalin's popularity has tripled among Russians in the last twenty years [ 355 ] and the trend accelerated since Vladimir Putin , who has been described as holding neo-Soviet views, [ 356 ] has come to power.

[ 357 ] [ 358 ] China [ edit ] Mao Zedong Following the fall of the elite, land-owning class of the early 20th century, China began its Communist Revolution through the countryside. As relationships between agrarian masses and state-controlled programs splintered, the Chinese Communist Party led by Mao Zedong began seizing power.

[ 359 ] In his 1949 essay On People's Democratic Dictatorship , Mao committed himself and the Chinese state to the creation of a strong state power with increased economic control.

[ 359 ] He stressed the importance of an authoritarian state, where political order and unity could be established and maintained. Mao committed himself to unification in the vein of complete system overthrow.

[ 359 ] As party chairman , Mao allowed himself complete control over the structure and execution of the party with his own cult of personality , an almost mythical position as a guardian of wisdom and charisma.

[ 359 ] With such power, Mao was able to influence popular opinions, allowing his agenda support without going through state-controlled measures. During the Great Leap Forward, an initiative to develop China from an agrarian sector a major industrial powerhouse, Mao relied greatly on his prestige to influence the people.

[ 359 ] However, the Great Leap Forward proved a failure as widespread crop and irrigation failures led to the 1959–1961 Great Chinese Famine . There was no suggested end to the revolution—it was meant to be a continuing process of empowerment of the peasant class .

[ 360 ] With the aggressive failure of his Cultural Revolution , Chinese support for the party and for Mao waned. Continuing struggles after his death would undermine his socialist system, allowing a more democratic yet still one-party ruled system to continue into today. As there is little agreement over his legacy both in China and abroad, Mao is a controversial figure who has been regarded as one of the most important and influential individuals in modern world history.

[ 361 ] [ 362 ] Supporters credit Mao with driving imperialism out of China, [ 363 ] [ 364 ] modernizing the nation and building it into a world power , promoting the status of women and improving education and health care as well as increasing life expectancy as China's population grew from around 550 million to over 900 million under his leadership, [ 365 ] [ 366 ] among other achievements.

[ 367 ] [ 368 ] Conversely, his regime has been called autocratic and totalitarian and condemned for bringing about mass repression and destroying religious and cultural artifacts and sites. It was additionally responsible for vast numbers of deaths, with estimates ranging from 30 to 70 million victims through starvation, prison labour and mass executions.

[ 369 ] [ 370 ] While some critics argue that Mao was dismissive of the suffering and death caused by his policies, or that he was well aware that his policies would be responsible for the deaths of millions, [ 371 ] others have disputed this.

[ 369 ] [ 372 ] [ 373 ] Praised as a political intellect, theorist, military strategist, poet and visionary, [ 369 ] Mao has been variously described as a "great historical criminal", "both monster and a genius", who was also "a great force for good", [ 209 ] a "great leader in history" and a "great criminal" [ 372 ] as well as "one of the great tyrants of the twentieth century", comparable to Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin, [ 374 ] [ 375 ] with a death toll surpassing both.

[ 369 ] [ 370 ] However, others reject those comparisons, arguing that whereas the deaths caused by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union were largely systematic and deliberate, the overwhelming majority of the deaths under Mao were unintended consequences of famine, noting that the landlord class was not exterminated as a people due to his belief in redemption through thought reform. Mao has been compared to 19th-century Chinese reformers who challenged China's traditional beliefs in the era of China's clashes with Western colonial powers [ 369 ] as well as to United States President Andrew Jackson .

[ 376 ] Similarly, Maoist economics policies are controversial. Supporters argue that life expectancy greatly improved under Mao and that such policies rapidly industrialized China and laid the groundwork for the country's later rise to become an economic superpower.

[ 208 ] Critics argue that policies such as the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution were impediments to industrialization and modernization that delayed economic development and claim that China's economy underwent its rapid growth only after Maoist policies had been widely abandoned. All in all, both supporters and critics alike generally agree that the human cost has been staggering.

[ 209 ] Maoism [ edit ] Maoism is an adapted Sino-centric version of Marxism–Leninism .

[ 377 ] While believing in democratic centralism , where party decisions are brought about by scrutiny and debate and then are binding upon all members of the party once implemented, Mao did not accept dissenters to the party's decisions.

[ 360 ] Through the Cultural Revolution and the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries , Mao attempted to purge any subversive idea—especially capitalist or Western threat—with heavy force, justifying his actions as the necessary way for the central authority to keep power.

[ 360 ] At the same time, Mao emphasized the importance of cultural heritage and individual choice as a way of creating this national unity. He described his ideal system as "a political situation in which there is both centralism and democracy, both discipline and freedom, both unity of purpose and personal ease of mind and liveliness to facilitate the socialist revolution".

[ 360 ] While the system advocates contradiction, Mao believed the state above all could provide the masses with the tools for their own expression, but his own brand of self-expression was wholly manufactured, built largely on replacing traditional practices and artifacts of Chinese culture with his own. Through this, transformation of the people towards an internal party collectiveness was possible.

[ 360 ] Notably, Mao's authoritarianism was rooted in a collective bottom-up style of empowerment. In his system, the proletariat and peasantry were responsible for rising up against the bureaucracy and capital of the state.

[ 377 ] Joining the peasant class with the bourgeoisie of the countryside (the land-holding, local farmers), the group was able to stifle the claims to power by the wealthier, urban landowners through the banner of communism . Only when this collection of peasants and petty bourgeoisie existed could Mao grow his own, custom bureaucracy.

[ 377 ] Once this unity was established, Mao argued that the people were the ones who could control the state, but his government's intense control over the citizenry emphasizes the contradiction in his theory—a contradiction, he maintained, was a necessary reality of their specialized system.

[ 377 ] Post-Maoism [ edit ] Following the Chinese economic reforms in the 1980s by Deng Xiaoping , most then current and former authoritarian socialist regimes have followed the Chinese model while only leaders such as Kim Jong-il and Mobutu Sese Seko maintained their orthodox views. Countries such as Vietnam ( socialist-oriented market economy ) and more recently Cuba have followed the Chinese socialist market economy . With the Great Recession , the Washington Consensus has been losing favour to the Beijing Consensus. According to Joshua Kurlantzick , the Chinese model "offer a viable alternative to the leading democracies. In many ways, their systems pose the most serious challenge to democratic capitalism since the rise of communism and fascism in the 1920s and early 1930s".

[ 254 ] While arguing that "the 'China model' has become shorthand for economic liberalization without political liberalization", Kurlantzick cautiones that "China's model of development is actually more complex. It builds on earlier, state-centered Asian models of development such as in South Korea and Taiwan, while taking uniquely Chinese steps designed to ensure that the Communist Party remains central to economic and political policy-making". Kurlantzick argues that "the Beijing government maintains a high degree of control over the economy, but it is hardly returning to socialism". China developed "a hybrid form of capitalism in which it has opened its economy to some extent, but it also ensures the government controls strategic industries, picks corporate winners, determines investments by state funds, and pushes the banking sector to support national champion firms". Although noting that "China privatized many state firms" in the 1980s and 1990s, he states that "the central government still controls roughly 120 companies. [...] Working through these networks, the Beijing leadership sets state priorities, gives signals to companies, and determines corporate agendas, but does so without the direct hand of the state appearing in public".

[ 254 ] According to Kurlantzick, "government intervention in business is utilized, in a way not possible in a free-market democracy, to strengthen the power of the ruling regime and China's position internationally. [...] In short, the China model sees commerce as a means to promote national interests, and not just to empower (and potentially to make wealthy) individuals. And for over three decades, China's model of development has delivered staggering successes". Along with India, China is providing "virtually the only growth in the whole global economy" and in about thirty years the country has gone from a poor, mostly agrarian nation to the second-largest economy in the world.

[ 254 ] Arab world [ edit ] See also: Arab socialism Socialism was introduced into the Middle East in the form of populist policies designed to galvanize the working class into overthrowing colonial powers and their domestic allies. These policies were held by authoritarian states interested in the rapid industrialisation and social equalisation of Arab nations and often were characterised by redistributive or protectionist economic policies, lower class mobilization, charismatic leaders and promises to improve national living standards.

[ 378 ] Those states were progressive in terms of the colonial development that had occurred thus far. They allowed important political and economic gains to be made by workers, encouraged land redistribution, unseated oligarchical political powers and implemented import-substituting industrialisation development strategies.

[ 378 ] With the collapse of the Eastern Bloc following the Revolutions of 1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991 as well as the push for democratization , many Arab states have moved toward a model of fiscal discipline proposed by the Washington Consensus .

[ 378 ] Although authoritarian leaders of those states implemented democratic institutions during the 1980s and 1990s, their multi-party elections created an arena in which business elites could lobby for personal interests while largely silencing the lower class.

[ 378 ] Economic liberalisation in these regions yielded economies that led to regimes built on the support of rent-seeking urban elites, with political opposition inviting the prospect of political marginalisation and even retaliation.

[ 378 ] Academics and political scientists have classified Ba'athist Syria as an Arab government that is based on the cold war era model of authoritarian socialism.

[ a ] While some Trotskyists such as the Committee for a Workers' International have included Ba'athist Syria as an authoritarian socialist state when they have had a nationalized economy as deformed workers' states , [ 387 ] [ 388 ] other socialists argued that the neo-Ba'athists promoted capitalists from within the party and outside their countries.

[ 389 ] Resistance to democratisation [ edit ] Arab world A great deal of debate has been paid by the field of comparative politics to how the Arab region was able to avoid the third wave of democratisation . A number of arguments have been offered by professionals in the field, ranging from a discussion of prerequisites for democratisation not supported by the Arab culture to a lack of democratic actors initiating the necessary democratic transition.

Marsha Pripstein Posusney argues that the "patriarchal and tribal mentality of the culture is an impediment to the development of pluralist values", rendering Arab citizens prone to accept patriarchal leaders and lacking the national unity that many argue is necessary for democratization to be successful.

[ 7 ] Eva Bellin concedes that the prevalence of Islam is a distinguishing factor of the region and therefore must contribute to the region's exceptionalism, "given Islam's presumed inhospitality to democracy".

[ 7 ] Posusney argues that this "intrinsic incompatibility between democracy and Islam" remains unproven given that efforts to test this association quantitatively have failed to produce conclusive results.

[ 7 ] Ethnic divisions in the area have also been cited as a factor as well as a weak civil society, a state-controlled economy, poverty, low literacy rates and inequality.

[ 7 ] [ 390 ] In his book Debating Arab Authoritarianism: Dynamics and Durability in Nondemocratic Regimes , Oliver Schlumberger has argued that there is in fact an international ambivalence toward authoritarianism in the Middle East given that stability is preferred over the uncertainty of democratisation due to the region's oil and gas supplies and the strategic importance of its geopolitical location.

[ 390 ] Africa [ edit ] See also: African socialism Léopold Sédar Senghor During the 1945 Pan-African Conference , calls for increased organization, development and self-determination in the poverty stricken African continent put the impetus on colonial powers to negotiate national sovereignty .

[ 5 ] While there were few Marxist movements into the continent, Soviet Union activity spurred anti-imperialist and globalization movements from African countries. The congress established national liberation as the main topic of their sessions, emphasizing the elimination and exploitation by the imperialist powers over authentic national sovereignty. However, they did not establish clear social or political parameters for this new liberation.

[ 5 ] African leaders consistently viewed socialism as a direct rejection of the colonial system and in turn dismissed the notion of creating independent capitalist systems throughout the continent. They attempted to infuse various forms of socialism—some Marxist–Leninist, others democratic—into tailored ideologies specific to each country.

[ 5 ] Once these systems were in place, countries developed towards a "focal institutional" society. According to sociologist William Friedland, societies adopted a totalitarian vision of rule, allowing one-party systems and institutions to "penetrate every sphere of private or public activity".

[ 6 ] Senegal [ edit ] Senegalese President Leopold Sedar Senghor was among the first and most vocal African advocates for socialism. Before being elected president, Senghor served as one of nine African delegates to the 1945 French Constituent Assembly, negotiating for the transfer of self-governing and policy-making power through locally elected councils.

[ 391 ] The measure shortly failed, keeping autonomy from the colonies until the independence movements of the 1960s.

After Senegalese independence in 1960, Senghor's Union Progresiste Senegalaise , a derivative of the French Socialist Party , grew massive support throughout the continent.

[ 6 ] Much of his party's success hinged on his revisionist version of Marxism–Leninism, where he argued that "the major contradiction of Marxism is that it presents itself as a science, whereas, despite its denials, it is based on an ethic".

[ 6 ] By framing it as an ethic, Senghor was able to remove the strict determinism from the ideology, allowing it to be molded towards an Afro-centric model. His revision proved similar to that of Benito Mussolini as he called on a national movement from and for his one-party-ruled government, arguing: "In a word, we must awaken the National Consciousness. [...] But the government cannot and must not do it all. It must be helped by the party. [...] Our party must be the consciousness of the masses".

[ 6 ] Ghana [ edit ] In the same vein as Senghor, socialist leader Kwame Nkrumah sought to advance this one-party, nationalized form of socialist obedience. Nkrumah stressed the importance of government-owned property and resources. He maintained that "production for private profit deprives a large section of the people of the goods and services produced", advocating public ownership to fit the "people's needs".

[ 392 ] To accomplish this, Nkrumah emphasized the importance of discipline and obedience towards the single socialist party. He argued that if people submitted and accepted the singular party's program, political independence would be possible.

[ 392 ] By 1965, his one-party rule had produced an Assembly entirely made up of his own party members.

[ 393 ] Nkrumah saw law as a malleable weapon of political power, not as a product of a complex system of political institutions.

[ 393 ] Ghanaian power structures were dominated and controlled by his hand, but elite landowners questioned the legitimacy of Nkrumah's power. Those elites were only afforded one choice, namely to align with their government if they wanted access to the state. Gradually, those who were not granted or did not desire entrance into the party created regions blocs.

[ 394 ] The Asante emerged as a regional force capable political sway. With the power to set the agenda, the authoritarian party often clashed with these emerging regional groups, ultimately undermining the one-party system.

[ 394 ] Tanzania [ edit ] Julius Nyerere attempted to socialist reform for Tanzania following those in Ghana and Senegal . The tenets of his initiatives were to promote the Tanzanian economy; secure state control over development; create a sole political party called the Tanganyika African National Union (TANU) which would be under his control; and share the benefits of all gathered income.

[ 395 ] The system—called ujaama—became a tool for nationalization of the Tanzanian people. In the system, all Tanzanains were encouraged to run for office, with no campaign funding allowed. Speeches in the election would not focus on the national issues, but rather on the quality of the individual, each of whom would be closely controlled by TANU.

[ 395 ] Structurally, the power was shared along regional boundaries, giving increased policy making power and resource allocation to these regions. Local institutions were downplayed, with leadership organizations often facing subversion from higher governmental structures.

[ 396 ] The first wave of elections in the Tanzanian general election produced a 100% voting rate for TANU officials.

[ 397 ] [ 398 ] Latin America [ edit ] See also: Pink tide Socialism of the 21st century is an interpretation of socialist principles first advocated by German sociologist and political analyst Heinz Dieterich and taken up by a number of Latin American leaders. Dieterich argued in 1996 that both free-market industrial capitalism and 20th-century authoritarian socialism have failed to solve urgent problems of humanity like poverty, hunger , exploitation , economic oppression , sexism , racism , the destruction of natural resources and the absence of a truly participatory democracy .

[ 399 ] While having democratic socialist elements, it primarily resembles Marxist revisionism .

[ 400 ] Leaders who have advocated for this form of socialism include Hugo Chávez of Venezuela , Néstor Kirchner of Argentina , Rafael Correa of Ecuador , Evo Morales of Bolivia and Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil .

[ 401 ] Because of the local unique historical conditions, it is often contrasted with previous applications of socialism in other countries, with a major difference being the effort towards a more decentralised and participatory planning process.

[ 400 ] Critics claim that this form of socialism in Latin America acts as a façade for authoritarianism. The charisma of figures like Hugo Chávez and mottoes such as "Country, Socialism, or Death!" have drawn comparisons to the Latin American dictators and caudillos of the past.

[ 402 ] According to Steven Levitsky , only under "the dictatorships of the past [...] were presidents reelected for life", with Levitsky further stating that while Latin America experienced democracy, citizens opposed "indefinite reelection, because of the dictatorships of the past".

[ 8 ] Levitsky then noted how in Ecuador, Nicaragua and Venezuela "reelection is associated with the same problems of 100 years ago".

[ 8 ] In 2014, The Washington Post also argued that "Bolivia's Evo Morales, David Ortega of Nicaragua and the late Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez [...] used the ballot box to weaken or eliminate term limits".

[ 403 ] The sustainability and stability of economic reforms associated with governments adhering to such socialism have also been questioned. Latin American countries have primarily financed their social programs with extractive exports like petroleum, natural gas and minerals, creating a dependency that some economists claim has caused inflation and slowed growth.

[ 404 ] While some critics say the crisis is caused by socialism or the country's socialist policies, [ 405 ] its policies have been described as This article contains weasel words : vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information .

Such statements should be clarified or removed .

( June 2025 ) populist [ 406 ] [ 407 ] or "hyper-populist" [ 408 ] and the crisis has more to do with authoritarianism as well as anti-democratic governance, corruption and mismanagement of the economy.

[ 409 ] [ 410 ] [ 411 ] [ 412 ] According to analysts and critics alike, the Bolivarian government has used those populist policies in order to maintain political power.

[ 413 ] [ 414 ] [ 415 ] Although socialists have welcomed a socialism of the 21st century, they have been skeptical of Latin America's examples and criticized their authoritarian qualities and occasional cults of personality. While citing their progressive role, they argue that the appropriate label for these governments is populism rather than socialism .

[ 416 ] [ 417 ] [ 418 ] [ 419 ] [ 420 ] Chávez and Maduro have been compared to Lenin and Stalin, respectively, including Chávez and Lenin's early deaths and the economic problems after their deaths. Maduro, who has joked about his similar appearance and walrus moustache with Stalin, [ 421 ] argued he is not a new Stalin and claimed to be merely following Chávez.

[ 422 ] Nonetheless, Maduro has been variously described by newspapers such as the New Statesman and The Times as the "Stalin of the Caribbean" and the "tropical Stalin", respectively.

[ 423 ] [ 424 ] According to The Daily Beast , Maduro has embraced the "tropical Stalin" moniker.

[ 425 ] According to Joshua Kurlantzick, Latin American countries such as Nicaragua and Venezuela have been following the Chinese model and are described as authoritarian capitalist regimes.

[ 254 ] Venezuela [ edit ] See also: Crisis in Venezuela Hugo Chávez Venezuela under Chávez and his Bolivarian Revolution moved toward authoritarian socialism.

[ 426 ] [ 427 ] Chávez campaigned for a constituent assembly and to draft a new constitution, which was approved in 1999. The 1999 Venezuelan constitution eliminated much of Venezuela's checks and balances , Chávez's government controlled every branch of the Venezuelan government for over 15 years after it passed until the 2015 parliamentary election .

[ 428 ] [ 429 ] The 1999 constitution also brought the military closer to political power, allowing military officers the right to vote, eliminating its apolitical nature, and transferring the function of military promotions of high officers to the president, which in the 1961 constitution was the responsibility of the Senate .

[ 430 ] By January 2007, after being reelected in the 2006 presidential election and swearing in as president, Chávez began openly proclaiming the ideology of socialism of the 21st century.

[ 431 ] The Bolivarian government used "centralized decision-making and a top-down approach to policy formation, the erosion of vertical power-sharing and concentration of power in the presidency, the progressive deinstitutionalization at all levels, and an increasingly paternalist relationship between state and society" in order to hasten changes in Venezuela.

[ 432 ] In practice, Chávez's administration proposed and enacted populist economic policies.

[ 433 ] [ 434 ] Using record-high oil revenues of the 2000s, his government nationalized key industries, created communal councils and implemented social programs known as the Bolivarian missions to expand access to food, housing, healthcare and education.

[ 435 ] [ 436 ] [ 437 ] [ 438 ] [ 439 ] [ 440 ] [ 441 ] [ 442 ] [ 443 ] Venezuela received high oil profits in the mid-2000s, [ 444 ] resulting in improvements in areas such as poverty, literacy, income equality and quality of life occurring primarily between 2003 and 2007.

[ 436 ] [ 444 ] [ 445 ] However, those gains started to reverse after 2012 and it has been argued that government policies did not address structural inequalities .

[ 446 ] On 2 June 2010, Chávez declared an economic war due to shortages in Venezuela , beginning the crisis in Bolivarian Venezuela .

[ 447 ] By the end of Chávez's presidency in the early 2010s, economic actions performed by his government during the preceding decade such as deficit spending [ 448 ] [ 449 ] [ 450 ] [ 451 ] [ 452 ] and price controls [ 453 ] [ 454 ] [ 455 ] [ 456 ] [ 457 ] proved to be unsustainable, with the economy of Venezuela faltering while poverty, [ 436 ] [ 444 ] [ 458 ] inflation [ 454 ] and shortages increased. His use of enabling acts [ 459 ] and his government's use of Bolivarian propaganda were also controversial.

[ 460 ] [ 461 ] [ 462 ] [ 463 ] On the socialist development in Venezuela, Chávez argued with the second government plan ( Plan de la Patria [ es ] ) that "socialism has just begun to implant its internal dynamism among us" whilst acknowledging that "the socio-economic formation that still prevails in Venezuela is capitalist and rentier ".

[ 464 ] [ non-primary source needed ] This same thesis is defended by Maduro.

[ 465 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Nicolás Maduro In 2015, The Economist argued that the Bolivarian Revolution in Venezuela—now under Nicolás Maduro after Chávez's death in 2013—was devolving from authoritarianism to dictatorship as opposition politicians were jailed for plotting to undermine the government, violence was widespread and independent media shut down.

[ 466 ] Chávez and Maduro administrations' economic policies led to shortages, a high inflation rate and a dysfunctional economy.

[ 467 ] The government has attributed Venezuela's economic problems to the decline in oil prices, sanctions imposed by the United States and economic sabotage by the opposition.

[ 468 ] Western media coverage of Chávez and other Latin American leaders from the 21st-century socialist movement has been criticized as unfair by their supporters and left-leaning media critics.

[ 469 ] [ 470 ] Broadly, chavismo policies include nationalization, social welfare programs and opposition to neoliberalism , particularly the policies of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank . According to Chávez, Venezuelan socialism accepts private property , [ 471 ] but this socialism is a form of social democracy that seeks to promote social property .

[ 472 ] In January 2007, Chávez proposed to build the communal state, whose main idea is to build self-government institutions like communal councils, communes and communal cities.

[ 473 ] While Chávez remained relatively popular throughout his time in office, Maduro suffered unpopularity with the deterioration of the economy during his tenure and there was a decline of self-identified chavistas .

[ 474 ] [ 475 ] [ 476 ] Despite its socialist rhetoric, chavismo has been frequently described as being state capitalist by critics.

[ 477 ] [ 478 ] Critics frequently point towards Venezuela's large private sector.

[ 479 ] In 2009, roughly 70% of Venezuela's gross domestic product was created by the private sector.

[ 480 ] According to Asa Cusack, an expert on Latin America and frequent contributor to mainstream media , Venezuela's economy remained "market-based and private-sector dominated" throughout Chávez's time in office. Although "the social economy and the public sector were heavily promoted", for example through nationalization, "the private sector was expected to remain dominant, and it did. A centrally planned socialist economy like Cuba's was neither the aim nor the reality".

[ 481 ] Chavismo has been widely discussed in the media.

[ 482 ] [ 483 ] [ 484 ] [ 485 ] [ 486 ] [ 487 ] [ 488 ] [ 489 ] According to Kirk A. Hawkins, scholars are generally divided into two camps, namely a liberal-democratic one that sees chavismo as an instance of democratic backsliding and a radical-democratic one that upholds chavismo as the fulfillment of its aspirations for participatory democracy. Hawkins argues that the most important division between these two groups is neither methodological nor theoretical, but ideological. It is a division over basic normative views of democracy, i.e.

liberalism versus radicalism . Scholars in the first camp tended to adhere to a classical liberal ideology that valued procedural democracy (competitive elections, widespread participation defined primarily in terms of voting and civil liberties ) as the political means best suited to achieving human welfare. They saw chavismo in a mostly negative light as a case of democratic backsliding or even competitive authoritarianism or electoral authoritarian regime. On the other hand, scholars in the second camp generally adhered to a classical socialist ideology that mistrusted market institutions in either the state or the economy. Although accepting the importance of liberal-democratic institutions, they saw procedural democracy as insufficient to ensure political inclusion and emphasized participatory forms of democracy and collective worker ownership in the economy.

[ 490 ] Criticism [ edit ] Main article: Criticism of communist party rule Left-wing [ edit ] See also: Anti-Leninism and Anti-Stalinist left Left-wing critics argue that it is a form of state capitalism that followed anti-imperialism , populism , nationalism and social democracy. Rather than representing a socialist planned economy, the Soviet model has been described in practice as either a form of state capitalism [ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] or a non-planned , command economy.

[ 69 ] [ 147 ] [ 70 ] The fidelity of those varied socialist revolutionaries, leaders and parties to the work of Karl Marx and that of other socialist thinkers is highly contested and has been rejected by many Marxists and other socialists alike.

[ 491 ] Some academics, scholars and socialists have criticized the linking of all leftist and socialist ideals to the excesses of authoritarian socialism.

[ 492 ] Anarchism and Marxism [ edit ] Many democratic and libertarian socialists, including anarchists , mutualists and syndicalists , deride it as state socialism for its support of a workers' state instead of abolishing the bourgeois state apparatus outright. They use the term in contrast with their own form of socialism which involves either collective ownership (in the form of worker cooperatives ) or common ownership of the means of production without central planning by the state. Those libertarian socialists believe there is no need for a state in a socialist system because there would be no class to suppress and no need for an institution based on coercion and regard the state being a remnant of capitalism.

[ 493 ] [ 494 ] [ 495 ] They hold that statism is antithetical to true socialism, [ 25 ] the goal of which is the eyes of libertarian socialists such as William Morris , who wrote as follows in a Commonweal article: "State Socialism? — I don't agree with it; in fact I think the two words contradict one another, and that it is the business of Socialism to destroy the State and put Free Society in its place".

[ 496 ] Classical and orthodox Marxists also view the term as an oxymoron, arguing that while an association for managing production and economic affairs would exist in socialism, it would no longer be a state in the Marxist definition which is based on domination by one class . Preceding the Bolshevik-led revolution in Russia, many socialist groups—including reformists, orthodox Marxist currents such as council communism and the Mensheviks as well as anarchists and other libertarian socialists—criticized the idea of using the state to conduct planning and nationalization of the means of production as a way to establish socialism.

[ 497 ] Lenin himself acknowledged his policies as state capitalism, [ 258 ] [ 259 ] [ 260 ] [ 261 ] defending them from left-wing criticism, [ 498 ] but arguing that they were necessary for the future development of socialism and not socialist in themselves.

[ 499 ] [ 500 ] American Marxist Raya Dunayevskaya dismissed it as a type of state capitalism [ 501 ] [ 502 ] [ 503 ] because state ownership of the means of production is a form of state capitalism; [ 504 ] the dictatorship of the proletariat is a form of democracy and single-party rule is undemocratic; [ 505 ] and Marxism–Leninism is neither Marxism nor Leninism, but rather a composite ideology which socialist leaders such as Joseph Stalin used to expediently determine what is communism and what is not communism among the Eastern Bloc countries.

[ 506 ] Left communism [ edit ] Critical of the economy and government of socialist states, left communists such as the Italian Amadeo Bordiga argued that Marxism–Leninism was a form of political opportunism which preserved rather than destroyed capitalism because of the claim that the exchange of commodities would occur under socialism ; the use of popular front organisations by the Communist International ; [ 507 ] and that a political vanguard organised by organic centralism was more effective than a vanguard organised by democratic centralism.

[ 508 ] For Bordiga and those left communists supporting his conception of Stalinism, Joseph Stalin and later Mao Zedong, Ho Chi Minh , Che Guevara and other anti-imperialist revolutionaries were great Romantic revolutionaries, i.e. bourgeois revolutionaries. According to this view, the Stalinist regimes that came into existence after 1945 were extending the bourgeois nature of prior revolutions that degenerated as all had in common a policy of expropriation and agrarian and productive development which those left communist considered negations of previous conditions and not the genuine construction of socialism.

[ 509 ] While the Russian Revolution was a proletarian revolution , it degenerated into a bourgeois revolution [ 510 ] and represented the French Revolution of the Eastern and Third World , with socialism taking liberalism's place.

[ 507 ] [ 511 ] Although most Marxist–Leninists distinguish between communism and socialism, Bordiga, who did consider himself a Leninist and has been described as being "more Leninist than Lenin", [ 512 ] did not distinguish between the two in the same way Marxist–Leninists do. Both Lenin and Bordiga did not see socialism as a separate mode of production from communism, but rather just as how communism looks as it emerges from capitalism before it has "developed on its own foundations".

[ 513 ] This is coherent with Marx and Engels, who used the terms communism and socialism interchangeably.

[ 514 ] [ 515 ] Like Lenin, Bordiga used socialism to mean what Marx called the " lower-stage of communism ".

[ 516 ] For Bordiga, both stages of communist or socialist society—with stages referring to historical materialism—were characterized by the gradual absence of money, the market and so on, the difference between them being that earlier in the first stage a system of rationing would be used to allocate goods to people while in communism this could be abandoned in favour of full free access. This view distinguished Bordiga from Marxist–Leninists, who tended and still tend to telescope the first two stages and so have money and the other exchange categories surviving into socialism, but Bordiga would have none of this. For him, no society in which money, buying and selling and the rest survived could be regarded as either socialist or communist—these exchange categories would die out before the socialist rather than the communist stage was reached.

[ 507 ] Stalin first made the claim that the Soviet Union had reached the lower stage of communism and argued that the law of value still operated within a socialist economy.

[ 517 ] Other left communists such as the councilists explicitly reject the Leninist vanguard party and the organic centralism promoted by Bordigists .

[ 518 ] Otto Rühle saw the Soviet Union as a form of state capitalism that had much in common with the state-centred capitalism of the West as well as fascism.

[ 510 ] While Rühle saw the Leninist vanguardist party as an appropriate form for the overthrow of the tsarist autocracy, it was ultimately an inappropriate form for a proletarian revolution. For Rühle and others, no matter what the actual intentions of the Bolsheviks , what they actually succeeded in bringing about was much more like the bourgeois revolutions of Europe than a proletarian revolution.

[ 510 ] [ 519 ] Libertarian communism and socialism [ edit ] A variety of non-state, libertarian communist and socialist positions reject the concept of a socialist state altogether, believing that the modern state is a byproduct of capitalism and cannot be used for the establishment of a socialist system. They reason that a socialist state is antithetical to socialism and that socialism will emerge spontaneously from the grassroots level in an evolutionary manner , developing its own unique political and economic institutions for a highly organized stateless society . Libertarian communists, including anarchists , councilists, leftists and Marxists , also reject the concept of a socialist state for being antithetical to socialism, but they believe that socialism and communism can only be established through revolution and dissolving the existence of the state.

[ 494 ] [ 495 ] Within the socialist movement, there is criticism towards the use of the term socialist state in relation to countries such as China and previously of Soviet Union and Eastern and Central European states before what some term the "collapse of Stalinism" in 1989.

[ 520 ] [ 521 ] [ 522 ] [ 523 ] Anti-authoritarian communists and socialists such as anarchists, other democratic and libertarian socialists as well as revolutionary syndicalists and left communists [ 145 ] [ 524 ] claim that the so-called socialist states cannot be called socialist because they actually presided over state capitalist [ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] or non-planned administrative economies.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Those socialists who oppose any system of state control whatsoever believe in a more decentralized approach which puts the means of production directly into the hands of the workers rather than indirectly through state bureaucracies [ 494 ] [ 495 ] which they claim represent a new elite or class.

[ 525 ] [ 526 ] [ 527 ] [ 528 ] This leads them to consider state socialism a form of state capitalism (an economy based on centralized management, capital accumulation and wage labor, but with the state owning the means of production) [ 529 ] which Engels and other Bolshevik leaders such as Vladimir Lenin and Nikolai Bukharin stated would be the final form of capitalism rather than socialism.

[ 142 ] [ 145 ] Similarly, others pointed out that nationalisation and state ownership have nothing to do with socialism by itself, having been historically carried out for various different purposes under a wide variety of different political and economic systems.

[ 530 ] Trotskyism [ edit ] Some Trotskyists following on from Tony Cliff deny that it is socialism, calling it state capitalism.

[ 531 ] Other Trotskyists agree that these states could not be described as socialist, [ 532 ] but they deny that those states were capitalist, [ 533 ] supporting Leon Trotsky's analysis of pre-restoration Soviet Union as a workers' state that had degenerated into a bureaucratic dictatorship which rested on a largely nationalized industry run according to a plan of production.

[ 534 ] [ 535 ] [ 536 ] and claimed that the former Stalinist states of Central and Eastern Europe were deformed workers' states based on the same relations of production as the Soviet Union.

[ 537 ] Trotsky believed that regardless of their intellectual capacity, central planners operate without the input and participation of the millions of people who participate in the economy that can understand and respond to local conditions and changes in the economy. In advocating a decentralised planned socialist economy, Trotsky and some of his followers have criticized central state planning as being unable to effectively coordinate all economic activity.

[ 538 ] Some Trotskyists have emphasised Trotsky's revolutionary-democratic socialism [ 539 ] and Trotskyists such as Hal Draper described it as such.

[ 18 ] [ 540 ] Those third camp revolutionary-democratic Trotskyists and socialists supported a socialist political revolution that would establish or re-establish socialist democracy in deformed or degenerated workers' states.

[ 541 ] [ 542 ] Some such as Draper also compared social democracy and Stalinism as two forms of socialism from above.

[ 1 ] [ 543 ] Right-wing [ edit ] See also: Criticism of socialism Right-wing criticism is mainly related to communist party rule as well as anti-communism , anti-Marxism and anti-socialism .

[ 15 ] Another criticism is that of the economic calculation problem as first outlined by Austrian School economists Ludwig von Mises [ 544 ] and Friedrich Hayek, [ 545 ] followed by the socialist calculation debate .

[ 546 ] [ 547 ] [ 548 ] Socialist states and state socialism are often conflated to and referred to by detractors simply as socialism . Austrian School economists such as Mises and Hayek continually used socialism as a synonym for authoritarian socialism and its command economy.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] The attributive state is usually added by socialists with a non-state-based method for achieving socialism to criticize state socialism.

[ 549 ] This is especially notable in the United States, where socialism is a pejorative term used to refer to either authoritarian socialist states, [ 75 ] any state or tax-funded industry, program and service, [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] or the degree of government and economic interventionism by the state.

[ 71 ] In their broader critique of socialism, right-wing commentators have emphasised the lack of democracy in socialist states that are considered to be authoritarian or undemocratic, arguing that democracy and socialism are incompatible. Chicago School economist Milton Friedman argued that a "society which is socialist cannot also be democratic" in the sense of "guaranteeing individual freedom".

[ 15 ] Sociologist Robert Nisbet , a philosophical conservative who began his career as a leftist, argued in 1978 that there is "not a single free socialism to be found anywhere in the world".

[ 15 ] For anti-communist academic Richard Pipes , the tendency to "merge political and economic power" is "implicit in socialism" and authoritarianism is "virtually inevitable".

[ 15 ] According to the Hungarian-born political sociologist and communist-studies scholar Paul Hollander , a critic of communism and left-wing politics in general, [ 550 ] egalitarianism was one of the features of authoritarian socialist states that was so attractive to Western intellectuals that they quietly justified their authoritarianism and the murder of millions of capitalists, landowners and supposedly wealthy kulaks in order to achieve this equality.

[ 551 ] See also [ edit ] Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal Anti-authoritarianism Authoritarianism Authoritarian capitalism Libertarian socialism State capitalism State socialism Tankie Notes [ edit ] ^ Sources: [ 379 ] [ 380 ] [ 381 ] [ 382 ] [ 383 ] [ 384 ] [ 385 ] [ 386 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Draper, Hal (1970) [196 3].

Two Souls of Socialism (revised ed.). Highland Park, Michigan: International Socialists. Archived from the original on 20 January 2016 . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ a b c Huntington 1970 .

^ a b c Löwy 1986 , p. 264.

^ a b c Amandae 2003 .

^ a b c d Mushkat, Marion (June 1972). "African Socialism Reappraised and Reconsidered".

Istituto Italiano per l'Africa e l'Oriente .

2 : 151– 153.

^ a b c d e Gregor, A. James (July 1967). "African Socialism, Socialism and Fascism: An Appraisal".

The Review of Politics .

29 (3): 324– 353.

doi : 10.1017/s0034670500032745 .

S2CID 144400114 .

^ a b c d e Posusney, Marsha Pripstein (2005).

Authoritarianism in the Middle East: Regimes and Resistance . Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-58826-317-9 .

^ a b c Rogers, Tim (11 April 2014).

"Does Ecuador's leader aspire to a perpetual presidency?" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ a b Nation, R. Craig (1992).

Black Earth, Red Star: A History of Soviet Security Policy, 1917-1991 .

Cornell University Press . pp.

85 –6.

ISBN 9780801480072 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 .

^ Barrett (1978) : "If we were to extend the definition of socialism to include Labor Britain or socialist Sweden, there would be no difficulty in refuting the connection between capitalism and democracy."; Heilbroner et al. (1991) ; Kendall (2011) , pp. 125–127: "Sweden, Great Britain, and France have mixed economies, sometimes referred to as democratic socialism—an economic and political system that combines private ownership of some of the means of production, governmental distribution of some essential goods and services, and free elections. For example, government ownership in Sweden is limited primarily to railroads, mineral resources, a public bank, and liquor and tobacco operations."; Li (2015) , pp. 60–69: "The scholars in the camp of democratic socialism believe that China should draw on the Sweden experience, which is suitable not only for the West but also for China. In post-Mao China, the Chinese intellectuals are confronted with a variety of models. The liberals favour the American model and share the view that the Soviet model has become archaic and should be abandoned. Meanwhile, democratic socialism in Sweden provided an alternative model. Its sustained economic development and extensive welfare programs fascinated many. Numerous scholars within the democratic socialist camp argue that China should model itself politically and economically on Sweden, which is viewed as more genuinely socialist than China. There is a growing consensus among them that in the Nordic countries the welfare state has been extraordinarily successful in eliminating poverty." ^ "Tankies: A Data-driven Understanding of Left-Wing Extremists on Social Media" . 2 October 2023.

^ a b c Lipow, Arthur (1991).

Authoritarian Socialism in America: Edward Bellamy and the Nationalist Movement . Berkeley: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0520075436 .

^ Draper, Hal (1963).

The Two Souls of Socialism: Socialism from Below v. Socialism from Above . New York: Young People's Socialist League.

^ Berger (1997) , pp. 853–854; Lingle, Owens & Rowley (1998) ; Budhwar (2004) , p. 221; Bhasin (2007) , pp. 39–50 ^ a b c d e Barrett 1978 .

^ a b c d Young, James D. (1988).

Socialism Since 1889: A Biographical History . Totowa: Barnes & Noble Books.

ISBN 978-0-389-20813-6 .

^ Draper, Hal (1970) [1963].

Two Souls of Socialism (revised ed.). Highland Park, Michigan: International Socialists. Archived from the original on 20 January 2016 . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

We have mentioned several cases of this conviction that socialism is the business of a new ruling minority, non-capitalist in nature and therefore guaranteed pure, imposing its own domination either temporarily (for a mere historical era) or even permanently. In either case, this new ruling class is likely to see its goal as an Education Dictatorship over the masses — to Do Them Good, of course — the dictatorship being exercised by an elite party which suppresses all control from below, or by benevolent despots or Savior-Leaders of some kind, or by Shaw's 'Supermen,' by eugenic manipulators, by Proudhon's 'anarchist' managers or Saint-Simon's technocrats or their more modern equivalents — with up-to-date terms and new verbal screens which can be hailed as fresh social theory as against 'nineteenth-century Marxism.' ^ a b Lipow, Arthur (1991).

Authoritarian Socialism in America: Edward Bellamy and the Nationalist Movement .

University of California Press . p. 1.

ISBN 9780520075436 .

^ Hahnel, Robin (2005).

Economic Justice and Democracy .

Routledge . p. 138.

ISBN 0-415-93344-7 .

^ Lesigne (1887).

"Socialistic Letters" Archived 2020-08-07 at the Wayback Machine .

Le Radical . Retrieved 20 June 2020.

^ Tucker, Benjamin (1911) [1888].

State Socialism and Anarchism: How Far They Agree and Wherein They Differ . Fifield.

^ Tucker, Benjamin (1893).

Instead of a Book by a Man Too Busy to Write One . pp.

363– 364.

^ Brown, Susan Love (1997). "The Free Market as Salvation from Government". In Carrier, James G. (ed.).

Meanings of the Market: The Free Market in Western Culture . Berg Publishers. p. 107.

ISBN 9781859731499 .

^ Woodcock, George (1962).

Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements . Melbourne: Penguin . p. 263.

^ a b McKay, Iain, ed. (2008). "Isn't libertarian socialism an oxymoron?".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. I. Stirling: AK Press .

ISBN 978-1-902593-90-6 .

OCLC 182529204 .

^ Osgood, Herbert L. (March 1889). "Scientific Anarchism".

Political Science Quarterly .

4 (1). The Academy of Political Science: 1– 36.

doi : 10.2307/2139424 .

JSTOR 2139424 .

^ Volkogonov, Dimitri (1991).

Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy . Translated by Shukman, Harold. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. p. 173.

ISBN 9780297810803 .

^ Huerta de Soto, Jesús (2010).

Socialism, Economic Calculation and Entrepreneurship (4th ed.).

Edward Elgar Publishing . pp.

79– 80.

ISBN 978-1-849-80500-1 .

^ Landa, Ishay (2012).

The Apprentice's Sorcerer: Liberal Tradition and Fascism .

Haymarket Books . pp.

60– 65.

^ Boesche, Roger (2003).

The First Great Political Realist: Kautilya and His Arthashastra .

Lexington Books . p. 67.

ISBN 9780739106075 .

^ Mookerji, Radhakumud.

Chandragupta Maurya and His Times . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 102.

Kautiliya polity was based on a considerable amount of socialism and nationalisation of industries.

^ Ross, W. D.

Aristotle (6th ed.). p. 257.

^ Taylor, Alfred Edward (2001).

Plato: The Man and His Work . Dover. pp.

276– 277.

^ a b c Smitha, Frank E.

"Optimism, Adam Smith, Liberals and Utopians" .

Macrohistory . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ "Birth of the Socialist Idea" .

Australian National University . Retrieved 2 June 2010 .

^ Newman, Michael (2005).

Socialism: A Very Short Introduction .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-280431-6 .

^ a b Bellamy, Edward (1888).

Looking Backward: 2000-1887 .

Houghton Mifflin .

^ Bromley, Kent (1906). "Preface". In Kropotkin, Peter (ed.).

The Conquest of Bread . London and New York City: G. P. Putnam's Sons.

^ a b c d e Block, Walter (15 January 2013). "Was Milton Friedman A Socialist? Yes".

MEST Journal .

1 (1): 11–26.

doi : 10.12709/mest.01.01.01.02.pdf .

^ Hoppe, Hans-Hermann (2013) [1988].

A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism (2nd ed.). Auburn, Alabama: Mises Institute . p. 2.

ISBN 9781933550732 .

^ Ebenstein, Alan (2003).

Friedrich Hayek: A Biography . Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0226181509 .

^ Tebble, Adam; Meadowcroft, John (2013).

F.A. Hayek (Paperback ed.). London: Bloomsbury Academic .

ISBN 978-1441109064 .

^ a b c Hayek, Friedrich (1994).

The Road to Serfdom (50th anniversary ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0-226-32061-8 . Archived from the original on 6 December 2014 . Retrieved 25 November 2011 .

^ a b Mises, Ludwig von (1936) [1922].

Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis . London: Jonathan Cape.

OCLC 72357479 .

^ Mises, Ludwig von (1962) [1927].

The Free and Prosperous Commonwealth: An Exposition of the Ideas of Classical Liberalism . Translated by Raico, Ralph. Princeton, New Jersey: Van Nostrand .

ISBN 9780442090579 .

OCLC 473936839 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Hayek, Friedrich (1944).

The Road to Serfdom .

Routledge .

ISBN 0226320618 .

OCLC 30733740 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Hayek, Friedrich (1944). "Security and Freedom".

The Road to Serfdom .

Routledge .

ISBN 0226320618 .

OCLC 30733740 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Friedman, Milton (1962).

Capitalism and Freedom . Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 9780226264004 .

OCLC 168498 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b c Bel (2006) ; Gat (2007) ; Fuchs (2017) ; Fuchs (2018) ^ Doherty, Brian (June 1995).

"Best of Both Worlds: An Interview with Milton Friedman" .

Reason . Reason Foundation . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ Hayek, Friedrich (1976).

Law, Legislation and Liberty . Vol. 2. Chicago: University of Chicago Press . p. 87.

ISBN 978-0-226-32083-0 .

There is no reason why in a free society government should not assure to all, protection against severe deprivation in the form of an assured minimum income, or a floor below which nobody need to descend. To enter into such an insurance against extreme misfortune may well be in the interest of all; or it may be felt to be a clear moral duty of all to assist, within the organised community, those who cannot help themselves. So long as such a uniform minimum income is provided outside the market to all those who, for any reason, are unable to earn in the market an adequate maintenance, this need not lead to a restriction of freedom, or conflict with the Rule of Law.

^ Klein, Ezra (9 July 2010).

"Hayek on Social Insurance" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on May 14, 2011 . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

There is no reason why, in a society which has reached the general level of wealth ours has, the first kind of security should not be guaranteed to all without endangering general freedom; that is: some minimum of food, shelter and clothing, sufficient to preserve health. Nor is there any reason why the state should not help to organize a comprehensive system of social insurance in providing for those common hazards of life against which few can make adequate provision.

^ Hayek, Friedrich; Hamowy, Ronald, ed. (2011) [1960].

"Why I am Not a Conservative" .

The Constitution of Liberty (definitive ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 9780226315393 .

^ Cottrell, Allin; Cockshott, Paul (1993).

Towards a New Socialism Archived 2014-11-17 at the Wayback Machine . Spokesman.

ISBN 9780851245454 .

^ Epstein, Richard A. (1999).

"Hayekian Socialism" .

Maryland Law Review .

58 (271). Retrieved 22 June 2019.

^ Hayek, Friedrich; Hamowy, Ronald, ed. (2011) [1960].

The Constitution of Liberty (definitive ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 405.

ISBN 9780226315393 . "There is no reason why in a society which has reached the general level of wealth which ours has attained [that security against severe physical privation, the certainty of a given minimum of sustenance for all; or more briefly, the security of a minimum income] should not be guaranteed to all without endangering general freedom. There are difficult questions about the precise standard which should thus be assured [...] but there can be no doubt that some minimum of food, shelter, and clothing, sufficient to preserve health and the capacity to work, can be assured to everybody. Indeed, for a considerable part of the population of England this sort of security has long been achieved.

Nor is there any reason why the state should not assist [...] individuals in providing for those common hazards of life against which, because of their uncertainty, few individuals can make adequate provision. Where, as in the case of sickness and accident, neither the desire to avoid such calamities nor the efforts to overcome their consequences are as a rule weakened by the provision of assistance – where, in short, we deal with genuinely insurable risks – the case for the state's helping to organize a comprehensive system of social insurance is very strong. [...] [And] there is no incompatibility in principle between the state's providing greater security in this way and the preservation of individual freedom. Wherever communal action can mitigate disasters against which the individual can neither attempt to guard himself nor make the provision for the consequences, such communal action should undoubtedly be taken." ^ Wapshott, Nicholas (2011).

Keynes Hayek: The Clash That Defined Modern Economics . New York: W. W. Norton & Company . p. 291.

ISBN 9780393083118 .

^ Harcourt, Bernard (12 September 2012).

"How Paul Ryan enslaves Friedrich Hayek's The Road to Serfdom" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

^ Rothbard, Murray (1963).

America's Great Depression . Princeton, New Jersey: Van Nostrand .

OCLC 173706 .

^ White, Lawrence H. (1999).

"Why Didn't Hayek Favor Laissez Faire in Banking?" (PDF) .

History of Political Economy .

31 (4): 753– 769.

doi : 10.1215/00182702-31-4-753 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2013 . Retrieved 11 April 2013 .

^ Friedman, Milton ; Schwartz, A. J. (1986).

"Has government any role in money?" (PDF) .

Journal of Monetary Economics .

17 (1): 37– 62.

doi : 10.1016/0304-3932(86)90005-X .

^ a b Friedman, Milton (30 January 1999).

"Mr. Market" .

Hoover Institution .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2018 . Retrieved 22 September 2018 .

^ a b c Friedman, Milton (2002) [1962].

Capitalism and Freedom (40th anniversary ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0-226-26421-9 .

^ Frank, Robert H. (23 November 2006).

"The Other Milton Friedman: A Conservative With a Social Welfare Program" .

The New York Times . New York.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 22 February 2017 .

^ Kinsella, Stephan (10 June 2005).

"Friedman and Socialism" .

Mises Wire .

Mises Institute . Retrieved 21 April 2020 .

^ Mises, Ludwig von (2007) [1949].

Human Action: A Treastise on Economics . Liberty Fund. p. 259.

ISBN 9780865976313 .

There is no mixture of the two systems possible or thinkable; there is no such thing as a mixed economy, a system that would be in part capitalistic and in part socialist.

^ Mises, Ludwig von (2007) [1949].

Human Action: A Treastise on Economics . Liberty Fund. p. 259.

ISBN 9780865976313 .

The fact that the state or municipalities own and operate some plants does not alter the characteristic features of a market economy. These publicly owned and operated enterprises are subject to the sovereignty of the market. They must fit themselves, as buyers of raw materials, equipment, and labour, and as sellers of goods and services, into the scheme of the market economy. They are subject to the laws of the market and thereby depend on the consumers who may or may not patronize them. They must strive for profits, or at least, to avoid losses.

^ Mattick, Paul (1969).

"State-Sapitalism and the Mixed Economy" .

Marx and Keynes: The Limits of the Mixed Economy . Boston: Horizons Books/Porter Sargent Publisher.

ISBN 9780875580692 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

To be sure, 'orthodox Marxism' maintains that the mixed economy is still the capitalism of old, just as 'orthodox' bourgeois theory insists that the mixed economy is a camouflaged form of socialism. Generally, however, both the state-capitalist and mixed economies are recognized as economic systems adhering to the principle of progress by way of capital accumulation.

^ a b c d e Wilhelm, John Howard (1985). "The Soviet Union Has an Administered, Not a Planned, Economy".

Soviet Studies .

37 (1): 118– 130.

doi : 10.1080/09668138508411571 .

^ a b c d Ellman, Michael (2007). "The Rise and Fall of Socialist Planning". In Estrin, Saul; Kołodko, Grzegorz W.; Uvalić, Milica (eds.).

Transition and Beyond: Essays in Honour of Mario Nuti . New York City: Palgrave Macmillan . p.

22 .

ISBN 9780230546974 .

In the USSR in the late 1980s the system was normally referred to as the 'administrative-command' economy. What was fundamental to this system was not the plan but the role of administrative hierarchies at all levels of decision making; the absence of control over decision making by the population [...].

^ a b Campbell, John (2012) [2009].

The Iron Lady: Margaret Thatcher: From Grocer's Daughter to Iron Lady .

Random House . p. 95.

ISBN 9781448130672 .

^ a b Reinhardt, Uwe E. (8 May 2009).

"What Is 'Socialized Medicine'?: A Taxonomy of Health Care Systems" .

Economix . The New York Times Company.

The New York Times . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ a b Truman, Harry S.

(10 October 1952).

"Rear Platform and Other Informal Remarks in New York" .

Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

The directive was drafted by Senator Taft at that famous breakfast in New York City a few weeks ago. Senator Taft left that meeting and told the press what the General stands for. Taft explained that the great issue in this campaign is "creeping socialism." Now that is the patented trademark of the special interest lobbies. Socialism is a scare word they have hurled at every advance the people have made in the last 20 years. Socialism is what they called public power. Socialism is what they called social security. Socialism is what they called farm price supports. Socialism is what they called bank deposit insurance. Socialism is what they called the growth of free and independent labor organizations. Socialism is their name for almost anything that helps all the people. When the Republican candidate inscribes the slogan "Down With Socialism" on the banner of his "great crusade," that is really not what he means at all. What he really means is, "Down with Progress—down with Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal," and "down with Harry Truman's Fair Deal." That is what he means.

^ a b Jackson, Samuel (6 January 2012).

"The failure of American political speech" .

The Economist . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

Socialism is not "the government should provide healthcare" or "the rich should be taxed more" nor any of the other watery social-democratic positions that the American right likes to demonise by calling them "socialist"—and granted, it is chiefly the right that does so, but the fact that rightists are so rarely confronted and ridiculed for it means that they have successfully muddied the political discourse to the point where an awful lot of Americans have only the flimsiest grasp of what socialism is.

^ a b Astor, Maggie (12 June 2019).

"What Is Democratic Socialism? Whose Version Are We Talking About?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ Mises, Ludwig von (1985) [1927].

"The Argument of Fascism" .

Liberalism: In the Classical Tradition . Translated by Raico, Ralph. Irvington, New York: Cobden Press .

ISBN 9780930439231 .

It cannot be denied that Fascism and similar movements aiming at the establishment of dictatorships are full of the best intentions and that their intervention has, for the moment, saved European civilization. The merit that Fascism has thereby won for itself will live on eternally in history. But though its policy has brought salvation for the moment, it is not of the kind which could promise continued success. Fascism was an emergency makeshift. To view it as something more would be a fatal error.

^ Raico, Ralph (1996).

"Mises on Fascism, Democracy, and Other Questions" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

12 (1): 1– 27.

^ Seymour, Richard (2010).

The Meaning of Cameron . London: Zero Books . p. 32.

ISBN 978-1846944567 – via Google Books .

^ Hülsmann, Jörg Guido (2007).

Mises: The Last Knight of Liberalism .

Mises Institute .

ISBN 978-1-933550-18-3 .

^ a b Farrant, Andrew; McPhail, Edward; Berger, Sebastian (2012). "Preventing the "Abuses" of Democracy: Hayek, the "Military Usurper" and Transitional Dictatorship in Chile?".

American Journal of Economics and Sociology .

71 (3): 513– 538.

doi : 10.1111/j.1536-7150.2012.00824.x .

JSTOR 2324518 .

^ Caldwell, Bruce; Montes, Leonidas (26 September 2014).

"Friedrich Hayek and his visits to Chile" (PDF) .

The Review of Austrian Economics .

28 (3): 261– 309.

doi : 10.1007/s11138-014-0290-8 .

S2CID 254986148 – via London School of Economics .

^ Avnôn, Dan (1999).

Liberalism and its Practice .

Routledge . p. 56.

ISBN 0415193540 .

^ Grandin, Greg (2006).

Empire's Workshop: Latin America, the United States, and the Rise of the New Imperialism . New York: Metropolitan. pp.

172– 173.

ISBN 0805077383 .

^ Winn, Peter (2004).

Victims of the Chilean Miracle: Workers and Neoliberalism in the Pinochet Era, 1973–2002 .

Duke University Press . p. 16.

The Allende government that Pinochet overthrew in 1973 had been elected in 1970 on a platform of pioneering a democratic road to a democratic socialism.

^ Patsouras, Louis (2005).

Marx in Context .

iUniverse . p. 265.

In Chile, where a large democratic socialist movement was in place for decades, a democratic socialist, Salvadore Allende, led a popular front electoral coalition, including Communists, to victory in 1970.

^ Medina, Eden (2014).

Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in Allende's Chile .

MIT Press . p. 39.

[...] in Allende's democratic socialism.

^ Mabry, Don (1975).

"Chile: Allende's Rise and Fall" .

Archived 30 October 2006 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 12 July 2019.

^ "Profile of Salvador Allende" .

BBC News . 8 September 2003 . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

^ Harvey, David (2005).

A Brief History of Neoliberalism .

Oxford University Press . p. 7.

ISBN 978-0199283279 .

^ Letter from Arnold Harberger to Stig Ramel as reprinted in The Wall Street Journal on 12 October 1976.

^ a b Friedman, Milton (31 August 1984).

Iceland Television Debate (Flash video) (Television production). Reykjavík: Icelandic State Television .  Event occurs at 009:48:00.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2010 .

^ Friedman, Milton; Friedman, Rose D. (1998).

Two Lucky People: Memoirs . pp. 598–599.

^ "Commanding Heights: Milton Friedman" . PBS. 10 January 2000. Retrieved 22 June 2020.

^ Mask II, William Ray (May 2013).

The Great Chilean Recovery: Assigning Responsibility For The Chilean Miracle(s) . Fresno: California State University. hdl:10211.3/105425.

^ "Chile's Chicago Boys and Latin America's Other Market Reformers" . Hoover Institution. 26 April 2011. Retrieved 22 June 2020. See also "Chile and the "Chicago Boys" . Hoover Institution. Stanford University.

Archived 10 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 22 June 2019.

^ O'Shaughnessy, Hugh (11 December 2006).

"General Augusto Pinochet" .

The Independent . Retrieved 22 June 2019.

^ Friedman, Milton (14 June 1976).

"Are These Monetary Swings Necessary?" (PDF) .

Newsweek . p. 80 . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Friedman, Milton (1980).

Free to Choose .

5 .

"Created Equal" . See also his 1980 debate on YouTube.

^ Friedman, Milton (1 November 1991).

"Economic Freedom, Human Freedom, Political Freedom" . The Smith Center.

Archived 22 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 22 June 2020.

^ "Interview with Jeffery Sachs on the "Miracle of Chile" .

PBS .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2008 . Retrieved 20 February 2008 .

^ "Commanding Heights: Milton Friedman" .

PBS .

Archived from the original on 28 December 2008 . Retrieved 29 December 2008 .

^ "Milton Friedman interview" .

PBS .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2011 . Retrieved 20 February 2008 .

^ Santiso, Javier (2007).

Latin America's Political Economy of the Possible: Beyond Good Revolutionaries and Free-Marketeers .

MIT Press . p.

101 .

ISBN 9780262693592 .

^ "How Chile cooled its ideological fever" .

Financial Times . 30 July 2006 . Retrieved 3 January 2018 .

^ Caplan, Bryan (January 2004). "Is socialism really "impossible"?".

Critical Review .

16 (10): 33– 52.

doi : 10.1080/08913810408443598 .

S2CID 143580702 .

^ Gordon, David (10 January 2004).

"Must Economies Be Rational?" .

Mises Review .

10 (3).

Mises Institute . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Boettke, Peter J.; Leeson, Peter T. (2004).

"Socialism: Still Impossible After All These Years" . Mises Institute. Retrieved 17 June 2020.

^ Caplan, Bryan (2003).

"Why I Am Not an Austrian Economist" .

George Mason University . Retrieved 21 April 2020 .

Austrians have overused the economic calculation argument. In the absence of detailed empirical evidence showing that this particular problem is the most important one, it is just another argument out of hundreds on the list of arguments against socialism. How do we know that the problem of work effort, or innovation, or the underground economy, or any number of other problems were not more important than the calculation problem?

^ a b c d e f Ghodsee, Kristen (2014).

"A Tale of "Two Totalitarianisms": The Crisis of Capitalism and the Historical Memory of Communism" (PDF) .

History of the Present .

4 (2): 115– 142.

doi : 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 .

JSTOR 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 .

^ Ghodsee, Kristen (2017).

Red Hangover: Legacies of Twentieth-Century Communism .

Duke University Press . pp.

xix– xx, 134, 197– 199.

ISBN 9780822369493 .

^ Hoffmann, David (2011).

Cultivating the Masses: Modern State Practices and Soviet Socialism, 1914–1939 . Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press . pp.

6– 10.

ISBN 9780801446290 .

^ a b Milne 2002 .

^ a b Milne 2006 .

^ McFarland, Sam; Ageyev, Vladimir; Abalakina-Paap, Marina (1992). "Authoritarianism in the former Soviet Union".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

63 (6): 1004– 1010.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.397.4546 .

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.63.6.1004 .

^ Parenti 1997 , p.

118 .

^ a b Tucker, Robert C.

(5 May 1992).

Stalin in Power: The Revolution from Above, 1928–1941 .

W. W. Norton & Company . p. 96.

ISBN 9780393308693 .

^ "Benito Mussolini" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Gartman, David.

From Autos to Architecture: Fordism and Architectural Aesthetics in The Twentieth Century . Princeton Architectural Press. p. 148.

^ Gat 2007 .

^ Blinkhorn, Martin (2006).

Mussolini and Fascist Italy .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0415262071 .

^ Van Oudenaren, John (1991). "7: Economics".

Détente in Europe: The Soviet Union and the West Since 1953 . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press . p.

255 .

ISBN 9780822311416 . Retrieved 28 March 2019 .

After veering toward autarky under war communism, in the 1920s the Soviet authorities began restoring business relations with traditional partners.

^ De Grand, Alexander J. (2000) [1938].

Italian fascism: Its Origins and Development (3rd ed.). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press .

ISBN 978-0803266223 .

OCLC 42462895 .

^ Edwin, Black (2001).

IBM and the Holocaust: The Strategic Alliance Between Nazi Germany and America's Most Powerful Corporation (1st ed.). New York: Crown Publishers.

ISBN 978-0609607992 .

OCLC 45896166 .

^ Paxton, Robert O.

(2005).

The Anatomy of Fascism (1st ed.). New York: Vintage Books .

ISBN 978-1400033911 .

OCLC 58452991 .

- Read online, registration required ^ Griffin, Roger (1993).

The Nature of Fascism .

Routledge . pp.

222– 223.

ISBN 9780415096614 .

^ a b Keefe, Jopshua R. (2009).

"Stalin and the Drive to Industrialize the Soviet Union" .

Inquires Journal .

1 (1): 1. Retrieved 21 April 2020.

^ "World Economic Outlook, Database—WEO Groups and Aggregates Information, October 2018" .

International Monetary Fund . October 2018 . Retrieved 21 April 2020 .

^ a b Draper, Hal (1966).

The Two Souls of Socialism .

"Six Strains of Socialism-From-Above" .

New Politics .

5 (1): 57–84. Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Connell, Dan.

Rethinking Revolution: New Strategies for Democracy & Social Justice. The Experiences of Eritrea, South Africa, Palestine & Nicaragua . Red Sea Pr; 1st Rea Sea Press, Inc. pp.

31– 32.

^ "Mozambique: One-party rule, socialism and civil war (1975-1986)" . Electoral Institute for Sustainable Democracy in Africa. February 2008. Archived from the original on 27 March 2015 . Retrieved 27 March 2015 .

^ "Political System" .

Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ McGuire, Patrick L. (1985).

Red Stars: Political Aspects of Soviet Science Fiction (Studies in Speculative Fiction) (1st revised ed.). UMI Research Press.

ISBN 9780835715799 .

^ "About Us" . Radio Rebelde . Retrieved 21 June 2019 .

^ a b c d e Wilczynski, J. (1977).

The Economics of Socialism: Principles Governing the Operation of the Centrally Planned Economies in the USSR and Eastern Europe Under the New System . London: Allen and Unwin. pp. 22–23; 33–34; 34–41.

ISBN 9780043350348 .

^ Arnold, N. Scott (1994).

The Philosophy and Economics of Market Socialism . New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

43– 45.

ISBN 9780195358513 .

^ Hunt, R. N. Carew (1930).

Theory and Practice of Communism: An Introduction . New York: Macmillan. p. 73.

ISBN 9780140205787 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Costello, Mick (1977).

Workers' Participation in the Soviet Union .

^ a b c Chomsky, Noam (1986).

"The Soviet Union Versus Socialism" .

Our Generation (Spring/Summer). Retrieved 29 January 2020.

^ a b c Howard, M. C.; King, J. E. (2001).

"'State Capitalism' in the Soviet Union" Archived 2019-07-28 at the Wayback Machine .

History of Economics Review .

34 (1): 110–126.

doi : 10.1080/10370196.2001.11733360 .

^ a b c Wolff 2015 .

^ Engels, Friedrich (1962) [1877].

Anti-Duhring . Foreign Languages Publishing House. pp. 329–330. "Just as at first the capitalist mode of production displaced the workers, so now it displaces the capitalists, relegating them to the superfluous population even if not in the first instance to the industrial reserve army. But neither the conversion into joint stock companies nor into state property deprives the productive forces of their character as capital. [...] The modern state, whatever its form, is then the state of the capitalists, the ideal collective body of all the capitalists. The more productive forces it takes over as its property, the more it becomes the real collective body of the capitalists, the more citizens it exploits. The workers remain wage-earners, proletarians. The capitalist relationship isn't abolished; it is rather pushed to the extreme." ^ a b Engels, Friedrich (1970) [1880].

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific .

"Historical Materialism" .

Marx/Engels Selected Works .

3 . Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 95–151.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1948) [1915].

Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism . London: Lawrence and Wishart.

^ Bukharin, Nikolai (1929) [1917].

Imperialism and World Economy . International Publishers. p. 157.

^ a b c Communist Workers Organisation (2000).

"Trotsky, Trotskyism, Trotskyists: From Revolution to Social Democracy" .

"Trotsky and the Origins of Trotskyism" . "The Nature of the USSR". Internationalist Communist Tendency. Retrieved 22 June 2020.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1964) [1917].

The State and Revolution .

"Supplementary Explanations by Engels" .

Lenin Collected Works .

25 . Moscow: Progress Publishers . pp. 381–492.

^ a b Zimbalist, Andrew; Sherman, Howard J. (October 1988).

Comparing Economic Systems: A Political-Economic Approach .

Harcourt College Publishing . pp.

4 .

ISBN 978-0-15-512403-5 .

Almost all industry in the Soviet Union is government owned and all production is directed, in theory, by a central plan (though in practice much is left for local discretion and much happens that is unplanned or not under government control).

^ Rosser, Mariana V.; Rosser, J. Barkley (2003).

Comparative Economics in a Transforming World Economy .

MIT Press . p.

7 .

ISBN 978-0-262-18234-8 .

In a command economy the most important allocation decisions are made by government authorities and are imposed by law.

^ Mandel, Ernest (September–October 1986).

"In defense of socialist planning" .

New Left Review .

I (159): 5– 37.

Planning is not equivalent to 'perfect' allocation of resources, nor 'scientific' allocation, nor even 'more humane' allocation. It simply means 'direct' allocation, ex ante. As such, it is the opposite of market allocation, which is ex post.

See also the PDF version .

^ Schweickart, David; Lawler, James; Ticktin, Hiller; Ollman, Bertell (1998). "Definitions of Market and Socialism".

Market Socialism: The Debate Among Socialists . New York: Routledge . pp.

58– 59.

ISBN 978-0-415-91967-8 .

For an Anti-Stalinist Marxist, socialism is defined by the degree to which the society is planned. Planning here is understood as the conscious regulation of society by the associated producers themselves. Put it differently, the control over the surplus product rests with the majority of the population through a resolutely democratic process. [...] The sale of labour power is abolished and labour necessarily becomes creative. Everyone participates in running their institutions and society as a whole. No one controls anyone else.

^ a b c Sirc, Lujbo (1969).

Economic Devolution in Eastern Europe . New York: Praeger.

ISBN 9780582500150 .

^ Sejna, Jan (1986).

Decision-Making in Communist Countries: An Inside View . Washington: Pergamon-Brassey's.

ISBN 9780080336510 .

.

^ a b c Cereseto, Shirley (June 1986).

"Economic Development, Political-Economic System, and the Physical Quality of Life" .

American Journal of Public Health .

76 (6): 661– 666.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.76.6.661 .

PMC 1646771 .

PMID 3706593 .

^ Gregory, Paul; Stuart, Robert (2003).

Comparing Economic Systems in the Twenty-First .

South-Western College Publishing . p. 152.

ISBN 0-618-26181-8 .

^ Mandel, Ernest (September–October 1986).

"In defense of socialist planning" .

New Left Review .

I (159): 5– 37 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Cottrell, Allin; Cockshott, Paul (1993).

"Socialist Planning after the Collapse of the Soviet Union" (PDF) .

Revue européenne des sciences sociales .

7 (31). Librairie Droz: 167– 185.

JSTOR 40370022 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 April 2019 . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ a b c Ader, Emile Bertrand (1970).

Communism, Classic and Contemporary . Woodbury: Barron's Educational Series.

ISBN 9780812004038 .

^ Stanislaw, Joseph; Yergin, Daniel (2002).

The Commanding Heights: The Battle for the World Economy (revised, updated, subsequent ed.). Free Press.

ISBN 9780684835693 .

^ Bardhan, Pranab K.; Roemer, E. John (1993).

Market Socialism: The Current Debate . New York: Oxford University Press . p. 191.

ISBN 9780195080490 .

^ a b Wellisz, Stanislaw (1964).

The Economies of the Soviet Bloc: A Study of Decision Making and Resource Allocation . New York: McGraw. pp. 12–27; 26–27.

ISBN 9780070692282 .

^ a b c Lavigne, Marie (1974).

The Socialist Economies of the Soviet Union and Europe . White Plains: International Arts and Sciences Press. pp. 32–36; 80–98.

ISBN 9780873320634 .

^ a b c d Maddison, Angus (2001).

The World Economy Volume 1: A Millennial Perspective (PDF) . Development Centre Studies. OECD Development Centre. p. 183.

doi : 10.1787/9789264022621-en .

ISBN 9789264022621 .

^ a b "The Fall of the Soviet Union" . Levada-Center. 9 January 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2019.

^ Taylor, Adam (21 December 2016).

"Why do so many people miss the Soviet Union?" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ "Why Russia Backs The Eurasian Union" .

Business Insider .

The Economist . 22 August 2014 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ Balmforth (2018) ; Nikitin (2014) ; Taylor (2014) ^ "Nostal'giya po SSSR" Ностальгия по СССР [Nostalgia for the USSR] (in Russian). Levada-Center. 19 December 2018 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ a b Maza, Christina (19 December 2018).

"Russia vs. Ukraine: More Russians Want the Soviet Union and Communism Back Amid Continued Tensions" .

Newsweek . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ Shiryayev, Y.; Sokolov, A. (1976).

CMEA and European Economic Cooperation . Novosti Press Agency Publishing House.

^ a b c d e Hardt, John Pearce; Kaufman, Richard F. (1995).

East-Central European Economies in Transition .

M. E. Sharpe .

ISBN 978-1-56324-612-8 .

^ a b c d Turnock, David (1997).

The East European Economy in Context: Communism and Transition .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-415-08626-4 .

^ Teichova, Alice; Matis, Herbert (2003).

Nation, State, and the Economy in History .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-79278-3 .

^ "Sowjetunion, 17. März 1991: Weiterbestand der UdSSR als Föderation gleichberechtigter und souveräner Staaten" [Soviet Union, March 17, 1991: Continuation of the USSR as a federation of equal and sovereign states].

Direct Democracy (in German). 17 March 1991 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ a b Ther, Philipp (2016).

Europe Since 1989: A History .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9780691167374 .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2019 . Retrieved 13 March 2019 .

^ Klein, Naomi (2008).

The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism . Picador. p. 276.

ISBN 978-0312427993 .

^ Whyman, Philip; Baimbridge, Mark; Mullen, Andrew (2012).

The Political Economy of the European Social Model . Routledge Studies in the European Economy.

Routledge . p. 108.

ISBN 978-0415476294 .

In short, Gorbachev aimed to lead the Soviet Union towards the Scandinavian social democratic model.

^ Kaprans, Martins (7 March 2010). "Then and now: Comparing the Soviet and Post-Soviet experience in Latvian autobiographies".

Atslegvardi/Keywords. Online Journal for New Research in Humanities and Social Sciences in the Baltic States .

2 .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.1565829 .

^ Espova, Neli; Ray, Jule (19 December 2013).

"Former Soviet Countries See More Harm From Breakup" .

Gallup . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ Ekman & Linde (2005) , pp. 354–374; Todorova & Gille (2010) ; Bartmanski (2011) , pp. 213–231; Prusik & Lewicka (2016) ; Ghodsee & Mead (2018) , p. 108; Ghodsee (2011) ^ Boyer, Dominic (2006).

Ostalgie and the Politics of the Future in Eastern Germany .

Duke University Press .

^ Sachno (2003) ; Murawska (2005) ; Esche, Mossiah & Topalska (2009) ; Golinowska (2016) ^ Anghel, Stefan Costin (3 June 2014).

"Would Romanians Vote for Ceaușescu If He Were Alive Today?" .

Vice News . Retrieved 28 January 2019 .

^ Lindstrom, Nicole (January 2005).

"Yugonostalgia: Restorative and reflective nostalgia in former Yugoslavia" .

East Central Europe. l'Europe du Centre-est .

32 ( 1– 2): 227– 237.

doi : 10.1163/1876330805X00108 .

^ Luthar, Brenda; Puznik, Marusa (2010).

Remembering Utopia: The Culture of Everyday Life in Socialist Yugoslavia . Washington, D.C.: New Academia Publishing.

ISBN 9780984406234 .

^ McAaley, Alastair.

Russia and the Baltics: Poverty and Poverty Research in a Changing World . Archived from the original on 16 February 2018 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ "An epidemic of street kids overwhelms Russian cities" .

The Globe and Mail . 16 April 2002. Archived from the original on 28 August 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 .

^ Targ, Harry (2006).

Challenging Late Capitalism, Neoliberal Globalization, & Militarism . Lulu.com.

ISBN 9781411677265 .

^ Gerber, Theodore P.; Hout, Michael (1998). "More Shock than Therapy: Market Transition, Employment, and Income in Russia, 1991–1995".

AJS .

104 (1): 1– 50.

^ Volkov, Vladimir (26 April 2007).

"The bitter legacy of Boris Yeltsin (1931-2007)" . World Socialist Web Site. Archived from the original on 30 May 2020 . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ "Cops for hire" .

The Economist . 18 March 2010.

Archived from the original on 25 June 2018 . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ "Corruption Perceptions Index 2014" . Transparency International. 30 December 2014. Archived from the original on 2 December 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ Hardt, John (2003).

Russia's Uncertain Economic Future: With a Comprehensive Subject Index .

M. E. Sharpe . p. 481.

ISBN 9780765612083 .

^ Alexander, Catharine; Buchil, Victor; Humphrey, Caroline (2007).

Urban Life in Post-Soviet Asia .

CRC Press .

ISBN 9781844721153 .

^ Smorodinskaya.

Encyclopaedia of Contemporary Russian .

Routledge .

^ Galazkaa, Artur (2000).

"Implications of the Diphtheria Epidemic in the Former Soviet Union for Immunization Programs" .

Journal of Infectious Diseases .

181 : 244– 248.

doi : 10.1086/315570 .

PMID 10657222 .

^ Shubnikov, Eugene.

"Non-communicable Diseases and Former Soviet Union countries" . Archived from the original on 11 October 2016 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ Wharton, Melinda; Vitek, Charles (1998).

"Diphtheria in the Former Soviet Union: Reemergence of a Pandemic Disease" .

Emerging Infectious Diseases .

4 (4): 539– 550.

doi : 10.3201/eid0404.980404 .

PMC 2640235 .

PMID 9866730 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ a b Parenti 1997 , pp. 107, 115.

^ Hoepller, C. (2011).

"Russian Demographics: The Role of the Collapse of the Soviet Union" .

Undergraduate Research Journal for the Human Sciences .

10 (1).

^ Poland, Marshall.

"Russian Economy in the Aftermath of the Collapse of the Soviet Union" . Archived from the original on 8 July 2016 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ "End of Communism Cheered but Now with More Reservations" .

Pew Research Center 's Global Attitudes Project. 2 November 2009.

Archived from the original on 19 May 2018 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 .

^ "Confidence in Democracy and Capitalism Wanes in Former Soviet Union" .

Pew Research Center 's Global Attitudes Project. 5 December 2011.

Archived from the original on 20 May 2018 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 .

^ a b Ghodsee, Kristen R.

; Sehon, Scott (22 March 2018).

"Anti-anti-communism" .

Aeon .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2018 . Retrieved 26 September 2018 .

^ a b Marangos, John (2004).

Alternative Economic Models of Transition . Aldershot; Burlington: Ashgate Publishing .

ISBN 9780754636571 .

^ "Modern History Sourcebook: The Common Program of The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, 1949" .

Fordham University . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ Nove, Alec; Nuti, D. M. (1972).

Socialist Economics . Harmondsworth: Penguin . pp.

491– 510.

ISBN 9780140806229 .

^ Hoffmann, Charles (September 1971). "The Maoist Economic Model".

Journal of Economic Issues .

5 (3).

Taylor & Francis : 12– 27.

doi : 10.1080/00213624.1971.11502983 .

JSTOR 4224090 .

^ a b O'Brien (2002) , p. 254; Gao (2008) ; Ebrey (2010) , p. 327; Galtung & Stenslie (2014) ^ a b c "Mao Tse Tung: China's Peasant Emperor" (2005).

Biography . A&E Network. ASIN B000AABKXG.

^ Ollman, Berell; Schweickart, David; Lawler, James; Ticktin, Hillel (1998).

Market Socialism: The Debate Among Socialists . New York: Routledge . pp.

60– 62.

ISBN 9780415919678 .

^ Gregory, Paul Roderick (2003).

The Political Economy of Stalinism: Evidence from the Soviet Secret Archives .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780511615856 .

^ "The Political Economy of Stalinism" .

Hoover Institution . 23 January 2004 . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

^ Ellman, Michael (2014).

Socialist Planning .

Cambridge University Press . p. 372.

ISBN 978-1107427327 .

^ Wilkinson, Richard G. (1996).

Unhealthy Societies: The Afflictions of Inequality .

Routledge . p. 122.

ISBN 0415092353 .

^ Peterson, D. J. (1993).

Troubled Lands: The Legacy of Soviet Environmental Destruction (A Rand Research Study) .

Westview Press .

ISBN 9780813316741 .

^ Novokmet, Filip; Piketty, Thomas; Zucman, Gabriel (9 November 2017).

"From Soviets to oligarchs: Inequality and property in Russia, 1905-2016" .

Vox . Centre for Economic Policy Research . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

^ Werge, Fiona (11 October 2000).

"Child poverty soars in eastern Europe" .

BBC News . Retrieved 5 June 2020 .

^ "Transition - The first ten years : analysis and lessons for Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union (English)" .

Transition Newsletter .

World Bank . 1 January 2002 . Retrieved 5 June 2020 .

^ a b Kaplan, Robert D. (8 October 2000).

"Who Lost Russia?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 5 June 2020 .

^ Scheidel, Walter (2017).

The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century .

Princeton University Press . p. 222.

ISBN 978-0691165028 – via Google Books .

^ Ghodsee, Kristen (2017).

Red Hangover: Legacies of Twentieth-Century Communism .

Duke University Press . pp.

63– 64.

ISBN 978-0822369493 .

^ Milanović, Branko (2015). "After the Wall Fell: The Poor Balance Sheet of the Transition to Capitalism".

Challenge .

58 (2): 135– 138.

doi : 10.1080/05775132.2015.1012402 .

S2CID 153398717 .

^ Rosefielde, Steven (2001). "Premature Deaths: Russia's Radical Economic Transition in Soviet Perspective".

Europe-Asia Studies .

53 (8): 1159– 1176.

doi : 10.1080/09668130120093174 .

S2CID 145733112 .

^ Karlsson, Klas-Göran; Schoenhals, Michael (2008).

"Crimes Against Humanity under Communist Regimes" (PDF) .

Forum for Living History .

ISBN 9789197748728 .

^ Dallin, Alexander (2000). "Reviewed Work(s): The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression by Stéphane Courtois, Nicolas Werth, Jean-Louis Panné, Andrzej Paczkowski, Karel Bartošek, Jean-Louis Margolin, Jonathan Murphy and Mark Kramer".

Slavic Review .

59 (4): 882‒883.

doi : 10.2307/2697429 .

JSTOR 2697429 .

^ Valentino, Benjamin (2005).

Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the Twentieth Century .

Cornell University Press . pp. 75, 91, 275.

ISBN 9780801472732 .

^ Harff, Barbara (1996). "Death by Government by R. J. Rummel".

Journal of Interdisciplinary History .

27 (1): 117– 119.

doi : 10.2307/206491 .

JSTOR 206491 .

^ Kuromiya, Hiroaki (2001). "Review Article: Communism and Terror. Reviewed Work(s): The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, and Repression by Stephane Courtois; Reflections on a Ravaged Century by Robert Conquest".

Journal of Contemporary History .

36 (1): 191– 201.

doi : 10.1177/002200940103600110 .

JSTOR 261138 .

S2CID 49573923 .

^ Paczkowski, Andrzej (2001). "The Storm Over the Black Book".

The Wilson Quarterly .

25 (2): 28– 34.

JSTOR 40260182 .

^ Weiner, Amir (2002). "Review. Reviewed Work: The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression by Stéphane Courtois, Nicolas Werth, Jean-Louis Panné, Andrzej Paczkowski, Karel Bartošek, Jean-Louis Margolin, Jonathan Murphy, Mark Kramer".

Journal of Interdisciplinary History .

32 (3): 450– 452.

doi : 10.1162/002219502753364263 .

JSTOR 3656222 .

S2CID 142217169 .

^ Dulić, Tomislav (2004). "Tito's Slaughterhouse: A Critical Analysis of Rummel's Work on Democide".

Journal of Peace Research .

41 (1): 85– 102.

doi : 10.1177/0022343304040051 .

JSTOR 4149657 .

S2CID 145120734 .

^ Harff, Barbara (2017).

"The Comparative Analysis of Mass Atrocities and Genocide" (PDF) . In Gleditsch, N. P. (ed.).

R.J. Rummel: An Assessment of His Many Contributions . SpringerBriefs on Pioneers in Science and Practice. Vol. 37. pp.

111– 129.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-54463-2_12 .

ISBN 9783319544632 .

^ Taylor, Matt (22 February 2017).

"One Recipe for a More Equal World: Mass Death" .

Vice News . Retrieved 9 April 2017 .

^ Marglin, Stephen A.; Schor, Juliet B. (1991).

The Golden Age of Capitalism: Reinterpreting the Postwar Experience .

Clarendon Press .

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198287414.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780198287414 .

^ Marglin, Stephen A.; Schor, Juliet B. (21 August 2017). "Post-war reconstruction and development in the Golden Age of Capitalism".

Reflecting on Seventy Years of Development Policy Analysis .

World Economic and Social Survey 2017 . World Economic and Social Survey. United Nations iLibrary.

doi : 10.18356/8310f38c-en .

ISBN 9789210605984 .

^ Parenti 1997 , p.

58 .

^ Parenti 1997 , pp. xiii, 6–11, 59–67, 74–86.

^ Dean 2012 , pp.

6–7 .

^ a b Ehms 2014 .

^ Chomsky, Noam (2000).

Rogue States: The Rule of Force in World Affairs .

Pluto Press . p. 178.

ISBN 9780745317083 .

^ Chomsky, Noam .

"Counting the Bodies" .

Spectre (9).

Archived from the original on 21 September 2016 . Retrieved 18 September 2016 .

^ Aarons, Mark (2007).

"Justice Betrayed: Post-1945 Responses to Genocide" . In Blumenthal, David A.; McCormack, Timothy L. H. (eds.).

The Legacy of Nuremberg: Civilising Influence or Institutionalised Vengeance? (International Humanitarian Law) .

Martinus Nijhoff Publishers . pp. 71, 80– 81.

ISBN 978-9004156913 . Archived from the original on 2016-01-05 . Retrieved 2020-04-23 – via Google Books .

^ Robinson, Nathan J. (28 October 2017).

"How to be a Socialist without being an Apologist for the Atrocities of Communist Regimes" .

Current Affairs . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ Ghodsee, Kristen (2015).

The Left Side of History: World War II and the Unfulfilled Promise of Communism in Eastern Europe .

Duke University Press . p. xvi–xvii.

ISBN 9780822358350 .

^ Szymanski, Albert (1984).

Human Rights in the Soviet Union .

Zed Books . p. 291.

ISBN 9780862320195 .

^ Ball, Olivia; Gready, Paul (2007).

The No-Nonsense Guide to Human Rights . New Internationalist. p. 35.

ISBN 978-1904456452 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Nugent 1992 .

^ a b c Schulman 2006 .

^ Grawert, Elke (2009).

Departures From Post-Colonial Authoritarianism: Analysis of System Change With A Focus On Tanzania . Frankfurt am Main.

ISBN 9783631574676 .

^ a b c Germani, Gino (1978).

Authoritarianism, Fascism, and National Populism . New Brunswick: Transaction Books.

ISBN 978-0-87855-642-7 .

^ Sargent, Lyman Tower (2008).

Contemporary Political Ideologies: A Comparative Analysis (14th ed.). Wadsworth Publishing. p.

117 .

ISBN 9780495569398 .

Because many communists now call themselves democratic socialists, it is sometimes difficult to know what a political label really means. As a result, social democratic has become a common new label for democratic socialist political parties.

^ Lamb, Peter (2015).

Historical Dictionary of Socialism (3rd ed.).

Rowman & Littlefield . p. 415.

ISBN 9781442258266 .

In the 1990s, following the collapse of the communist regimes in Eastern Europe and the breakup of the Soviet Union, social democracy was adopted by some of the old communist parties. Hence, parties such as the Czech Social Democratic Party, the Bulgarian Social Democrats, the Estonian Social Democratic Party, and the Romanian Social Democratic Party, among others, achieved varying degrees of electoral success. Similar processes took place in Africa as the old communist parties were transformed into social democratic ones, even though they retained their traditional titles [...].

^ Kurlantzick, Joshua (2013).

Democracy in Retreat: The Revolt of the Middle Class and the Worldwide Decline of Representative Government (Council on Foreign Relations Books ed.).

Yale University Press .

ISBN 9780300175387 .

^ a b c d e Kurlantzick, Joshua (21 March 2013).

"Why the 'China Model' Isn't Going Away" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 29 July 2020 .

^ Fuchs 2017 .

^ Fuchs 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Brzezinski 1989 .

^ a b Lenin, Vladimir (1964) [1917].

"The Economic Basis of the Withering Away of the State: The Higher Phase of Communist Society" .

The State and Revolution . Lenin Collected Works. Vol. 25. Moscow: Progress Publishers . pp.

381– 492 . Retrieved 23 April 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b Lenin, Vladimir (1965) [1918].

Lenin Collected Works .

27 . Moscow: Progress Publishers. p. 293. Quoted by Aufheben .

Archived 18 March 2004 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ a b Lenin, Vladimir (1965) [1921].

"The Tax in Kind" .

Lenin Collected Works (1st English ed.).

32 . Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 329–365. Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ a b Pena, David S. (21 September 2007).

"Tasks of Working-Class Governments under the Socialist-oriented Market Economy" .

Political Affairs .

Archived 5 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 5 September 2008.

^ Serge, Victor (1937).

From Lenin to Stalin . New York: Pioneer Publishers. p. 55.

OCLC 256449 .

^ a b Bovin, A. E.

"Kazarmennyy kommunizm" Казарменный коммунизм [Barracks communism].

Great Soviet Encyclopedia (in Russian) . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ Duncan, Graeme Campbell (1977) [1973].

Marx and Mill: Two Views of Social Conflict and Social Harmony .

CUP Archive . p. 194.

ISBN 9780521291309 .

^ a b Marx, Karl ; Engels, Friedrich ; Trotsky, Leon ; Wright, John G.

; Lenin, Vladimir (2001).

Marxism versus Anarchism .

Resistance Books . p. 88.

ISBN 9781876646035 .

^ Kimball (1973) , pp. 491–514; McClellan (1973) , pp. 546–553; Wallace (1992) ; Mayer (1993) , pp. 249–263; Read (2005) ; Rakitin (2019) ^ a b Busgalin, Alexander; Mayer, Günter (2008).

"Kasernenkommunismus" [Barracks Communism].

Historisch-kritisches Wörterbuch des Marxismus (in German). Vol. 7. Spalten. pp.

407– 411.

( PDF text ) ^ Reinalda, Bob (2009).

Routledge History of International Organizations: From 1815 to the Present Day .

Routledge . p. 765.

ISBN 9781134024056 .

^ Laidler, Harry W.

(2013).

History of Socialism: An Historical Comparative Study of Socialism, Communism, Utopia .

Routledge . p. 412.

ISBN 9781136231438 .

^ Smith, S. A. (2014).

The Oxford Handbook of the History of Communism .

Oxford University Press . p. 126.

ISBN 9780191667527 .

The 1936 Constitution described the Soviet Union for the first time as a 'socialist society', rhetorically fulfilling the aim of building socialism in one country, as Stalin had promised.

^ Fu, Hualing; Gillespie, John; Nicholason, Penelope; Partlett, William Edmund, eds. (2018).

Socialist Law in Socialist East Asia .

Cambridge University Press . p. 58.

ISBN 9781108424813 .

^ Ramana, R. (June 1983). "Reviewed Work: China's Socialist Economy by Xue Muqiao ".

Social Scientist .

11 (6): 68– 74.

doi : 10.2307/3516910 .

JSTOR 3516910 .

^ McCarthy, Greg (1985). Brugger, Bill (ed.).

Chinese Marxism in Flux, 1978–1984: Essays on Epistemology, Ideology, and Political Economy .

M. E. Sharpe . pp.

142– 143.

ISBN 0873323238 .

^ Evans, Alfred B. (1993).

Soviet Marxism–Leninism: The Decline of an Ideology .

ABC-CLIO . p. 48.

ISBN 9780275947637 .

^ Pollock, Ethan (2006).

Stalin and the Soviet Science Wars .

Princeton University Press . p. 210.

ISBN 9780691124674 .

^ Mommen, André (2011).

Stalin's Economist: The Economic Contributions of Jenö Varga .

Routledge . pp.

203– 213.

ISBN 9781136793455 .

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1965) [1921].

"The Tax in Kind" .

Lenin Collected Works (1st English ed.).

32 . Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 329–365. Retrieved 23 April 2020. "No one, I think, in studying the question of the economic system of Russia, has denied its transitional character. Nor, I think, has any Communist denied that the term Soviet Socialist Republic implies the determination of the Soviet power to achieve the transition to socialism, and not that the existing economic system is recognised as a socialist order." ^ Rieber, Alfred J. (2005). "Stalin as Georgian: The Formative Years". In Davies, Sarah; Harris, James (eds.).

Stalin: A New History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp.

18– 44.

ISBN 978-1-139-44663-1 .

^ Petrovsky-Shtern, Yohanan (2010).

Lenin's Jewish Question . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-15210-4 .

JSTOR j.ctt1npd80 .

^ a b Service 2000 .

^ Rice, Christopher (1990).

Lenin: Portrait of a Professional Revolutionary . London: Cassell.

ISBN 978-0-304-31814-8 .

^ a b Pipes 1996 .

^ Deutscher, Isaac (1967).

Stalin: A Political Biography (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. pp.

248– 251.

ISBN 9780195002737 .

^ Service 2004 , p. 5.

^ Sandle 1999 , pp. 265–266.

^ Leggett (1986) ; Service (1990) , pp. 16–19; Pipes (1997) ; Radzinsky (1997) ; Pipes (2003) ; Applebaum (2014) ^ Deutscher (2003) ; Medvedev (1982) ; Gill (1998) ; Lewin (2005) ^ a b c d e Ryan 2012 .

^ a b c Read 2005 .

^ Liebman, Marcel (1975) [1973].

Leninism Under Lenin . Translated by Pearce, Brian. London: Jonathan Cape.

ISBN 978-0-224-01072-6 .

^ a b Lee 2003 .

^ Sewell, Rob (21 January 2014).

"In Defence of Lenin" .

In Defence of Marxism .

International Marxist Tendency . Retrieved 21 April 2020 .

^ Serge, Victor (2017) [1930].

Year One of the Russian Revolution .

Haymarket Books . pp. 95, 115.

ISBN 9781608466092 .

The revolution made the mistake of showing magnanimity to the leader of the Cossack attack. He should have been shot on the spot. [...] He was to go off to put the Don region to fire and the sword. [...] The Whites massacre the workers in the Arsenal and the Kremlin: the Reds release their mortal enemy, General Krasnov, on parole.

^ Woods, Alan (7 November 2019).

"The Russian Revolution: The Meaning of October" .

In Defence of Marxism .

International Marxist Tendency . Retrieved 21 April 2020 .

^ Resis, Albert (7 August 2014).

"Vladimir Ilich Lenin" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 19 June 2015 . Retrieved 21 June 2020 .

^ White, James D. (2001).

Lenin: The Practice and Theory of Revolution. European History in Perspective . Basingstoke, England: Palgrave . p. ix.

ISBN 9780333721575 .

^ Service 2000 , p. 488.

^ Read 2005 , p. 283.

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 5.

^ a b c Fischer, Louis (1964).

The Life of Lenin . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

ISBN 9781842122303 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Shub, David (1966).

Lenin: A Biography (revised ed.). London: Pelican .

ISBN 9780140208092 .

^ a b Leggett, George (1981).

The Cheka: Lenin's Political Police . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-822552-2 .

^ a b Volkogonov, Dmitri (1994).

Lenin: Life and Legacy . Translated by Shukman, Harold. London: HarperCollins .

ISBN 978-0-00-255123-6 .

^ Ryan (2012) ; Lee (2003) ; Lewin (1969) ; Rigby (1979) ; Service (2000) ; Sandle (1999) ^ Pipes, Richard (1990).

The Russian Revolution: 1899–1919 . London: Collins Harvill.

ISBN 978-0-679-73660-8 .

^ Lee 2003 , p. 14.

^ Lee 2003 , p. 123.

^ Lee 2003 , p. 124.

^ Stalin, Joseph (1954) [1931].

"The Tasks of Business Executives" .

Collected Works .

13 . Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House .

^ Getty, Rittersporn & Zemskov (1993) , pp. 1017–1049; Wheatcroft (1996) , pp. 1319–1353; Rosefielde (1996) , pp. 959–987; Ellman (2002) , pp. 1152–1172; Davies & Wheatcroft (2004) ^ Healey, Dan (1 June 2018).

"Golfo Alexopoulos. Illness and Inhumanity in Stalin's Gulag" .

The American Historical Review .

123 (3): 1049– 1051.

doi : 10.1093/ahr/123.3.1049 . Retrieved 23 September 2018 .

New studies using declassified Gulag archives have provisionally established a consensus on mortality and "inhumanity." The tentative consensus says that once secret records of the Gulag administration in Moscow show a lower death toll than expected from memoir sources, generally between 1.5 and 1.7 million (out of 18 million who passed through) for the years from 1930 to 1953.

^ Snyder, Timothy (2010).

Bloodlands: Europe between Hitler and Stalin . New York: Vintage Books .

ISBN 978-1-4070-7550-1 .

^ Snyder, Timothy (10 March 2011).

"Hitler vs. Stalin: Who Killed More?" .

The New York Review of Books . Retrieved 10 September 2020 .

^ Naimark, Norman M.

(2008). "Stalin and the Question of Soviet Genocide". In Hollander, Paul (ed.).

Political Violence: Belief, Behavior, and Legitimation . London: Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

39– 48.

ISBN 978-0-230-60646-3 .

^ Kuromiya, Hiroaki (2008). "The Soviet Famine of 1932–1933 Reconsidered".

Europe-Asia Studies .

60 (4): 663– 675.

doi : 10.1080/09668130801999912 .

S2CID 143876370 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 .

^ Tauger, Mark B. (2001). "Natural Disaster and Human Actions in the Soviet Famine of 1931–1933".

The Carl Beck Papers in Russian and East European Studies (1506).

doi : 10.5195/CBP.2001.89 .

ISSN 2163-839X .

^ Davies, Robert; Wheatcroft, Stephen G. (June 2006).

"Stalin and the Soviet Famine of 1932-33: A Reply to Ellman" .

Europe-Asia Studies .

58 (4): 625–633.

doi : 10.1080/09668130600652217 .

JSTOR 20451229 .

^ a b Wheatcroft 1996 , pp. 1319–1353.

^ a b c d e f McDermott 2006 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Service 2004 .

^ a b Khlevniuk 2015 .

^ a b c Kotkin 2014 .

^ Service (2004) ; Khlevniuk (2015) ; Kotkin (2014) ; Montefiore (2007) ; McCauley (2003) ^ a b c d Conquest, Robert (1991).

Stalin: Breaker of Nations . New York and London: Penguin .

ISBN 978-0-14-016953-9 .

^ a b c d e Volkogonov, Dimitri (1991).

Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy . Translated by Shukman, Harold. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

ISBN 978-0-297-81080-3 .

^ Montefiore 2007 .

^ Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2003).

Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 978-1-84212-726-1 .

^ Harris, James (26 July 2016).

"Historian James Harris says Russian archives show we've misunderstood Stalin" . History News Network. Retrieved 1 December 2018. "So what was the motivation behind the Terror? The answers required a lot more digging, but it gradually became clearer that the violence of the late 1930s was driven by fear. Most Bolsheviks, Stalin among them, believed that the revolutions of 1789, 1848 and 1871 had failed because their leaders hadn't adequately anticipated the ferocity of the counter-revolutionary reaction from the establishment. They were determined not to make the same mistake".

^ Parenti 1997 .

^ Traverso (2001) ; Geyes & Fitzpatrick (2008) ; Hobsbawm (2012) ; Milne (2012) , p. 40: "The impact of this cold-war victors' version of the past has been to relativise the unique crimes of Nazism, bury those of colonialism and feed the idea that any attempt at radical social change will always lead to suffering, killing and failure." ^ Losurdo, Domenico (January 2004).

"Towards a Critique of the Category of Totalitarianism" .

Historical Materialism .

12 (2): 25–55.

doi : 10.1163/1569206041551663 . Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Fitzpatrick, Sheila (October 1986). "New Perspectives on Stalinism".

The Russian Review . Wiley.

45 (4): 357–373.

doi : 10.2307/130466 .

JSTOR 130466 .

^ Fitzpatrick, Sheila (October 1986). "Afterword: Revisionism Revisited".

The Russian Review .

45 (4). Wiley: 409– 413.

doi : 10.2307/130471 .

JSTOR 130471 .

^ Laqueur, Walter (1987).

The Fate of the Revolution: Interpretations of Soviet History from 1917 to the Present . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons .

ISBN 9780684189031 .

^ Siegel (1998) , p. 200: "Concepts of totalitarianism became most widespread at the height of the Cold War. Since the late 1940s, especially since the Korean War, they were condensed into a far-reaching, even hegemonic, ideology, by which the political elites of the Western world tried to explain and even to justify the Cold War constellation."; Guilhot (2005) , p. 33: "The opposition between the West and Soviet totalitarianism was often presented as an opposition both moral and epistemological between truth and falsehood. The democratic, social, and economic credentials of the Soviet Union were typically seen as "lies" and as the product of a deliberate and multiform propaganda. [...] In this context, the concept of totalitarianism was itself an asset. As it made possible the conversion of prewar anti-fascism into postwar anti-communism."; Reisch (2005) , pp. 153–154; Defty (2007) ; Caute (2010) , pp. 95–99 ^ Davies, Sarah; Harris, James (8 September 2005).

Stalin: A New History .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

3– 5.

ISBN 978-1-139-44663-1 – via Google Books .

^ Lenoe, Matt (2002). "Did Stalin Kill Kirov and Does It Matter?".

Journal of Modern History .

74 (2): 352– 380.

doi : 10.1086/343411 .

ISSN 0022-2801 .

S2CID 142829949 .

^ Ellman 2002 , pp. 1152–1172.

^ Wheatcroft, Stephen (1999). "The Great Leap Upwards: Anthropometric Data and Indicators of Crises and Secular Change in Soviet Welfare Levels, 1880–1960".

Slavic Review .

58 (1): 27– 60.

doi : 10.2307/2672986 .

JSTOR 2672986 .

PMID 22368819 .

S2CID 43228133 .

^ Ellman 2002 , pp. 1151–1172.

^ Young, Cathy (31 October 2015).

"Russia Denies Stalin's Killer Famine" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

^ Losurdo, Domenico ; Giacomini, Riggero [in Italian] , eds. (1999).

URSS: bilancio di un'esperienza. Atti del Convegno italo-russo. Urbino, 25-26-27 settembre 1997 [ USSR: balance sheet of an experience. Proceedings of the Italian-Russian Conference. Urbino, 25-26-27 September 1997 ] (in Italian). Urbino: Quattro venti.

ISBN 88-392-0512-8 .

^ Giacomini, Riggero [in Italian] (2005).

Stalin nella storia del Novecento [ Stalin in the history of the twentieth century ] (in Italian). Teti Editore. p. 139.

^ Losurdo, Domenico (2008).

Stalin: History and Criticism of A Black Legend . Rome: Carocci.

ISBN 978-8843077007 .

^ Liguori, Guido (10 April 2009).

"Lettere su Stalin" .

Liberazione (in Italian). Communist Refoundation Party.

Archived 2 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 2 April 2012.

^ Evangelisti, Valerio (14 April 2009).

"Domenico Losurdo: Stalin. Storia e critica di una leggenda nera" .

Carmilla on line [ it ] (in Italian) . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

^ Jünke, Christoph (August 2000).

"Auf zum letzten Gefecht? Zur Kritik an Domenico Losurdos Neostalinismus" [On to the last stand? On the criticism of Domenico Losurdo's neo-Stalinism] (in German).

Rosa Luxemburg Foundation . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

^ Jünke, Christoph (2007).

Der lange Schatten des Stalinismus. Sozialismus und Demokratie gestern und heute [ The long shadow of Stalinism. Socialism and democracy yesterday and today ] (in German). Cologne: ISP. p. 123.

ISBN 978-3-89 900-126-6 .

^ Jünke, Christoph (2014).

"Zurück zu Stalin!? Domenico Losurdos Feldzug gegen die Entstalinisierung" [Back to Stalin!? Domenico Losurdo's campaign against de-Stalinization].

Emanzipation (in German).

4 (2): 57– 73.

^ Wolfe, Ross (12 April 2017).

"Moar like Absurdo, amirite?" .

The Charnel-House . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

^ Pozdnyaev, Mikhail; Izvestia, Novye (5 March 2008).

"Glamurnyy tiran: Kul't lichnosti Stalina perezhivayet v Rossii vtoroye rozhdeniye" Гламурный тиран: Культ личности Сталина переживает в России второе рождение [The Glamorous Tyrant: The Cult of Stalin Experiences a Rebirth] (in Russian). Levada-Center. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ "Segodnya ispolnyayetsya 55 let so dnya smerti Stalina" Сегодня исполняется 55 лет со дня смерти Сталина [Today marks 55 years since Stalin's death] (in Russian). Caucasian Knot. 5 March 2008 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ "Re-Stalinization of Moscow subway sparks debate" .

The Washington Post . 27 October 2009 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ "Most Russians Say Soviet Union 'Took Care of Ordinary People' – Poll" .

The Moscow Times . 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ Slade, Gavin (31 May 2005).

"Deconstructing the Millennium Manifesto: The Yeltsin-Putin Transition and the Rebirth of Ideology" .

Journal of Russian and Asian Studies .

4 . The School of Russian and Asian Studies. Archived from the original on 26 September 2007 . Retrieved 26 September 2007 .

^ Osborn, Andrew (5 September 2009).

"Josef Stalin 'returns' to Moscow metro" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ "Putin Says Stalin No Worse Than 'Cunning' Oliver Cromwell" .

Sputnik . 19 December 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ a b c d e Meisner, Maurice (1999).

Mao's China and After: A History of the People's Republic . New York: Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 9780684856353 .

^ a b c d e Fetzer, James A. (April–May 1985). "Mao Zedong: A Justification of Authoritarian Practice".

The High School Journal .

68 (4): 296– 300.

^ Webley, Kayla (4 February 2011).

"Top 25 Political Icons" .

Time . Retrieved 9 June 2019 .

^ "Mao Zedong" .

The Oxford Companion to Politics of the World . Archived from the original on 21 March 2006 . Retrieved 23 August 2008 .

^ Ying, Xu (1 March 2009).

"Chinese Leader Mao Zedong / Part I" .

eTeacher . Archived from the original on 12 July 2015 . Retrieved 2 April 2015 .

^ Ying, Xu (1 April 2009).

"Chinese Leader Mao Zedong / Part II" .

eTeacher . Archived from the original on 15 March 2019 . Retrieved 2 April 2015 .

^ O'Brien 2002 , p. 254.

^ Ebrey 2010 , p. 327.

^ Gao 2008 .

^ Galtung & Stenslie 2014 .

^ a b c d e Short 2001 .

^ a b Fenby 2008 , p. 351: "Mao's responsibility for the extinction of anywhere from 40 to 70 million lives brands him as a mass killer greater than Hitler or Stalin, his indifference to the suffering and the loss of humans breathtaking." ^ Fenby (2008) , p. 351: "Mao's responsibility for the extinction of anywhere from 40 to 70 million lives brands him as a mass killer greater than Hitler or Stalin, his indifference to the suffering and the loss of humans breathtaking."; Courtois et al. (1999) ; Lynch (2004) , p. 230; Chang & Halliday (2005) ; Watts (2005) ; Duncan (2009) ; Dikötter (2010) ; Becker (2010) ^ a b Duncan 2009 .

^ Bernstein, Thomas P. (June 2006). "Mao Zedong and the Famine of 1959–1960: A Study in Wilfulness".

The China Quarterly .

186 (186).

Cambridge University Press : 421– 445.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741006000221 .

JSTOR 20192620 .

S2CID 153728069 .

^ Lynch 2004 , p. 230.

^ MacFarquhar, Roderick; Schoenhals, Michael (2006).

Mao's Last Revolution . Cambridge: Harvard University Press . p. 471.

ISBN 978-0-674-02748-0 .

Together with Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler, Mao appears destined to go down in history as one of the great tyrants of the twentieth century ^ Wasserstrom, Jeffrey N. (2010).

China in the 21st Century: What Everyone Needs to Know .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0199974962 .

^ a b c d Esherick, Joseph W. (January 1979). "On the "Restoration of Capitalism": Mao and Marxist Theory".

Modern China .

5 (1): 41– 77.

doi : 10.1177/009770047900500102 .

S2CID 144907145 .

^ a b c d e King, Stephen J. (2009).

The New Authoritarianism in The Middle East and North Africa . Bloomington: Indiana University Press .

ISBN 9780253221469 .

^ Meininghaus, Esther (2016). "Introduction".

Creating Consent in Ba'thist Syria: Women and Welfare in a Totalitarian State . I. B. Tauris. pp.

1– 33.

ISBN 978-1-78453-115-7 .

^ M. Choueiri, Youssef; M. Moghadem, Valentine (2008). "22: Modernizing Women in the Middle East".

A Companion to the History of the Middle East . West Sussex, UK: Wiley Blackwell. p. 427.

ISBN 978-1-4051-8379-6 .

^ K. Wilber, P. Jameson, Charles, Kenneth; Gottheil, Fred (1982). "Iraqi and Syrian Socialism: An Economic Appraisal".

Socialist Models of Development . Oxford, England: Pergamon Press. pp.

825– 836.

ISBN 0-08-027921-X .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Heydemann, Steven (1999). "4: Building the Institutions of Populist Authoritarian Rule".

Authoritarianism in Syria: Institutions and Social Conflict . New York: Cornell University Press. pp.

84– 104.

ISBN 0-8014-2932-3 .

^ Kahne, Z. Giele, Hilda, Janet; M. Moghadem, Valentine (2019). "5: Women, Employment, and Social Change in the Middle East and North Africa".

Women's Work and Women's Lives: The Continuing Struggle Worldwide . New York: Routledge. pp.

89– 90.

ISBN 978-0-8133-0636-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Moaddel, Mansoor (2005). "Introduction: Sociological Theories of Ideology and Cultural Change".

Islamic Modernism, Nationalism, and Fundamentalism: Episode and Discourse . Chicago, USA: University of Chicago Press. pp.

6– 7.

ISBN 0-226-53332-8 .

^ T. Hunter, Malik, Shireen, Huma (2005).

Modernization, Democracy, and Islam . Praegar Publishers. pp.

106– 107.

ISBN 0-275-98511-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Lane, Redissi, Jan-Erik, Hamadi (2009). "13: Islam and Politics: Where the Principal Difficulty of Post-modernity Lies".

Religion and Politics: Islam and Muslim Civilization (2nd ed.). Surrey, England: Ashgate. p. 188.

ISBN 978-0-7546-7418-4 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Grant, Ted (1978).

"The Colonial Revolution and the Deformed Workers' States" .

The Unbroken Thread . Retrieved 21 June 2020.

^ Jayasuriya, Siritunga.

"About Us" . United Socialist Party. Retrieved 21 June 2020.

^ Walsh, Lynn (1991).

Imperialism and the Gulf War . "Chapter 5".

Socialist Alternative . Retrieved 21 June 2020.

^ a b Schlumberger, Oliver (2007).

Debating Arab Authoritarianism: Dynamics and Durability in Nondemocratic Regimes . Stanford: Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8047-5776-8 .

^ Dimier, Veronique (February 2004). "For a Republic 'Diverse and Indivisible'? France's Experience from the Colonial Past".

Contemporary European History .

13 (1): 45– 66.

doi : 10.1017/S0960777303001462 .

JSTOR 20081191 .

S2CID 154619997 .

^ a b Nkrumah, Kwame (1963).

Africa Must Unite . New York: Frederick A. Praeger. p.

119 .

^ a b Bretton, Henry L. (1966).

The Rise and Fall of Kwame Nkrumah . New York: Frederick A. Praeger.

ASIN B0000CNF3B .

^ a b Riedl, Rachel (2014).

Authoritarian Origins of Democratic Party Systems in Africa .

Cambridge University Press . p. 108.

ISBN 9781107045040 .

^ a b Pratt, Cranford (1999).

"Julius Nyerere: Reflections on the Legacy of His Socialism" .

Canadian Journal of African Studies .

33 (1).

Taylor & Francis : 139.

doi : 10.2307/486390 .

JSTOR 486390 .

^ Hyden, Goran; Anthony, Constance G. (1980).

Beyond Ujamaa in Tanzania: Underdevelopment and an Uncaptured Peasantry . Berkeley: University of California Press . pp.

51– 54.

^ Nohlen, Dieter; Krennerich, Michael; Thibaut, Bernhard (1999).

Elections in Africa: A Data Handbook . Oxford University Press. pp.

880– 884.

ISBN 0-19-829645-2 .

^ Kadima, Denis; Lodge, Tom; Pottie, David, eds. (2009).

"Tanzania: The 1965 One-Party Elections" .

Compendium of Elections in Southern Africa . Electoral Institute of Southern Africa. pp. 353–354.

^ Dieterich, Heinz.

Socialism of the 21st Century .

^ a b Burbach, Roger; Fox, Michael; Fuentes, Federico (2013).

Latin America's Turbulent Transitions . London: Zed Books .

ISBN 9781848135697 .

^ Partido dos Trabalhadores.

Resoluções do 3º Congresso do PT (PDF) . 3º Congresso do PT (in Portuguese).

^ "Venezuela after Chávez: Now for the Reckoning" .

The Economist . 9 March 2013 . Retrieved 4 May 2013 .

^ Miroff, Nick (15 March 2014).

"Ecuador's popular, powerful president Rafael Correa is a study in contradictions" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 10 July 2015 .

^ Roth, Charles (6 March 2013).

"Venezuela's Economy Under Chávez, by the Numbers" .

Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 4 May 2013 .

^ Faiola, Anthony (11 February 2019).

"In socialist Venezuela, a crisis of faith not in just their leader but their economic model" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 31 May 2019 .

^ Heritage, Andrew (December 2002).

Financial Times World Desk Reference .

Dorling Kindersley . pp.

618– 621.

ISBN 9780789488053 .

^ Wilpert, Gregory Wilpert (2007).

Changing Venezuela By Taking Power: The History and Policies of the Chavez Government .

Verso Books . p.

69 .

ISBN 978-1-84467-552-4 .

^ Corrales, Javier (7 May 2015).

"Don't Blame It On the Oil" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 18 November 2019 .

^ Rabouin, Dion (19 May 2018).

"Here's why you can't blame socialism for Venezuela's crisis" .

Yahoo! Finance . Retrieved 4 June 2019 .

Socialism can result in diverse outcomes that range from the economy of Norway to that of Venezuela, and socialist leaders who vary as widely as Bolivia's Evo Morales and France's former President François Hollande. [...] Venezuela's problems stem from corruption and egregious mismanagement, which can happen anywhere. Countries with socialist regimes such as China, Vietnam, Chile and many in Europe have managed to successfully grow their economies as Venezuela's has tumbled.

^ Toro, Francisco (21 August 2018).

"No, Venezuela doesn't prove anything about socialism" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 4 June 2019 .

Since the turn of the century, every big country in South America except Colombia has elected a socialist president at some point. Socialists have taken power in South America's largest economy (Brazil), in its poorest (Bolivia) and in its most capitalist (Chile). Socialists have led South America's most stable country (Uruguay) as well as its most unstable (Ecuador). Argentina and Peru elected leftists who, for various reasons, didn't refer to themselves as socialists — but certainly governed as such. Mysteriously, the supposedly automatic link between socialism and the zombie apocalypse skipped all of them. Not content with merely not-collapsing, a number of these countries have thrived.

^ "Socialismo de Maduro ha convertido a Venezuela en un estado de pobreza y desesperación: Trump" .

El Financiero (in Spanish). 5 February 2019 . Retrieved 4 June 2019 .

^ López Maya, Margarita (14 December 2018).

"Populism, 21st-century socialism and corruption in Venezuela" .

Thesis Eleven .

149 : 67– 83.

doi : 10.1177/0725513618818727 .

^ Corrales, Javier (7 March 2013).

"The House That Chavez Built" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 21 April 2020.

^ "Venezuela's Expensive Friendships" . Stratfor. 2 January 2016. Retrieved 21 April 2020.

^ Minwoo, Nam (2 May 2018).

"Hwapyegyeongje muneojyeossneunde… Choejeoimgeum insang-e mogmaeneun benesuella" 화폐경제 무너졌는데…최저임금 인상에 목매는 베네수엘라 [The currency economy has collapsed. [...] Venezuela struggling to raise minimum wage].

The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean) . Retrieved 22 May 2018 .  [Venezuela's fall is considered to be mainly caused by the populist policy. [...] Venezuela, for decades, has increased the number of public sector employees and has promoted populist support to maintain the regime.] ^ Sargent, Lyman Tower (2008).

Contemporary Political Ideologies: A Comparative Analysis (14th ed.).

Wadsworth Publishing . p. 118.

ISBN 9780495569398 .

^ Munck, Ronaldo (2012).

Contemporary Latin America .

Palgrave Macmillan . p.

119 – via Google Books .

In a broad historical sense Chávez has undoubtedly played a progressive role but he is clearly not a democratic socialist [...] ^ De Faria, Carlos Aurélio Pimenta; Lopes, Dawisson Belém (January–April 2016).

"When Foreign Policy Meets Social Demands in Latin America" .

Contexto Internacional (Literature review).

38 (1). Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro: 11– 53.

doi : 10.1590/S0102-8529.2016380100001 .

The wrong left, by contrast, was said to be populist, old-fashioned, and irresponsible [...].

^ Iber, Patrick (Spring 2016).

"The Path to Democratic Socialism: Lessons from Latin America" .

Dissent . "Most of the world's democratic socialist intellectuals have been skeptical of Latin America's examples, citing their authoritarian qualities and occasional cults of personality. To critics, the appropriate label for these governments is not socialism but populism".

^ Lopes, Arthur (Spring 2016). "¿Viva la Contrarrevolución? South America's Left Begins to Wave Goodbye".

Harvard International Review .

37 (3): 12– 14.

JSTOR 26445830 .

South America, a historical bastion of populism, has always had a penchant for the left, but the continent's predilection for unsustainable welfarism might be approaching a dramatic end. [...] This "pink tide" also included the rise of populist ideologies in some of these countries, such as Kirchnerismo in Argentina, Chavismo in Venezuela, and Lulopetismo in Brazil.

^ "Maduro: "El camarada Stalin se parecía a mí. Mira el bigote, igualito" " [Maduro: "Comrade Stalin looked a lot like me. Look at the mustache, it's just the same].

ABC (in Spanish). 13 March 2015 . Retrieved 21 June 2020 .

^ "Maduro, con el enemigo en casa: "No soy un nuevo Stalin, soy hijo de Hugo Chávez" " [Maduro, with the enemy at home: "I'm not a new Stalin, I'm the son of Hugo Chávez].

ABC (in Spanish). 27 June 2014 . Retrieved 21 June 2020 .

^ Campbell, Matthew (6 August 2017).

"Maduro, the 'Tropical Stalin', struts as hunger and violence sweep Venezuela" .

The Times . Retrieved 21 June 2020.

^ Eaton, George (6 February 2019).

"The Stalin of the Caribbean: how Nicolás Maduro betrayed the Venezuelan revolution" .

New Statesman . Retrieved 21 June 2020.

^ Freisler, Eduard (28 November 2019).

"It's Beginning to Look a Lot Like Christmas in Maduro's Venezuela, but Only if You've Got U.S. Dollars" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 21 June 2020 .

^ Block, Elena (2015).

Political Communication and Leadership: Mimetisation, Hugo Chavez and the Construction of Power and Identity .

Routledge .

ISBN 9781317439561 .

[ pages needed ] ^ Harrison, Lawrence E. (2013).

Jews, Confucians, and Protestants: Cultural Capital and the End of Multiculturalism . Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 9781442219632 .

[ pages needed ] ^ "Venezuela Country report Freedom in the World 1999" .

Freedom House . 28 July 2016. Archived from the original on 28 July 2016 . Retrieved 28 July 2016 .

^ Ma, Alexandra (19 December 2015).

"Will A Venezuelan Opposition Party's Election Victory Bring Real Change?" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 19 December 2015 .

^ Márquez & Sanabria 2018 , p. 154 ^ Márquez & Sanabria 2018 , p. 169 ^ Maingon, Thais; Welsch, Friedrich (2009). "Venezuela 2008: hoja de ruta hacia el socialismo autoritario" [Venezuela 2008: road map towards authoritarian socialism].

Revista de Ciencia Política (in Spanish).

29 (2): 633– 656.

^ Wilpert, Gregory (2007).

Changing Venezuela By Taking Power: The History and Policies of the Chavez Government .

Verso Books . p.

69 .

ISBN 978-1-84467-552-4 .

^ López Maya, Margarita (2016).

El ocaso del chavismo: Venezuela 2005-2015 [ The decline of Chavismo: Venezuela 2005-2015 ] (in Spanish). Editorial Alfa. pp.

354– 355.

ISBN 9788417014254 .

^ James, Ian (4 October 2012).

"Venezuela vote puts 'Chavismo' to critical test" .

Yahoo News .

Yahoo!

.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2014 . Retrieved 2 February 2013 .

^ a b c Devereux, Charlie; Collitt, Raymond (7 March 2013).

"Venezuelans' Quality of Life Improved in UN Index Under Chavez" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2014 . Retrieved 7 March 2013 .

^ Social Panorama of Latin America 2014 (PDF) . ECLAC. March 2014. pp.

91– 92 . Retrieved 15 June 2015 .

^ Montilla K., Andrea (23 April 2014).

"Hoy se inicia consulta nacional para el currículo educativo" [National consultation for the educational curriculum begins today].

El Nacional (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 24 April 2014 . Retrieved 24 April 2014 .

^ "Estrategia de Cooperación de OPS/OMS con Venezuela 2006–2008" [PAHO/WHO Cooperation Strategy with Venezuela 2006–2008] (PDF) (in Spanish).

Pan American Health Organization . June 2006. pp.

p. 54 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 October 2006 . Retrieved 31 December 2006 .

^ Márquez, Humberto (28 October 2005).

"Venezuela se declara libre de analfabetismo" [Venezuela declares itself free of illiteracy] (in Spanish).

Inter Press Service . Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 29 December 2006 .

^ "Propaganda, not policy" .

The Economist . 28 February 2008.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2014 . Retrieved 3 May 2014 .

^ Weisbrot, Mark; Rosnick, David (May 2008).

" 'Illiteracy' Revisited: What Ortega and Rodríguez Read in the Household Survey" (PDF) . Retrieved 3 May 2014 .

^ "Banco de la Vivienda transfirió 66 millardos para subsidios" [Banco de la Vivienda transferred 66 billion for subsidies].

El Universal (in Spanish). 10 November 2006 . Retrieved 29 December 2006 .

^ a b c Nagel, Juan Cristóbal (4 June 2014).

"Poverty Shoots Up in Venezuela" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 26 October 2015 .

^ Alonso, Juan Francisco (24 February 2010).

"IACHR requests the Venezuelan government to guarantee all human rights" .

El Universal . Archived from the original on 14 May 2013 . Retrieved 25 February 2010 .

^ Smilde, David (14 September 2017). "Crime and Revolution in Venezuela".

NACLA Report on the Americas .

49 (3): 303– 08.

doi : 10.1080/10714839.2017.1373956 .

ISSN 1071-4839 .

S2CID 158528940 .

Finally, it is important to realize that the reductions in poverty and inequality during the Chávez years were real, but somewhat superficial. While indicators of income and consumption showed clear progress, the harder-to-change characteristics of structural poverty and inequality, such as the quality of housing, neighborhoods, education, and employment, remained largely unchanged .

^ "Chávez declara "guerra económica" a burguesía en Venezuela" [Chávez declares "economic war" against the bourgeoisie in Venezuela].

El Universo (in Spanish). 2 June 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

^ Siegel, Robert (25 December 2014).

"For Venezuela, Drop In Global Oil Prices Could Be Catastrophic" .

NPR . Retrieved 4 January 2015 .

^ Scharfenberg, Ewald (1 February 2015).

"Volver a ser pobre en Venezuela" [To be poor again in Venezuela].

El Pais . Retrieved 3 February 2015 .

^ Corrales, Javier (7 March 2013).

"The House That Chavez Built" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 6 February 2015 .

^ Gallagher, J. J. (25 March 2015).

"Venezuela: Does an increase in poverty signal threat to government?" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

^ Corrales, Javier (7 May 2015).

"Don't Blame It On the Oil" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 10 May 2015 .

^ Barreiro C., Raquel (4 March 2006).

"Mercal es 34% más barato" [Mercal is 34% cheaper].

El Universal (in Spanish) . Retrieved 29 December 2006 .

^ a b "Venezuela's economy: Medieval policies" .

The Economist . 20 August 2011 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ "Las principales causas de la escasez en Venezuela" [The main causes of shortages in Venezuela].

Banca & Negocios . 27 March 2014. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ "El ascenso de la escasez" [The rise of scarcity].

El Universal . 13 February 2014 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ "¿Por qué faltan dólares en Venezuela?" [Why are dollars missing in Venezuela?].

El Nacional . 8 October 2013. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ "2014 Panorama Social de América Latina" (PDF) .

United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean .

United Nations . Retrieved 24 October 2015 .

^ "Enabling laws in The Economist" .

The Economist . 28 December 2010 . Retrieved 19 May 2014 .

^ Moloney, Anastasia (29 January 2007).

"Photo Feature: Chavez's Propaganda" .

World Politics Review . Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 10 March 2012 .

^ Grant, Will (23 November 2010).

"Venezuela bans unauthorised use of Hugo Chavez's image" .

BBC News . Retrieved 26 April 2012 .

^ Romero, Simon (4 February 2011).

"In Venezuela, an American Has the President's Ear" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 26 April 2012 .

^ Lakshmanan, Indira (27 July 2005).

"Channeling his energies Venezuelans riveted by president's TV show" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved 14 April 2012 .

^ Chávez, Hugo (12 June 2012).

"Presentación, Programa de la Patria" (in Spanish).

Archived 1 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 1 October 2019.

^ Izarra, Sandra (26 February 2018).

"Maduro: En Venezuela lo que está en crisis es el modelo capitalista-rentista" .

Correo del Orinoco (in Spanish). Retrieved 21 April 2020.

^ "A slow-motion coup. The authoritarian regime is becoming a naked dictatorship. The region must react" .

The Economist . 28 February 2015 . Retrieved 12 June 2015 .

^ "Venezuela toilet paper shortage an anti-Bolivarian conspiracy, gov't claims" .

CBS News . 16 May 2013 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

^ Martin, Abby (22 June 2017).

"Empire Files: Venezuela Economy Minister — Sabotage, Not Socialism, Is the Problem" .

Truthout . Archived from the original on 27 January 2018 . Retrieved 22 June 2018 .

^ "Oliver Stone Interview: There's a Specter Haunting Latin America, the Specter of 21st Century Socialism" .

^ Hart, Peter (8 March 2013).

"NYT Debates Hugo Chavez- Minus the Debate" . Fairness and Accuracy In Reporting (FAIR) . Retrieved 4 May 2013 .

^ Sivaramakrishnan, Arvind (6 March 2013).

"Hugo Chávez: Death of a socialist" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 3 February 2014 .

^ Salmerón, Víctor (13 June 2012).

"Plan Chávez prevé crear 30 mil empresas de propiedad social" .

El Universal (in Spanish) . Retrieved 3 February 2014 .

^ Azzellini, Dario.

"The Communal State: Communal Councils, Communes, and Workplace Democracy" . North American Congress on Latin America . Retrieved 3 February 2014 .

^ "Sondeos de opinión Venezuela - Encuesta ICS Febrero 2015" (PDF) (in Spanish). International Consulting Services. 24 February 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 6 March 2015 .

^ "AFP: Gobierno de Maduro empeoró inflación, devaluación y pobreza que dejó Chávez" (in Spanish).

El Nacional . 3 March 2015 . Retrieved 4 March 2015 .

^ Woody, Christopher (2 December 2016).

" 'The tipping point': More and more Venezuelans are uprooting their lives to escape their country's crises" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Bremmer, Ian (17 May 2020).

"The Rise Of State-Controlled Capitalism" .

NPR . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Stossel, John (31 May 2017).

"Noam Chomsky's Venezuela Lesson" .

Reason . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

I never described Chavez's state capitalist government as 'socialist' or even hinted at such an absurdity. It was quite remote from socialism. Private capitalism remained. [...] Capitalists were free to undermine the economy in all sorts of ways, like massive export of capital.

^ Toussaint, Eric (24 June 2010).

"The Venezuelan economy: in transition towards socialism? (Part 3)" .

Series: Bolivarian Venezuela at the crossroads . Committee for the Abolition of Illegitimate Debt. Retrieved 17 June 2020.

^ James, Ian (18 July 2010).

"Despite Chavez, Venezuela economy not socialist" .

Boston .

Associated Press . Retrieved 9 September 2020 .

^ Cusack, Asa (31 May 2018).

"Is socialism to blame for Venezuela's never-ending crisis?" Al Jazeera. Retrieved 2 June 2020.

^ Halvorssen, Thor (9 August 2005).

"Hurricane Hugo" .

The Weekly Standard . Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Barone, Michael (31 July 2006).

"Good News" .

The New York Sun . Archived from the original on 10 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ "Lula says he is not like Chávez" .

El Universal (in Spanish). 22 August 2006. Archived from the original on 21 December 2007 . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Santora, Marc (26 September 2006).

"Chomsky is Alive, Actually, and Hungry for Debate" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Grandin, Greg (6 December 2007).

"Chavismo and Democracy" .

The Nation . No. 24 December 2007. Archived from the original on 3 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

Chavismo is not an adequate description of the social movement that makes up Chávez's political base, since many organizations predate his rise to political power, and their leaders and cadre have a sophisticated understanding of their relationship with Chávez. Over the last couple of years, a number of social scientists have done field work in urban barrios , and their findings confirm that this synergy between the central government and participatory local organizations has expanded, not restricted, debate and that democracy is thriving in Venezuela.

Chavismo has ripped open the straitjacket of post–Cold War Latin American discourse, particularly the taboo against government regulation of the economy and economic redistribution. Public policy, including economic policy, is now open to discussion and, importantly, popular influence. This is in sharp contrast to Costa Rica, where a few months ago its Supreme Court, with the support of its executive branch, prohibited public universities from not just opposing but even debating the Central American Free Trade Agreement, which soon won a national referendum by a razor-thin margin.

^ Naím, Moisés (25 February 2014).

"The Tragedy of Venezuela" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

Hugo Chávez based his popularity on his extraordinary charisma, lots of discretionary money, and a key and well-tested political message: denouncing the past and promising a better future for all. The country's widespread student protests now symbolize the demise of this message. Venezuelans younger than 30 years of age (the majority of the population) have not known any government other than that of Chávez or Maduro. For them, " Chavismo " is the past. As for the promises of a better future: The results are in. The catastrophic consequences of Chávez's 21st-century socialism are impossible to mask any longer and the government has run out of excuses. Blaming the CIA, the "fascist opposition", or "dark international forces", as Maduro and his allies customarily do, has become fodder for parodies flooding YouTube. The concrete effects of 15 years of Chavismo are all too visible in empty shelves and overflowing morgues.

^ Weisbrot, Mark (9 October 2014).

"Why Chávez Was Re-elected" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ "Democracy to the rescue?" .

The Economist . 14 March 2015 . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

The viceroys of the colonial era set the pattern. They centralised power and bought the loyalty of local interest groups. [...] Caudillos , dictators and elected presidents continued the tradition of personalising power. Venezuela's Chavismo and the Kirchnerismo of Ms Fernández are among today's manifestations.

^ Hawkins, Kirk A. (2016).

"Chavismo, Liberal Democracy, and Radical Democracy" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

19 (1): 311– 329.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-072314-113326 .

^ Phillips, Ben (1981).

"USSR: Capitalist or Socialist?" .

The Call .

10 (8) . Retrieved 15 July 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Dean (2012) , pp.

6–7 ; Ehms (2014) ; Milne (2002) ; Milne (2006) ^ Schumpeter, Joseph (2008) [1942].

Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy . Harper Perennial. p. 169.

ISBN 978-0-06-156161-0 .

But there are still others (concepts and institutions) which by virtue of their nature cannot stand transplantation and always carry the flavor of a particular institutional framework. It is extremely dangerous, in fact it amounts to a distortion of historical description, to use them beyond the social world or culture whose denizens they are. Now ownership or property – also, so I believe, taxation – are such denizens of the world of commercial society, exactly as knights and fiefs are denizens of the feudal world. But so is the state (a denizen of commercial society).

^ a b c McKay, Iain, ed. (2012). "Why do anarchists oppose state socialism?".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. II. Edinburgh: AK Press .

ISBN 978-1-902593-90-6 .

OCLC 182529204 .

^ a b c McKay, Iain, ed. (2012). "What would an anarchist society look like?".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. II. Edinburgh: AK Press .

ISBN 978-1-902593-90-6 .

OCLC 182529204 .

^ William Morris (17 May 1890).

"The 'Eight Hours' and the Demonstration" .

Commonweal .

6 (227). p. 153. Retrieved 4 November 2019.

^ Screpanti, Ernesto ; Zamagni, Stefano (2005).

An Outline on the History of Economic Thought (2nd ed.).

Oxford University Press . p. 295.

It should not be forgotten, however, that in the period of the Second International, some of the reformist currents of Marxism, as well as some of the extreme left-wing ones, not to speak of the anarchist groups, had already criticised the view that State ownership and central planning is the best road to socialism. But with the victory of Leninism in Russia, all dissent was silenced, and socialism became identified with 'democratic centralism', 'central planning', and State ownership of the means of production.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1972) [1920].

"Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder .

Collected Works .

31 . Moscow: Progress Publishers . pp. 17–118. Retrieved 10 February 2020.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1972) [1918].

"Session of the All-Russia C.E.C." .

Collected Works (4th English ed.).

27 . Moscow: Progress Publishers . pp. 279–313. "Reality tells us that state capitalism would be a step forward. If in a small space of time we could achieve state capitalism in Russia, that would be a victory." Retrieved 10 February 2020.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1965) [1921].

"The Tax in Kind" . Translated by Sdobnikov, Tury.

Collected Works (1st English ed.).

32 . Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 329–365. "State capitalism would be a step forward as compared with the present state of affairs in our Soviet Republic. If in approximately six months' time state capitalism became established in our Republic, this would be a great success and a sure guarantee that within a year socialism will have gained a permanently firm hold and will have become invincible in this country." Retrieved 10 February 2020.

^ Dunayevskaya, Raya (1941).

"The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is a Capitalist Society" .

Internal Discussion Bulletin of the Workers Party . Retrieved 23 April 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Dunayevskaya, Raya (1946).

"The Nature of the Russian Economy" .

The New International .

XII (10): 313–317.

XIII (1/January 1947): 27–30. Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Boggs, Grace Lee; Dunayevskaya, Ray; James, C. L. R. (1986).

State Capitalism and World Revolution . Chicago: Charles H. R. Publishing Company.

ISBN 9780882860794 . Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Lichtenstein, Nelson (2011).

American Capitalism: Social Thought and Political Economy in the Twentieth Century .

University of Pennsylvania Press . pp.

160– 161.

ISBN 9780812202632 .

^ Ishay, Micheline (2007).

The Human Rights Reader: Major Political Essays, Speeches, and Documents from Ancient Times to the Present .

Taylor & Francis . p. 245.

ISBN 9780415951609 .

^ Todd, Allan (2012).

History for the IB Diploma: Communism in Crisis 1976–1989 .

Cambridge University Press . p. 16.

ISBN 978-1107649279 .

^ a b c Bordiga, Amadeo (1952).

"Dialogue With Stalin" .

Il Programma Comunista . Translated by Libri Incogniti . Retrieved 11 November 2019 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Bordiga, Amadeo .

"Theses on the Role of the Communist Party in the Proletarian Revolution" . Communist International . Retrieved 25 March 2019 .

^ Goldner, Loren (1995).

"Amadeo Bordiga, the Agrarian Question and the International Revolutionary Movement" (PDF) .

Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory .

23 (1): 73– 100.

doi : 10.1080/03017609508413387 . Retrieved 1 August 2018 .

^ a b c Mattick, Paul (1978).

"Otto Rühle and the German Labour Movement" .

Anti-Bolshevik Communism (PDF) . London: Merlin Press .

ISBN 9780850362237 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Deutscher, Isaac (April 1952). "The French Revolution and the Russian Revolution: Some Suggestive Analogies".

World Politics .

4 (3).

Cambridge University Press : 369– 381.

doi : 10.2307/2009128 .

JSTOR 2009128 .

S2CID 154358254 .

^ Piccone, Paul (1983).

Italian Marxism .

University of California Press . p. 134.

ISBN 9780520047983 .

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1964) [1917].

The State and Revolution .

"Chapter 5" .

Collected Works .

25 . Moscow: Progress Publishing. pp. 381–492. Retrieved 27 December 2019.

^ Steele, David (1992).

From Marx to Mises: Post-Capitalist Society and the Challenge of Economic Calculation . Open Court Publishing Company. pp.

44– 45.

ISBN 978-0-87548-449-5 .

By 1888, the term 'socialism' was in general use among Marxists, who had dropped 'communism', now considered an old fashioned term meaning the same as 'socialism'. [...] At the turn of the century, Marxists called themselves socialists. [...] The definition of socialism and communism as successive stages was introduced into Marxist theory by Lenin in 1917 [...], the new distinction was helpful to Lenin in defending his party against the traditional Marxist criticism that Russia was too backward for a socialist revolution.

^ Hudis, Peter; Vidal, Matt; Smith, Tony; Rotta, Tomás; Prew, Paul, eds. (September 2018 – June 2019). "Marx's Concept of Socialism".

The Oxford Handbook of Karl Marx .

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190695545.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0190695545 .

.

^ Marx, Karl (1970) [1875].

"Part I" .

Critique of the Gotha Program .

Marx/Engels Selected Works .

3 . Moscow: Progress Publishers . pp. 13–30. Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Stalin, Joseph (1972) [1951].

Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1st ed.). Beijing: Foreign Languages Press . Retrieved 27 December 2019 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Rühle, Otto (2007) [1920].

"The Revolution Is Not a Party Affar" . In Gorter, Hermann ; Pankhurst, Sylvia ; Pannekoek, Anton (eds.).

Non-Leninist Marxism: Writings on the Workers' Councils . St. Petersburg, Florida: Red and Black Publishers. pp.

157– 164.

ISBN 9780979181368 . Retrieved 23 April 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Mattick, Paul (1978).

Anti-Bolshevik Communism (PDF) . London: Merlin Press .

ISBN 9780850362237 .

^ Committee for a Workers' International (June 1992).

"The Collapse of Stalinism" . Retrieved 4 November 2019.

^ Grant, Ted (1996).

The Collapse of Stalinism and the Class Nature of the Russian State . Retrieved 4 November 2019 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Arnove, Anthony (Winter 2000).

"The Fall of Stalinism: Ten Years On" .

International Socialist Review .

10 . Archived from the original on 26 July 2011 . Retrieved 4 November 2019 .

^ Daum, Walter (Fall 2002).

"Theories of Stalinism's Collapse" .

Proletarian Revolution .

65 . Retrieved 4 November 2019 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ "State Capitalism" . International Communist Current. 30 December 2004 . Retrieved 25 June 2019 .

^ Đilas, Milovan (1983) [1957].

The New Class: An Analysis of the Communist System (paperback ed.). San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

ISBN 0-15-665489-X .

^ Đilas, Milovan (1969).

The Unperfect Society: Beyond the New Class . Translated by Cooke, Dorian. New York City: Harcourt, Brace & World.

ISBN 0-15-693125-7 .

^ Đilas, Milovan (1998).

Fall of the New Class: A History of Communism's Self-Destruction (hardcover ed.).

Alfred A. Knopf .

ISBN 0-679-43325-2 .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1991) [1937].

The Revolution Betrayed: What is the Soviet Union and Where is it Going?

(paperback ed.). Detroit: Labor Publications.

ISBN 0-929087-48-8 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Williams, Raymond (1985) [1976].

"Capitalism" .

Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society . Oxford paperbacks (revised ed.). New York: Oxford University Press . p.

52 .

ISBN 9780195204698 . Retrieved April 30, 2017 .

A new phrase, state-capitalism, has been widely used in mC20, with precedents from eC20, to describe forms of state ownership in which the original conditions of the definition – centralized ownership of the means of production, leading to a system of wage-labour – have not really changed.

^ Alistair, Mason; Pyper, Hugh (21 December 2000). Hastings, Adrian (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Christian Thought .

Oxford University Press . p.

677 .

ISBN 978-0198600244 . Retrieved 28 December 2019 .

At the heart of its vision has been social or common ownership of the means of production. Common ownership and democratic control of these was far more central to the thought of the early socialists than state control or nationalization, which developed later. [...] Nationalization in itself has nothing particularly to do with socialism and has existed under non-socialist and anti-socialist regimes. Kautsky in 1891 pointed out that a 'co-operative commonwealth' could not be the result of the 'general nationalization of all industries' unless there was a change in 'the character of the state' .

^ Cliff, Tony (1988) [1948].

"The Theory of Bureaucratic Collectivism: A Critique" .

State Capitalism in Russia . London: Bookmarks. pp.

333– 353.

ISBN 9780906224441 . Retrieved 23 April 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Mandel, Ernest (1979).

"Why The Soviet Bureaucracy is not a New Ruling Class" .

Monthly Review .

3 : 63– 86.

doi : 10.14452/MR-031-03-1979-07_6 . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ Taafee, Peter (1995). "Trotsky and the Collapse of Stalinism".

The Rise of Militant: Thirty Years of Militant . Militant Publications.

ISBN 978-0906582473 .

The Soviet bureaucracy and Western capitalism rested on mutually antagonistic social systems.

^ Trotsky, Leon (2004) [1936].

The Revolution Betrayed . Translated by Eastman, Max. Dover Publications.

ISBN 9780486433981 . Retrieved 11 November 2019.

^ Trotsky, Leon (1977) [1938].

"The USSR and Problems of the Transitional Epoch" .

Transitional Program for Socialist Revolution . (1st ed.). Translated by Eastman, Max.

Pathfinder Press . pp.

39–42 .

ISBN 9780873485241 . Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Trotsky, Leon [1939].

"The ABC of Materialist Dialectics" .

In Defense of Marxism : Against the Petty-Bourgeois Opposition in the Socialist Workers Party (4th revised ed.).

Pathfinder Press .

ISBN 9780873487894 . Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Frank, Pierre (November–December 1951).

"Evolution of Eastern Europe" .

Fourth International .

12 (6): 176, 213– 218 . Retrieved 11 November 2019 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1972).

Writings 1932–1933 . New York: Pathfinder Press . p. 96.

ISBN 9780873482288 .

^ Taaffe, Peter (1 March 2019).

"New introduction to Trotsky's classic work" .

In Defence of Marxism .

Committee for a Workers' International / Socialist Party Scotland . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

[Leon Trotsky] also touches on many other vital issues for Marxists: on the absolute necessity for democratic control and management of the future workers' state as well as the necessary instrument to create that state: a mass party of the working class. Indeed, if there was one central theme of the book it is this: what kind of party is necessary to replace capitalism with a worldwide democratic socialist revolution?

^ LeBlanc, Paul (2014).

Marx, Lenin, and the Revolutionary Experience: Studies of Communism and Radicalism in an Age of Globalization .

Routledge . p. 202.

ISBN 9781317793526 .

^ "Deformed Workers' States" .

In Defence of Marxism .

International Marxist Tendency . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ Gliniecki, Ben (22 August 2018).

"50 years after the Prague Spring – what are the lessons for today?" .

In Defence of Marxism .

International Marxist Tendency . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

The Prague Spring was a movement with the potential to develop into a socialist political revolution against the Communist Party (CP) bureaucracy [...].

^ "Socialism and democracy" .

Socialist Worker .

International Socialist Organization . 23 May 2014 . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

These two self-styled socialisms are very different, but they have more in common than they think. The social democracy has typically dreamed of "socializing" capitalism from above. Its principle has always been that increased state intervention in society and economy is per se socialistic. It bears a fatal family resemblance to the Stalinist conception of imposing something called socialism from the top down, and of equating statification with socialism. Both have their roots in the ambiguous history of the socialist idea.

^ Mises, Ludwig von (1990).

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth (PDF) .

Mises Institute . Retrieved 11 November 2019 .

^ Hayek, Friedrich (1935). "The Nature and History of the Problem"; "The Present State of the Debate".

Collectivist Economic Planning . pp. 1–40, 201–243.

^ Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E., eds. (1987).

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online .

Palgrave Macmillan .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ Biddle, Jeff; Samuels, Warren; Davis, John (2006).

A Companion to the History of Economic Thought .

Wiley-Blackwell . p. 319.

What became known as the socialist calculation debate started when von Mises (1935 [1920]) launched a critique of socialism.

^ Levy, David M.; Peart, Sandra J. (2008). "Socialist calculation debate".

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (Second ed.).

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

685– 692.

doi : 10.1057/9780230226203.1570 .

ISBN 978-0333786765 .

^ Tucker, Benjamin (1985).

State Socialism and Anarchism and Other Essays: Including the Attitude of Anarchism Toward Industrial Combinations and Why I Am an Anarchist . Ralph Myles Publisher.

ISBN 9780879260156 .

^ Nordlinger, Jay (22 July 2004).

"Hollander's Clear Eye" .

National Review Online . Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

^ Hollander, Paul (1998).

Political Pilgrims: Western Intellectuals in Search of the Good Society (4th ed.). New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers .

ISBN 1-56000-954-3 .

OCLC 36470253 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Amandae, Sonja (2003).

Rationalizing Capitalist Democracy: The Cold War Origins of Rational Choice Liberalism .

University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0226016542 .

Applebaum, Anne (14 October 2014).

"Understanding Stalin" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 4 April 2015 .

Balmforth, Tom (19 December 2018).

"Russian nostalgia for Soviet Union reaches 13-year high" .

Reuters . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

Barrett, William, ed. (1 April 1978).

"Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy: A Symposium" .

Commentary .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2017 . Retrieved 14 June 2020 .

Alt URL Bartmanski, Dominik (2011).

"Successful icons of failed time: rethinking post-communist nostalgia" .

Acta Sociologica .

54 (3): 213– 231.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.859.3655 .

doi : 10.1177/0001699311412625 .

S2CID 146782564 .

Becker, Jasper (25 September 2010).

"Systematic genocide" .

The Spectator . Archived from the original on 11 April 2012.

Bel, Germà (April 2006).

"Against the mainstream: Nazi privatization in 1930s Germany" (PDF) .

Economic History Review .

63 (1).

University of Barcelona : 34– 55.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0289.2009.00473.x .

hdl : 2445/11716 .

S2CID 154486694 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

Berger, Mark T. (August 1997). "Review: Singapore's Authoritarian Capitalism: Asian Values, Free Market Illusions, and Political Dependency by Christopher Lingle".

Journal of Asian Studies .

56 (3).

Cambridge University Press : 853– 854.

doi : 10.1017/S0021911800035129 .

JSTOR i325583 .

S2CID 153600219 .

Bhasin, Balbir B. (2007).

"Fostering Entrepreneurship: Developing a Risktaking Culture in Singapore" .

New England Journal of Entrepreneurship .

10 (2): 39– 50.

doi : 10.1108/NEJE-10-02-2007-B004 .

ISSN 1550-333X . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

Brzezinski, Zbigniew (1989).

The Grand Failure: The Birth and Death of Communism in the Twentieth Century (1st ed.). New York: Scribner .

ISBN 9780684190341 .

Budhwar, Pawan S., ed. (2004).

Managing Human Resources in Asia-Pacific .

Psychology Press .

ISBN 9780415300063 .

Caute, David (2010).

Politics and the novel during the Cold War .

Transaction Publishers .

ISBN 9781412831369 .

Chang, Jung; Halliday, Jon (2005).

Mao: The Unknown Story . London: Jonathan Cape.

ISBN 978-0-224-07126-0 .

Courtois, Stéphane ; Werth, Nicolas; Panne, Jean-Louis; Paczkowski, Andrzej ; Bartosek, Karel; Margolin, Jean-Louis; Kramer, Mark (1999).

The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression . Cambridge: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 0-674-07608-7 .

Davies, Robert ; Wheatcroft, Stephen G.

(2004).

The Industrialisation of Soviet Russia Volume 5: The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture 1931-1933 . Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-230-23855-8 .

Dean, Jodi (2012).

The Communist Horizon .

Verso Books .

ISBN 9781844679546 .

Defty, Brook (2007). "2–5".

Britain, America and Anti-Communist Propaganda 1945–1953 . The Information Research Department.

Deutscher, Isaac (2003) [1959].

The Prophet Unarmed: Trotsky 1921–1929 .

Verso Books .

ISBN 9781859844465 .

Dikötter, Frank (2010).

Mao's Great Famine: The History of China's Most Devastating Catastrophe, 1958–62 . London: Walker & Company.

ISBN 978-0-8027-7768-3 .

Duncan, Maxim (28 September 2009).

"Granddaughter Keeps Mao's Memory Alive in Bookshop" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on February 4, 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 .

Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (2010).

The Cambridge Illustrated History of China .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-12433-1 – via Google Books .

Ehms, Jule (2014).

"The Communist Horizon" .

Marx & Philosophy Review of Books .

Marx & Philosophy Society . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

Ekman, Joakim; Linde, Jonas (September 2005).

"Communist nostalgia and the consolidation of democracy in Central and Eastern Europe" .

Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics .

21 (3): 354–374 .

doi : 10.1080/13523270500183512 .

S2CID 154661789 .

Ellman, Michael (November 2002).

"Soviet Repression Statistics: Some Comments" (PDF) .

Europe-Asia Studies .

54 (7).

Taylor & Francis : 1151– 1172.

doi : 10.1080/0966813022000017177 .

JSTOR 826310 .

S2CID 43510161 .

Esche, Christine; Mossiah, Rosa Katharina; Topalska, Sandra (2009).

"Lost and Found: Communism Nostalgia and Communist Chic Among Poland's Old and Young Generations" .

Humanity in Action . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

Fenby, J. (2008).

Modern China: The Fall and Rise of a Great Power, 1850 to the Present . Ecco Press.

ISBN 978-0-06-166116-7 .

Fuchs, Christian (29 June 2017).

"The Relevance of Franz L. Neumann's Critical Theory in 2017: Anxiety and Politics in the New Age of Authoritarian Capitalism" (PDF) .

Media, Culture & Society .

40 (5): 779– 791.

doi : 10.1177/0163443718772147 .

S2CID 149705789 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

Fuchs, Christian (27 April 2018).

"Authoritarian Capitalism, Authoritarian Movements, Authoritarian Communication" (PDF) .

tripleC .

15 (2): 637– 650.

doi : 10.1177/0163443718772147 .

S2CID 149705789 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2019 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

Galtung, Marte Kjær; Stenslie, Stig (2014).

49 Myths About China .

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 978-1-4422-3622-6 .

Gao, Mobo (2008).

The Battle for China's Past: Mao and the Cultural Revolution . London: Pluto Press .

ISBN 978-0-7453-2780-8 .

Gat, Azar (1 July 2007).

"The Return of Authoritarian Great Powers" .

Foreign Affairs .

86 (4).

Council on Foreign Relations : 59– 69.

JSTOR 20032415 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2020 . Retrieved 8 June 2019 .

Getty, J. Arch ; Rittersporn, Gábor; Zemskov, Viktor (October 1993).

"Victims of the Soviet Penal System in the Pre-War Years: A First Approach on the Basis of Archival Evidence" (PDF) .

American Historical Review .

98 (4).

Oxford University Press : 1017– 1049.

doi : 10.2307/2166597 .

JSTOR 2166597 .

Geyes, Michael; Fitzpatrick, Sheila, eds. (2008).

Beyond Totalitarianism: Stalinism and Nazism Compared .

Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511802652 .

ISBN 9780521723978 .

Ghodsee, Kristen (2011).

"Dr. Kristen Ghodsee, Bowdoin College - Nostalgia for Communism" .

The Academic Minute . WAMC. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020.

Ghodsee, Kristen ; Mead, Julia (2018).

"What Has Socialism Ever Done For Women?" (PDF) .

Catalyst .

2 (2): 108 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

Gill, Graeme J.

(1998).

Stalinism .

Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 9780312177645 .

Golinowska, Karolina (Autumn 2016).

"Nostalgia for the PRL in contemporary Poland" .

Twentieth Century Communism .

11 (11): 67– 82.

doi : 10.3898/175864316819698512 . Archived from the original on 10 August 2020.

Guilhot, Nicholas (2005).

The Democracy Makers: Human Rights and International Order .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 9780231131247 .

Heilbroner, Robert L.; Barkan, Joanne; Brand, Horst; Cohen, Mitchell; Coser, Lewis; Denitch, Bogdan; Fehèr, Ferenc; Heller, Agnès; Horvat, Branko; Tyler, Gus (Winter 1991).

"From Sweden to Socialism: A Small Symposium on Big Questions" .

Dissident . pp.

96– 110 . Retrieved 17 April 2020 .

Hobsbawm, Eric J.

(2012).

Revolutionaries . Abacus.

ISBN 978-0-34-912056-0 .

Huntington, Samuel P. (1970).

Authoritarian Politics in Modern Society: The Dynamics of Established One-party Systems .

Basic Books .

ISBN 978-0465005697 .

Kendall, Diana (2011).

Sociology in Our Time: The Essentials .

Cengage Learning . pp.

125– 127.

ISBN 9781111305505 .

Khlevniuk, Oleg V.

(2015).

Stalin: New Biography of a Dictator . Translated by Favorov, Nora Seligman. New Haven and London: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-16388-9 .

Kimball, Alan (September 1973). "The First International and the Russian Obshchina".

Slavic Review .

32 (3).

Cambridge University Press : 491– 514.

doi : 10.2307/2495406 .

ISSN 0037-6779 .

JSTOR 2495406 .

S2CID 164131867 .

Kotkin, Stephen (2014).

Stalin: Paradoxes of Power, 1878–1928 . London: Allen Lane .

ISBN 978-0-7139-9944-0 .

Lee, Stephen J. (2003).

Lenin and Revolutionary Russia . London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-415-28718-0 .

Leggett, George (1986) [1981].

The Cheka: Lenin's Political Police .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780198228622 .

Lewin, Moshe (1969).

Lenin's Last Struggle . Translated by Sheridan Smith, A. M. London: Faber and Faber .

ISBN 9780571087136 .

Lewin, Moshe (2005).

Lenin's Last Testament . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .

ISBN 9780472030521 .

Li, He (2015).

Political Thought and China's Transformation: Ideas Shaping Reform in Post-Mao China . Springer. pp.

60– 69.

ISBN 9781137427816 .

Lingle, Christopher; Owens, Amanda J.; Rowley, Charles K., eds. (Summer 1998). "Singapore and Authoritarian Capitalism".

The Locke Luminary .

I (1).

Löwy, Michael (1986). "Mass organization, party, and state: Democracy in the transition to socialism".

Transition and Development: Problems of Third World Socialism .

94 .

Lynch, Michael (2004).

Mao . Routledge Historical Biographies.

Routledge .

Márquez, Laureano; Sanabria, Eduardo (2018).

Historieta de Venezuela: De Macuro a Maduro (1st ed.). Gráficas Pedrazas.

ISBN 978-1-7328777-1-9 .

Mayer, Robert (Summer 1993). "Lenin and the Concept of the Professional Revolutionary".

History of Political Thought .

14 (2): 249– 263.

ISSN 0143-781X .

JSTOR 26214357 .

McCauley, Martin (2003).

Stalin and Stalinism (3rd ed.). Harlow and London: Pearson.

ISBN 978-0-582-50587-2 .

McClellan, Woodford (September 1973).

"Nechaevshchina: An Unknown Chapter" .

Slavic Review .

32 (3).

Cambridge University Press : 546– 553.

doi : 10.2307/2495409 .

ISSN 0037-6779 .

JSTOR 2495409 .

McDermott, Kevin (2006).

Stalin: Revolutionary in an Era of War . Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-333-71122-4 .

Medvedev, Roy (1982).

Leninism and Western Socialism .

Schocken Books .

ISBN 9780805271041 .

Milne, Seumas (12 September 2002).

"The battle for history" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

Milne, Seumas (16 February 2006).

"Communism may be dead, but clearly not dead enough" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

Milne, Seumas (2012).

The Revenge of History: The Battle for the 21st Century .

Verso Books .

ISBN 9781844679645 .

Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2007).

Young Stalin . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 978-0-297-85068-7 .

Murawska, Renata (6 March 2005).

"Of the Polish People's Republic and its Memory in Polish Film" (PDF) .

KinoKultura .

2 .

Nikitin, Vadim (5 March 2014).

"Putin is exploiting the legacy of the Soviet Union to further Russia's ends in Ukraine" .

The Independent . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

Nugent, Margaret Latus (1992).

From Leninism to Freedom: The Challenges of Democratization . Boulder: Westview Press .

ISBN 978-0-8133-8524-2 .

O'Brien, Patrick Karl (2002).

Atlas of World History .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-521921-X – via Google Books .

Parenti, Michael (1997).

Blackshirts and Reds: Rational Fascism and the Overthrow of Communism . San Francisco: City Lights Books .

ISBN 978-0-87286-330-9 .

Pipes, Richard (1996).

The Unknown Lenin: From the Secret Archive . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-06919-8 .

Pipes, Richard (1997) [1995].

Three "Whys" of the Russian Revolution .

Vintage Books .

ISBN 9780679776468 .

Pipes, Richard (2003) [2001].

Communism: A History . Modern Library Chronicles.

ISBN 9780812968644 .

Prusik, Monika; Lewicka, Maria (October 2016).

"Nostalgia for Communist Times and Autobiographical Memory: Negative Present or Positive Past?" .

Political Psychology .

37 (5): 677– 693.

doi : 10.1111/pops.12330 .

Radzinsky, Edvard (1997) [1996].

Stalin: The First In-depth Biography Based on Explosive New Documents from Russia's Secret Archives .

Anchor Books .

ISBN 9780385479547 .

Rakitin, Alexander (2 March 2019).

"Sergey Nechayev: "temnyy chulanchik" russkoy revolyutsii" Сергей Нечаев: "темный чуланчик" русской революции [Sergei Nechaev: the "dark closet" of the Russian revolution].

Mirtesen (in Russian). Finam. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019 . Retrieved 29 March 2019 .

Read, Christopher (2005).

Lenin: A Revolutionary Life . Routledge Historical Biographies. London: Routledge .

ISBN 9780415206495 .

Reisch, George A. (2005).

How the Cold War Transformed Philosophy of Science: To the Icy Slopes of Logic .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780521546898 .

Rigby, T. H. (1979).

Lenin's Government: Sovnarkom 1917–1922 . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-22281-5 .

Ryan, James (2012).

Lenin's Terror: The Ideological Origins of Early Soviet State Violence . London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-138-81568-1 .

Rosefielde, Steven (1996). "Stalinism in Post-Communist Perspective: New Evidence on Killings, Forced Labour and Economic Growth in the 1930s".

Europe-Asia Studies .

48 (6).

Taylor & Francis : 959– 987.

doi : 10.1080/09668139608412393 .

JSTOR 152635 .

Sachno, Sergiusz O. (14 March 2003).

"Kapitan Żbik na tropie oranżady" [Captain Żbik on the trail of orangeade].

Wprost (in Polish) . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

Sandle, Mark (1999).

A Short History of Soviet Socialism . London: UCL Press .

doi : 10.4324/9780203500279 .

ISBN 9781857283556 .

Schulman, Jason (2006). "The Case for Socialism in the Twenty-First Century".

Democratic Left .

47 .

Service, Robert (1990). "Lenin: Individual and Politics in the October Revolution".

Modern History Review .

2 (1): 16– 19.

Service, Robert (2000).

Lenin: A Biography . London: Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-333-72625-9 .

Service, Robert (2004).

Stalin: A Biography . London: Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-333-72627-3 .

Short, Philip (2001).

Mao: A Life . Owl Books.

ISBN 978-0-8050-6638-8 .

Siegel, Achim, ed. (1998).

The Totalitarian Paradigm after the End of Communism: Towards a Theoretical Reassessment . Rodopi.

ISBN 9789042005525 .

Taylor, A. (9 June 2014).

"Calls for a return to 'Stalingrad' name test the limits of Putin's Soviet nostalgia" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

Todorova, Maria; Gille, Zsuzsa (2010).

Post-communist Nostalgia .

Berghahn Books .

ISBN 978-1-84545-671-9 .

Traverso, Enzo (2001).

Le Totalitarisme: Le XXe siècle en débat [ Totalitarianism: The 20th century in debate ] (in French). Poche.

ISBN 978-2020378574 .

Wallace, Ian G. (June 1992).

"The Influences of Chernyshevsky, Tkachev, and Nechaev on the Political Thought of V.I. Lenin" (PDF) . Hamilton, Ontario: McMaster University . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

Watts, Jonathan (2 June 2005).

"China must confront dark past, says Mao confidant" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 June 2019 .

Wheatcroft, Stephen G.

(1996).

"The Scale and Nature of German and Soviet Repression and Mass Killings, 1930–45" (PDF) .

Europe-Asia Studies .

48 (8): 1319– 1353.

doi : 10.1080/09668139608412415 .

JSTOR 152781 .

Wolff, Richard D.

(27 June 2015).

"Socialism Means Abolishing the Distinction Between Bosses and Employees" .

Truthout . Archived from the original on 11 March 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Authoritarian socialism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Arato, Andrew (1982). "Critical Sociology and Authoritarian State Socialism". In Held, David; Thompson, John (eds.).

Habermas (paperback ed.).

MIT Press . pp.

196– 218.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-16763-0_12 .

ISBN 978-0-333-27551-1 .

Arato, Andrew (1983). "Immanent Critique and Authoritarian Socialism".

Canadian Journal of Political and Social Theory .

7 ( 1– 2).

JSTOR 41801955 .

Arato, Andrew (1991). "Social Theory, Civil Society, and the Transformation of Authoritarian Socialism". In Arato, Andrew; Feher, Ferenc (eds.).

Crisis and Reform in Eastern Europe . New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers . pp.

1– 26.

ISBN 9781412820677 .

Arato, Andrew (2016).

From Neo-Marxism to Democratic Theory: Essays on the Critical Theory of Soviet-type Societies: Essays on the Critical Theory of Soviet-type Societies .

Routledge .

ISBN 9781315487717 .

Barnes, Ian (2003). "A fascist Trojan horse: Maurice Bardegraceche, fascism and authoritarian socialism".

Patterns of Prejudice .

37 (2): 177– 194.

doi : 10.1080/0031322032000084697 .

S2CID 144887261 .

Lingle, Christopher (1990). "Strategies of structural reform of authoritarian socialism: The role of private property and markets".

Communist Economics .

2 (4): 499– 507.

doi : 10.1080/14631379008427660 .

Meijer, Roel (2002).

The Quest for Modernity: Secular Liberal and Left-wing Political Thought in Egypt, 1945–1958 .

Psychology Press .

ISBN 9780700712472 .

Swilling, Mark (May 1992). "Socialism, Democracy and Civil Society: The Case for Associational Socialism".

Theoria: A Journal of Social and Political Theory (79).

Berghahn Books : 75– 82.

JSTOR 41801955 .

v t e Authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government Forms Absolute monarchy Autocracy Liberal Tsarist Communist state Counterintelligence state Dictatorship Benevolent Civilian Constitutional Dictablanda Grassroots Military Proletarian Right-wing Dominant-party system Illiberal democracy Totalitarian Libertarian authoritarianism Mafia state Managerial state Mediacracy Ochlocracy One-party state Oligarchy Police state Theocracy Islamic state Tyranny Majoritarian Soft Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Putinism Metaxism Authoritarian capitalism Pinochetism Authoritarian socialism Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Maoism Deng Xiaoping Theory Xi Jinping Thought Juche Despotism Enlightened Soft Ecoauthoritarianism Fascism Eco Neo Imperialism Nazism Neo Religious Caesaropapism Khomeinism Ziaism Shōwa Statism Techno See also Democracy indices Deep state Inverted totalitarianism Personality Leadership style Left-wing Right-wing Social dominance orientation Statism Strongman List of totalitarian states v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐896tc
Cached time: 20250816051523
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 5.463 seconds
Real time usage: 5.831 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 37045/1000000
Revision size: 338299/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1223337/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17094/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1922983/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 3.712/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19428442/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 5000.789      1 -total
 59.74% 2987.602      2 Template:Reflist
 34.06% 1703.483    259 Template:Cite_book
 10.46%  522.886     88 Template:Cite_journal
 10.35%  517.706     97 Template:Cite_news
  9.61%  480.618    117 Template:Sfn
  5.83%  291.617     51 Template:Cite_web
  3.19%  159.681      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  2.59%  129.732      1 Template:Socialism_sidebar
  2.36%  118.261      1 Template:Langx Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:33526804:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816051523 and revision id 1306142564. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Authoritarian_socialism&oldid=1306142564 " Categories : Authoritarianism Economic ideologies Marxism–Leninism Politics of the Soviet Union Stalinism Totalitarianism Types of socialism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 interwiki-linked names CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 uses Korean-language script (ko) CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2016 CS1 errors: missing title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from April 2020 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from October 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2023 Articles with weasel words from June 2025 Articles containing German-language text All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2024 CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 05:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Authoritarian socialism 7 languages Add topic

