Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Measuring black holes 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Quasi-periodic oscillation (astronomy) 4 languages العربية Deutsch Français Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Quasi-periodic oscillation ) Type of observed X-ray astronomy pattern "Quasi-periodic oscillation" redirects here; not to be confused with Quasiperiodic function or Quasiperiodicity .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Quasi-periodic oscillation" astronomy – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In X-ray astronomy , quasi-periodic oscillation ( QPO ) is the manner in which the X-ray light from an astronomical object flickers about certain frequencies.

[ 1 ] In these situations, the X-rays are emitted near the inner edge of an accretion disk in which gas swirls onto a compact object such as a white dwarf , neutron star , or black hole .

[ 2 ] The QPO phenomenon promises to help astronomers understand the innermost regions of accretion disks and the masses, radii, and spin periods of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes. QPOs could help test Albert Einstein 's theory of general relativity which makes predictions that differ most from those of Newtonian gravity when the gravitational force is strongest or when rotation is fastest (when a phenomenon called the Lense–Thirring effect comes into play). However, the various explanations of QPOs remain controversial and the conclusions reached from their study remain provisional.

A QPO is identified by performing a power spectrum of the time series of the X-rays. A constant level of white noise is expected from the random variation of sampling the object's light. Systems that show QPOs sometimes also show nonperiodic noise that appears as a continuous curve in the power spectrum. A periodic pulsation appears in the power spectrum as a peak of power at exactly one frequency (a Dirac delta function given a long enough observation). A QPO, on the other hand, appears as a broader peak, sometimes with a Lorentzian shape.

What sort of variation with time could cause a QPO? For example, the power spectrum of an oscillating shot appears as a continuum of noise together with a QPO. An oscillating shot is a sinusoidal variation that starts suddenly and decays exponentially. A scenario in which oscillating shots cause the observed QPOs could involve "blobs" of gas in orbit around a rotating, weakly magnetized neutron star. Each time a blob comes near a magnetic pole, more gas accretes and the X-rays increase. At the same time, the blob's mass decreases so that the oscillation decays.

Often power spectra are formed from several time intervals and then added together before the QPO can be seen to be statistically significant.

History [ edit ] QPOs were first identified in white dwarf systems and then in neutron star systems.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] At first the neutron star systems found to have QPOs were of a class ( Z sources and atoll sources ) not known to have pulsations. The spin periods of these neutron stars were unknown as a result. These neutron stars are thought to have relatively low magnetic fields so the gas does not fall mostly onto their magnetic poles, as in accreting pulsars . Because their magnetic fields are so low, the accretion disk can get very close to the neutron star before being disrupted by the magnetic field.

The spectral variability of these neutron stars was seen to correspond to changes in the QPOs. Typical QPO frequencies were found to be between about 1 and 60 Hz . The fastest oscillations were found in a spectral state called the Horizontal Branch, and were thought to be a result of the combined rotation of the matter in the disk and the rotation of the collapsed star (the "beat frequency model"). During the Normal Branch and Flaring Branch, the star was thought to approach its Eddington luminosity at which the force of the radiation could repel the accreting gas. This could give rise to a completely different kind of oscillation.

Observations starting in 1996 with the Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer could detect faster variability, and it was found that neutron stars and black holes emit X-rays that have QPOs with frequencies up to 1000 Hz or so. Often "twin peak" QPOs were found in which two oscillations of roughly the same power appeared at high amplitudes. These higher frequency QPOs may show behavior related to that of the lower frequency QPOs.

[ 5 ] Measuring black holes [ edit ] QPOs can be used to determine the mass of black holes .

[ 6 ] The technique uses a relationship between black holes and the inner part of their surrounding disks, where gas spirals inward before reaching the event horizon. The hot gas piles up near the black hole and radiates a torrent of X-rays, with an intensity that varies in a pattern that repeats itself over a nearly regular interval. This signal is the QPO. Astronomers have long suspected that a QPO's frequency depends on the black hole's mass. The congestion zone lies close in for small black holes, so the QPO clock ticks quickly. As black holes increase in mass, the congestion zone is pushed farther out, so the QPO clock ticks slower and slower.

See also [ edit ] Broad iron K line Quasiperiodicity Neutron-star oscillation References [ edit ] ^ Gravitational vortex provides new way to study matter close to a black hole published by "XMM-Newton" on 12 July 2016 ^ Ingram, Adam; Van Der Klis, Michiel; Middleton, Matthew; Done, Chris; Altamirano, Diego; Heil, Lucy; Uttley, Phil; Axelsson, Magnus (2016).

"A quasi-periodic modulation of the iron line centroid energy in the black hole binary H1743−322" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

461 (2): 1967– 1980.

arXiv : 1607.02866 .

Bibcode : 2016MNRAS.461.1967I .

doi : 10.1093/mnras/stw1245 .

^ Van Der Klis, M.; Jansen, F.; Van Paradijs, J.; Lewin, W. H. G.; Van Den Heuvel, E. P. J.; Trumper, J. E.; Szatjno, M. (1985).

"Intensity-dependent quasi-periodic oscillations in the X-ray flux of GX5-1" (PDF) .

Nature .

316 (6025): 225.

Bibcode : 1985Natur.316..225V .

doi : 10.1038/316225a0 .

hdl : 11245/1.421035 .

S2CID 35364152 .

^ Middleditch, J.; Priedhorsky, W. C. (1986). "Discovery of Rapid Quasi-periodic Oscillations in Scorpius X-1".

The Astrophysical Journal .

306 : 230.

Bibcode : 1986ApJ...306..230M .

doi : 10.1086/164335 .

^ Yu, Wenfei (2007).

"Coupling between the 45 Hz Horizontal-Branch Oscillation and the Normal-Branch Oscillation in Scorpius X-1" .

The Astrophysical Journal .

659 (2): L145 – L148 .

arXiv : astro-ph/0703170 .

Bibcode : 2007ApJ...659L.145Y .

doi : 10.1086/517606 .

^ "NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" .

EurekAlert!

. 1 April 2008. Archived from the original on 6 May 2020 . Retrieved 9 June 2020 .

v t e Neutron star Types Radio-quiet Pulsar Single pulsars Magnetar Soft gamma repeater Anomalous X-ray Ultra-long period Rotating radio transient Binary pulsars Binary X-ray pulsar X-ray binary X-ray burster List Millisecond Be/X-ray Spin-up Hulse–Taylor pulsar Properties Blitzar Fast radio burst Bondi accretion Chandrasekhar limit Gamma-ray burst Glitch Neutron matter Neutron-star oscillation Optical Pulsar kick Quasi-periodic oscillation Relativistic Rp-process Starquake Timing noise Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit Urca process Related Gamma-ray burst progenitors Asteroseismology Compact star Quark star Exotic star Supernova Supernova remnant Related links Hypernova Kilonova Microquasar Neutron star merger Quark-nova White dwarf Related links Stellar black hole Related links Radio star Pulsar planet Pulsar wind nebula Thorne–Żytkow object QCD matter Discovery LGM-1 Centaurus X-3 Timeline of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae Satellite investigation Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Chandra X-ray Observatory Other X-ray pulsar-based navigation The Magnificent Seven List of neutron stars Most massive neutron stars Neutron stars in fiction Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quasi-periodic_oscillation_(astronomy)&oldid=1304683221 " Categories : X-rays Observational astronomy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 14:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quasi-periodic oscillation (astronomy) 4 languages Add topic

