Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Life in Europe 1.3 World War I 1.4 Work in the United States 1.5 Creation of the Mises Institute 2 Contributions and influence in economics 3 Philosophical views 4 Political views Toggle Political views subsection 4.1 Key aspects of Mises's defense of liberalism 4.2 Comments about fascism 5 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 5.1 Debates about Mises's arguments 6 Works 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Ludwig von Mises 60 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Ślůnski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ludwig Von Mises ) Austrian–American political economist (1881–1973) Not to be confused with Ludwig Mies van der Rohe .

Ludwig von Mises Born Ludwig Heinrich Edler von Mises ( 1881-09-29 ) September 29, 1881 Lemberg , Austria , Austria-Hungary Died October 10, 1973 (1973-10-10) (aged 92) New York City, US Resting place Ferncliff Cemetery , Hartsdale, New York , US Spouse Margit von Mises Relatives Richard von Mises (brother) Gitta Sereny (stepdaughter) Academic background Alma mater University of Vienna Doctoral advisor Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk Influences Carl Menger Eugen Böhm von Bawerk Friedrich von Wieser Edmund Husserl Frank Fetter Max Weber Jean-Baptiste Say Immanuel Kant Sigmund Freud Academic work School or tradition Austrian School Institutions University of Vienna (1919–1934) Institut Universitaire de Hautes Études Internationales (1934–1940) New York University (1945–1969) Doctoral students Gottfried Haberler Fritz Machlup Oskar Morgenstern Gerhard Tintner Israel Kirzner Friedrich Hayek Notable students Adam Heydel Leonard Liggio Hans Sennholz Ralph Raico George Reisman Murray Rothbard Main interests Political economy Philosophy of science Libertarianism Notable ideas Austrian business cycle theory Catallactics Economic calculation problem Methodological dualism Praxeology Signature This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Ludwig Heinrich Edler von Mises [ n 1 ] ( / v ɒ n ˈ m iː z ɪ z / ; German: [ˈluːtvɪç fɔn ˈmiːzəs] ; September 29, 1881 – October 10, 1973) was an Austrian-American political economist and philosopher of the Austrian school . Mises wrote and lectured extensively on the social contributions of classical liberalism and the central role of consumers in a market economy.

[ 1 ] He is best known for his work in praxeology , particularly for studies comparing communism and capitalism , as well as for being a defender of classical liberalism [ 2 ] in the face of rising illiberalism and authoritarianism throughout much of Europe during the 20th century.

In 1934, Mises fled from Austria to Switzerland to escape the Nazis and he emigrated from there to the United States in 1940. On the day German forces entered Vienna, they raided his apartment, confiscating his papers and library, which were believed lost or destroyed until rediscovered decades later in Soviet archives.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] At the time, Mises was living in Geneva, Switzerland. However, with the imminent Nazi occupation of France threatening to isolate Switzerland within Axis-controlled territory, he and his wife fled through France—avoiding German patrols—and reached the United States via Spain and Portugal.

[ 3 ] Since the mid-20th century, both libertarian and classical liberal movements, as well as the field of economics as a whole have been strongly influenced by Mises's writings.

[ 5 ] Mises's student Friedrich Hayek viewed Mises as one of the major figures in the revival of classical liberalism in the post-war era. Hayek's work The Transmission of the Ideals of Freedom (1951) pays high tribute to the influence of Mises in the 20th-century libertarian movement.

[ 6 ] Economist Tyler Cowen lists his writings as "the most important works of the 20th century" and as "among the most important economics articles, ever".

[ 7 ] Entire schools of thought trace their origins to Mises's early work, including the development of anarcho-capitalist philosophy through Murray Rothbard [ 8 ] and the contemporary Austrian economics program led by scholars such as Peter Boettke at George Mason University .

[ 9 ] Mises's most influential work, Human Action: A Treatise on Economics (1949), laid out his comprehensive theory of praxeology—a deductive, a priori method for understanding human decision-making and economic behavior.

[ 10 ] Rejecting empirical and mathematical modeling, Mises defended classical liberalism and market coordination as products of rational individual action. Beyond his published works, Mises shaped generations of economists through his longstanding private seminar in Vienna [ 11 ] and later as a professor at New York University. His ideas deeply influenced students such as Friedrich Hayek , Murray Rothbard , and Israel Kirzner , who helped inspire the rise of postwar libertarian institutions in the United States, including the Foundation for Economic Education and the Ludwig von Mises Institute .

Mises received many honors throughout the course of his lifetime—honorary doctorates from Grove City College (1957), New York University (1963), and the University of Freiburg (1964) in Germany. His accomplishments were recognized in 1956 by his alma mater, the University of Vienna , when his doctorate was memorialized on its 50th anniversary and "renewed", a European tradition, and in 1962 by the Austrian government. He was also cited in 1969 as "Distinguished Fellow" by the American Economic Association.

[ 12 ] Biography [ edit ] Part of a series on the Austrian School Principal works Capital and Interest Human Action Individualism and Economic Order Man, Economy, and State Principles of Economics Origins School of Salamanca Classical economics French liberal school School of Brentano Methodenstreit Theories and ideologies Austrian business cycle Catallactics Creative destruction Economic calculation problem View of inflation Right-libertarianism Libertarianism in the United States Malinvestment Marginalism Methodological individualism Praxeology Roundaboutness Spontaneous order Subjective theory of value Theory of interest Organizations, universities, and think tanks Cato Institute University of Chicago George Mason University Foundation for Economic Education The Independent Institute Liberty Fund Mises Institute Mercatus Center Property and Freedom Society Reason Foundation People Amonn Böhm-Bawerk Bastos Block Bloom Boettke Boudreaux Caldwell DiLorenzo Epstein Ebeling Fetter Garrison Haberler Hayek Harper Hazlitt Heydel Higgs Holcombe Hoselitz Hoppe Horwitz Hülsmann Huerta de Soto Kaufmann Kirzner Konkin III Lachmann Lavoie Leeson Machlup Menger Milei Mises Morgenstern Moss Murphy North Peterson Powell Philippovich Reed Robbins Rodan Rothbard Rizzo Sabrin Sax Salerno Schumpeter Schlesinger Sennholz Skousen Strigl Stringham Wieser Yeager Variants and related topics Anarcho-capitalism Economic freedom Perspectives on capitalism Business and economics portal v t e Part of a series on Neoliberalism Ideas Austerity Balanced budget Denationalization Deregulation Economic integration Economic interdependence Economic liberalization Foreign direct investment Free markets Free trade ( area ) Globalization Intellectual property Laffer curve Marketization Market economy Mundell–Fleming model Privatization Public–private partnership Shock therapy Single market Structural Adjustment Programme Supranationalism Tax cuts Economics Monetarism Neoclassical Supply-side Trickle-down Movements Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Fujimorism Thatcherism Reaganomics Rogernomics Third Way Governance Association of Southeast Asian Nations Bank for International Settlements European Central Bank European Union Federal Reserve Greater Arab Free Trade Area International Monetary Fund MERCOSUR North American Free Trade Agreement Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership World Bank World Trade Organization Organizations World Economic Forum Third Way People Clinton Fujimori Douglas Greenspan Lippmann Nakasone Pinochet Reagan Rougier Thatcher Related topics Anti-capitalism Anti-globalization Alter-globalization Authoritarian capitalism Blatcherism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of intellectual property Market fundamentalism Capitalism portal Economics portal Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Early life [ edit ] Coat of arms of Ludwig von Mises's great-grandfather, Mayer Rachmiel Mises, awarded upon his 1881 ennoblement by Franz Joseph I of Austria Ludwig von Mises was born on September 29, 1881, to Jewish parents in Lemberg (now Lviv, Ukraine), then in the Austro-Hungarian Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria .

[ 13 ] His great-grandfather Meyer Rachmiel Mises had been ennobled a few months before Ludwig's birth, receiving the honorific Edler (indicating a non-landed noble family) , and the right to add the nobiliary particle von to his name; his family had been involved in financing and constructing railroads.

[ 14 ] His mother Adele (née Landau) was a niece of Joachim Landau, a Liberal Party deputy to the Austrian Parliament.

[ 15 ] : 3–9 His father Arthur von Mises was stationed in Lemberg as a construction engineer with the Czernowitz railway company.

By the age of 12, Mises spoke fluent German, Russian, Polish and French, read Latin and could understand Ukrainian.

[ 16 ] Mises had a younger brother, Richard von Mises , who became a mathematician and a member of the Vienna Circle , and a probability theorist.

[ 17 ] Mises was educated at the Akademisches Gymnasium in Vienna from 1892 to 1900, before entering the University of Vienna , where he studied law and the social sciences, initially in preparation for a career as a civil servant.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] There, he first encountered the works of Carl Menger , whose book Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre came to influence him significantly. Mises's father died in 1903. Three years later, Mises was awarded his doctorate from the school of law in 1906.

[ 20 ] From 1913 to 1938, Mises was a professor at the university, during which he mentored Friedrich Hayek .

[ 1 ] Life in Europe [ edit ] In the years from 1904 to 1914, Mises attended lectures given by Austrian economist Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk .

[ 21 ] He graduated in February 1906 ( Juris Doctor ) and started a career as a civil servant in Austria's financial administration.

After a few months, he left to take a trainee position in a Vienna law firm. During that time, Mises began lecturing on economics and in early 1909 joined the Austrian Chamber of Commerce and Industry , serving as economic advisor to the Austrian government until he left Austria in 1934.

[ 22 ] During World War I, Mises served as a front officer in the Austro-Hungarian artillery and as an economic advisor to the War Department.

[ 23 ] Mises was chief economist for the Austrian Chamber of Commerce and was an economic advisor of Engelbert Dollfuss , the austrofascist Austrian Chancellor .

[ 24 ] Later, Mises was economic advisor to Otto von Habsburg , the Christian democratic politician and claimant to the throne of Austria (which had been legally abolished in 1918 following the Great War).

[ 3 ] In 1934, Mises left Austria for Geneva, Switzerland, where he was a professor at the Graduate Institute of International Studies until 1940. Mises was invited to the Colloque Walter Lippmann , organized in Paris in 1938, and was a founding member of the Mont Pelerin Society in 1947.

[ 25 ] While in Switzerland, Mises married Margit Herzfeld Serény, a former actress and widow of Ferdinand Serény. She was the mother of Gitta Sereny .

[ 26 ] World War I [ edit ] During World War I, Ludwig von Mises was drafted by the Austrian government, despite being ideologically and morally opposed to the war. Like many who served in the front lines, [ 27 ] he rarely spoke about his personal experiences, and even his Memoirs (1940) omits a detailed account of his time in the military. However, he briefly alluded to the harsh realities of war in his seminal work, Human Action (1949): [ 28 ] Nothing is fair in war. It is not just that God is for the big battalions and that those who are better equipped defeat poorly equipped adversaries. It is not just that those in the front line shed their life-blood in obscurity, while the commanders, comfortably located in headquarters hundreds of miles behind the trenches, gain glory and fame. It is not just that John is killed and Mark crippled for the rest of his life, while Paul returns home safe and sound and enjoys all the privileges accorded to veterans.
It may be admitted that it is not "fair" that war enhances the profits of those entrepreneurs who contribute best to the equipment of the fighting forces. But it would be foolish to deny that the profit system produces the best weapons.

In Memoirs (1940), the only thing he had to say about the war was how it affected his work: [ 29 ] By the end of 1917, I was no longer at the front, but worked in Vienna in the economics division of the Department of War. I wrote only two small essays during those years.

The same chapter concludes with how he coped with his involuntary servitude fighting as the aggressor in a war he wanted nothing to do with, and includes a quote from Virgil that would go on to become the slogan of the Mises Institute in Alabama : [ 30 ] How one carries on in the face of unavoidable catastrophe is a matter of temperament. In high school, as was custom, I had chosen a verse by Virgil to be my motto: Tu ne cede malis sed contra audentior ito ('Do not give in to evil, but proceed ever more boldly against it'). I recalled these words during the darkest hours of the war.

Work in the United States [ edit ] External videos Bettina Greaves on Ludwig von Mises's Life (1994) In 1940, Mises and his wife left Austria, by then a territory of Nazi Germany , and emigrated to New York City in the United States .

[ 1 ] [ 15 ] : xi He had come to the United States under a grant by the Rockefeller Foundation . Like many other classical liberal scholars who fled to the United States, he received support from the William Volker Fund to obtain a position in American universities.

[ 31 ] Mises became a visiting professor at New York University and held this position from 1945 until his retirement in 1969, though he was not salaried by the university.

[ 20 ] Businessman and libertarian commentator Lawrence Fertig , a member of the New York University Board of Trustees, funded Mises and his work.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] For part of this period, Mises studied currency issues for the Pan-Europa movement , which was led by Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi , a fellow New York University faculty member and Austrian exile.

[ 34 ] In 1947, Mises became one of the founding members of the Mont Pelerin Society .

In 1962, Mises received the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art for political economy [ 35 ] at the Austrian Embassy in Washington, D.C.

[ 15 ] : 1034 Mises retired from teaching at the age of 87 [ 36 ] and died on October 10, 1973, at age 92. He is buried at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York .

Grove City College houses the 20,000-page archive of Mises papers and unpublished works.

[ 37 ] The personal library of Mises was given to Hillsdale College as bequeathed in his will.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] At one time, Mises praised the work of writer Ayn Rand , and she generally looked on his work with favor, but the two had a volatile relationship, with strong disagreements for example over the moral basis of capitalism.

[ 40 ] The two thinkers' disagreement reached a critical point during a dinner conversation where Mises reportedly lost his temper and called Rand a "silly little Jewish girl" after a heated argument, despite himself being Jewish.

[ 41 ] Creation of the Mises Institute [ edit ] As a result of the economic works of Ludwig Von Mises, the Mises Institute was founded in 1982 by Lew Rockwell , Burton Blumert , and Murray Rothbard , following a split between the Cato Institute and Rothbard, who had been one of the founders of the Cato Institute.

[ non-primary source needed ] It was funded by Ron Paul .

[ 42 ] The Mises Institute offers thousands of free books written by Ludwig Von Mises, Murray Rothbard, Hans-Hermann Hoppe , and other prominent economists in e-book and audiobook format.

[ 43 ] The Mises Institute also offers a series of summer seminars.

[ 44 ] Contributions and influence in economics [ edit ] Ludwig von Mises made significant contributions to the field of economics [ 45 ] initially by seeking to integrate the teachings of Carl Menger and Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk into the classical economic framework of his time.

[ 46 ] He recognized the need to reformulate economic epistemology , [ 46 ] particularly in response to the challenges introduced by the subjective value theory and the subjectivity of individual agents.

[ 15 ] Later, Mises made groundbreaking contributions to economic theory, [ 5 ] particularly in advancing the Austrian School of Economics by developing his own transformative ideas, including praxeology—a systematic framework for understanding human action [ 10 ] —and the economic calculation problem, [ 47 ] which challenged the feasibility of socialism.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] In 1920, Mises introduced the Economic Calculation Problem as a critique of socialist states which are based on planned economies and renunciations of the price mechanism .

[ 50 ] In his first article " Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth ", Mises describes the nature of the price system under capitalism and describes how individual subjective values are translated into the objective information necessary for rational allocation of resources in society.

[ 50 ] Mises argued the absence of market pricing results in inefficiencies within the economic system because central planners are deprived of the crucial information regarding opportunity costs needed to make informed decisions about resource allocation.

[ 50 ] He wrote that "rational economic activity is impossible in a socialist commonwealth ".

[ 50 ] Mises developed his critique of socialism more completely in his 1922 book Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis , arguing that the market price system is an expression of praxeology and cannot be replicated by any form of bureaucracy.

[ 51 ] [ 2 ] Throughout his life [ 18 ] [ 28 ] [ 50 ] [ 52 ] Mises argued that only a free market system, where individuals are free to pursue their own interests, can efficiently allocate resources and maximize social welfare .

[ 53 ] He believed that laissez-faire capitalism is the only system that allows individuals to express their intersubjective appraisals of goods and services in an open market, thereby creating a nexus of price signals based on the relative exchange ratios between goods. These price signals are essential for coordinating the inherently incomparable [ 54 ] subjective valuations that different individuals place on the same external objects.

[ 55 ] In a market, these subjective rankings are transformed into numerical values—prices—that can be objectively compared.

[ 56 ] This mechanism enables the continuous alignment of the open-ended coordination problem posed by millions of disparate individual preferences.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Unlike a centrally planned system, which assumes a final equilibrium which is to be planned towards, [ 59 ] the free market remains in constant flux, [ 60 ] continuously adjusting to changes in preferences and conditions.

[ 61 ] Mises's praxeological approach and reformulation of the economic problem has had a profound impact on the Austrian school of economics .

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Mises revived and expanded the term catallactics , which originally came from the Greek word katallasso , meaning 'to exchange' or 'to reconcile'.

[ 64 ] Catallaxy explains prices as they are, rather than as they "should" be.

[ 65 ] By adopting a value-neutral stance, it does not judge whether a price is "too high" or "too low"; instead, it seeks to explain why a price exists at a particular level based on the interplay of supply and demand . This framework considers both the material conditions influencing the availability of goods and services (supply) and the subjective preferences, values, and willingness to pay of individuals (demand).

[ 61 ] Prices emerge where these factors align between buyers and sellers, reflecting the conditions for exchange at a specific time and place.

[ 66 ] By focusing on prices as they are, catallactics aimed to avoid the pitfalls of culturally or ideologically biased assumptions, where economic policies are designed around idealized notions of what "ought" to happen, (e.g. some works that aim to prescribe the economy, not just describe it: [ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] ) which Mises argued carried them outside of the realm of the descriptive (or wertfrei ) sciences .

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Economics is not about what ought to be, but about what is. It describes and analyzes the reality of human action, without imposing any personal valuations or ethical imperatives.

For Mises, introducing normative judgments—such as declaring certain prices "fair" or "unfair"—transforms economics from a descriptive science into an ideological discourse.

[ 74 ] The ultimate decisions, the valuations and the choosing of ends, are beyond the scope of any science.

This approach redefined economics not as the study of wealth or resources in the abstract, but as the analysis of voluntary exchanges of these resources within the division of labor.

[ 75 ] His work on catallactics became a cornerstone of Austrian economics, influencing subsequent theories on entrepreneurship, [ 76 ] knowledge, [ 48 ] and the limits of government intervention.

[ 77 ] Mises was also a forerunner in the movement to unite microeconomics and macroeconomics , [ 61 ] arguing that macroeconomic phenomena have microeconomic foundations [ 78 ] —nearly 50 years before this perspective was widely adopted by mainstream economics .

[ 79 ] In his magnum opus Human Action (1949), Mises established praxeology as the foundational methodology for the social sciences , [ 80 ] offering a systematic approach to understanding human behavior and decision-making . This work laid the groundwork for a comprehensive economic theory [ 81 ] that accounted for the subjective nature of value and the complexity of individual choices, marking a significant departure [ 21 ] from the objective models of classical economics.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Mises used praxeology to further critique socialism , arguing that it is fundamentally flawed because it treats economics as a solvable, static problem [ 84 ] akin to mathematical or engineering challenges.

[ 54 ] Instead, he argued, economics involves an open-ended coordination process that aims to align the diverse and equally valid [ 85 ] subjective appraisals of millions of individuals.

[ 60 ] However, while praxeology has been influential within the Austrian school of economics, it is not widely adopted in contemporary economic practice, [ 86 ] which predominantly relies on empirical and mathematical methods to analyze and predict economic phenomena.

[ 87 ] Most mainstream economists view praxeology as lacking empirical validation and testability, thereby limiting its acceptance as a scientific approach within the broader discipline.

[ 88 ] In his 1956 book The Anti-Capitalistic Mentality , Ludwig von Mises explored the roots of intellectual opposition to the free market, particularly in American society.

[ 89 ] Mises argued that some people resent the burden of freedom, preferring the perceived security of a caste -like system where individual responsibility for one's position in the division of labor is minimized. He believed that people who are content in their position, i.e., who have forgone upward social mobility, may yearn for capitalism to be a rigid caste system, allowing them to blame "the system" or "society" for their low wages or unfulfilled ambitions. Mises also contended that throughout most of human history , wealth was often accumulated through exploitation , war , and conquest .

[ 90 ] As a result, our cognitive biases have not yet adapted to the modern world of rule of law and peaceful exchange, leading to a subconscious suspicion of wealth as being illegitimately obtained. This suspicion persists even though, in a free market, individuals can accumulate wealth through mutually beneficial exchange and technological innovation . Mises also criticized the romanticization of artisan goods, arguing that mass production , driven by consumer demand, has democratized access to goods that in previous centuries were available only to a small aristocratic few.

[ 91 ] He suggested that critics who lament the availability of inexpensive, mass-produced goods fail to appreciate the benefits these goods bring, as they enable a higher standard of living for the general population who may not be able to afford handcrafted goods.

[ 1 ] Friends and students of Mises in Europe included Wilhelm Röpke and Alfred Müller-Armack (advisors to German chancellor Ludwig Erhard ), Jacques Rueff (monetary advisor to Charles de Gaulle ), Gottfried Haberler (later a professor at Harvard ), Lionel, Lord Robbins (of the London School of Economics ), Italian President Luigi Einaudi , and Leonid Hurwicz , recipient of the 2007 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences.

[ 92 ] Economist and political theorist Friedrich Hayek first came to know Mises while working as his subordinate at a government office dealing with Austria's post-World War I debt. While toasting Mises at a party in 1956, Hayek said: "I came to know him as one of the best educated and informed men I have ever known".

[ 3 ] : 219–220 Mises's seminars in Vienna fostered lively discussion among established economists there. The meetings were also visited by other important economists who happened to be traveling through Vienna.

At his New York University seminar and at informal meetings at his apartment, Mises attracted college and high school students who had heard of his European reputation. They listened while he gave carefully prepared lectures from notes.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ n 2 ] Ludwig von Mises acknowledged that, by the time of his writing, many core concepts from the Austrian school of economics had been integrated into mainstream economic thought.

[ 95 ] He noted that the distinctions between the Austrian school and other economic traditions had blurred, making the label "Austrian" more of a historical reference than a marker of a distinct, contemporary doctrine.

[ 96 ] This integration occurred as concepts like marginal utility , opportunity cost , and the importance of subjective value became widely accepted among economists.

[ 79 ] Philosophical views [ edit ] Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Ludwig von Mises was a prominent advocate of methodological individualism , [ 32 ] a principle that asserts all social phenomena result from the actions and decisions of individuals.

[ 97 ] He believed that only individuals act, and thus, collective entities such as nations, classes, or races do not possess independent agency.

[ 98 ] This perspective formed the basis of his economic and social theories, rejecting any form of collectivism that attributed agency to groups rather than to individuals.

[ 99 ] His rejection of collectivism led him to be a vocal critic of what he termed " polylogism ;" the idea that different groups of people have fundamentally different ways of thinking and thus different logics.

[ 100 ] He rejected the notion that there could be distinct sciences or truths based on race, class, or nationality, such as " Jewish science " or " German science ".

[ 101 ] Mises believed in the universality of logic and reason, asserting that the principles of economics and science are objective and apply universally, regardless of the cultural or ethnic background of the individuals studying them.

[ 10 ] Ludwig von Mises is credited [ 102 ] with transforming praxeology into a comprehensive framework for understanding economics and human behavior, making it central to the Austrian school of economics .

[ 10 ] He provided it with a clear definition and methodology, focusing on the logical structure of human action and choice.

[ 5 ] Thus, while the term existed before Mises, he is largely responsible for its current understanding and significance in economic theory.

[ 61 ] Mises argued that economics is a branch of praxeology, which studies the implications of the fact that individuals act purposefully.

[ 103 ] Mises maintained that economic laws are derived from the self-evident axiom [ 104 ] that humans engage in purposeful behavior to achieve desired ends.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] This approach led him to oppose empirical and statistical methods as primary tools in economic theory, arguing that these could not establish economic laws due to the uniqueness of historical events.

[ 108 ] In defense of his teleological understanding of human action, he highlighted the difference in using physics to study inanimate objects, and its application to the study of an introspective being which reflects upon and changes its reactions to receiving the same stimulus twice: [ 109 ] The objects of the natural sciences react to stimuli according to regular patterns. No such regularity, as far as man can see, determines the reaction of man to various stimuli. Ideas are frequently, but not always, the reaction of an individual to a stimulation provided by his natural environment. But even such reactions are not uniform. Different individuals, and the same individual at various periods of his life, react to the same stimulus in a different way. As there is no discernible regularity in the emergence and concatenation of ideas and judgments of value, and therefore also not in the succession and concatenation of human acts, the role that experience plays in the study of human action is radically different from that which it plays in the natural sciences.

He would eventually go into enormous detail defending this distinction in his work Epistemological Problems of Economics (1933), Theory and History (1957), and again in The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science (1962) which included further explication such as: [ 110 ] Man alone has the faculty to build a purpose and to aim at its realization. Stones are moved by an impulse from outside. Animals, in their behavior, follow the impulses of their senses and appetites. Man is the only being who can control his impulses and passions, who can suppress a natural inclination and act contrary to it.

This perspective placed him in contrast with the positivist approach, which emphasizes empirical data and observation as the foundation of scientific knowledge.

[ 87 ] This rift in epistemology has led some to argue [ 111 ] that Mises attempted to usher in a paradigm shift in the science of economics—but this is not the direction the field as a whole has since gone.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 88 ] Because of this, most academics within the economics community implicitly consider the work which comes out of the Mises Institute and other followers of Mises, to simply not be economics.

[ 86 ] Mises's followers operate under a different paradigm and follow an opposed rule set to those operating under positivist economics.

[ 115 ] His objections can be seen as an early precursor to more modern critiques such as the famous Lucas critique .

[ 116 ] Political views [ edit ] Ludwig von Mises was a steadfast advocate of liberalism , particularly classical liberalism .

[ 18 ] He believed that while Marx provided a powerful critique of capitalism, he failed to offer a constructive vision [ 59 ] of a socialist society that could be practically implemented.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] To learn from this mistake, after publishing his lengthy critique of socialism, Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution , [ citation needed ] in his next book, Liberalism (1927), Mises articulated a positive vision of free society rooted in individual liberty, private property, free markets, and limited government coercion . He argued that these principles are essential for creating a peaceful and prosperous society.

[ 18 ] Key aspects of Mises's defense of liberalism [ edit ] Mises advocated for economic non-interventionism [ 119 ] and was a staunch anti-imperialist .

[ 120 ] He viewed the Great War as a watershed moment in human history, arguing that it marked a significant departure from previous conflicts due to the advanced technology employed. His experience in the first World War led to a lifelong obsession of finding a workable doctrine of peace among nations, which at the same time would not ask any individual nation to give up their own self interest. Regarding the birth of total war , Mises wrote: [ 121 ] War has become more fearful and destructive than ever before because it is now waged with all the means of the highly developed technique that the free economy has created. Bourgeois civilization has built railroads and electric power plants, has invented explosives and airplanes, in order to create wealth. Imperialism has placed the tools of peace in the service of destruction. With modern means, it would be easy to wipe out humanity at one blow.

Comments about fascism [ edit ] Marxists Herbert Marcuse and Perry Anderson as well as German writer Claus-Dieter Krohn accused Mises of writing approvingly of Italian fascism , especially for its suppression of leftist elements, in his 1927 book Liberalism .

[ 122 ] In 2009, economist J. Bradford DeLong and sociologist Richard Seymour repeated the accusation.

[ 123 ] Mises, in his 1927 book Liberalism , wrote: [ 124 ] It cannot be denied that Fascism and similar movements aiming at the establishment of dictatorships are full of the best intentions and that their intervention has, for the moment, saved European civilization. The merit that Fascism has thereby won for itself will live on eternally in history. But though its policy has brought salvation for the moment, it is not of the kind which could promise continued success. Fascism was an emergency makeshift. To view it as something more would be a fatal error.

Mises biographer Jörg Guido Hülsmann says that critics who suggest that Mises supported fascism are "absurd" as he notes that the full quote describes fascism as dangerous. He notes that Mises said it was a "fatal error" to think that it was more than an "emergency makeshift" against up-and-coming communism and socialism as exemplified by the Bolsheviks in Russia and the surging communists of Germany .

[ 15 ] : 560 Hülsmann writes in Mises: The Last Knight of Liberalism that Mises had been a card-carrying member of the Fatherland Front party and that this was "probably mandatory for all employees of public and semi-public organizations".

[ 125 ] However, this paragraph is also in keeping with a theme that runs through his work: he consistently refrained from imputing bad intentions to those he disagreed with, regardless of how fascistic or homicidal their policy outcomes were. He took pain to more than once explicitly acknowledge the good intentions of totalitarians and socialists of all walks, such as when he wrote: [ 126 ] [ failed verification ] Socialists have full right to be called righteous men. They do not wish to profit personally from their ideology. They seek nothing for themselves. They want to benefit the public. They have nothing but scorn for the riches that the capitalistic order of production offers them. They live for their idea, and if they sacrifice anything it is their own well-being. They are the idealists among our contemporaries.

Mises, in his 1927 book Liberalism , also wrote of fascism: [ 124 ] Repression by brute force is always a confession of the inability to make use of the better weapons of the intellect—better because they alone give promise of final success. This is the fundamental error from which Fascism suffers and which will ultimately cause its downfall. The victory of Fascism in a number of countries is only an episode in the long series of struggles over the problem of property. The next episode will be the victory of Communism. The ultimate outcome of the struggle, however, will not be decided by arms, but by ideas. It is ideas that group men into fighting factions, that press the weapons into their hands, and that determine against whom and for whom the weapons shall be used. It is they alone, and not arms, that, in the last analysis, turn the scales. So much for the domestic policy of Fascism. That its foreign policy, based as it is on the avowed principle of force in international relations, cannot fail to give rise to an endless series of wars that must destroy all of modern civilization requires no further discussion. To maintain and further raise our present level of economic development, peace among nations must be assured. But they cannot live together in peace if the basic tenet of the ideology by which they are governed is the belief that one's own nation can secure its place in the community of nations by force alone.

In his earlier work, Socialism (1922), Mises also made a similar remark with more context, saying that Mussolini did his best to prop up Austria-Hungary as a means of protecting Italian-speaking minorities, but regardless concludes that he was one the most wretched figures in history: [ 127 ] Only those Italians are free to blame Mussolini who begin to understand that the only means of protecting the Italian-speaking minorities in the Littoral districts of Austria against the threatening annihilation by the Slavonic majorities was to preserve the integrity of the Austrian state, whose constitution guaranteed equal rights to all linguistic groups. Mussolini was one of the most wretched figures of history.

In regards to Nazism, Mises called on the Allies in his 1944 book Omnipotent Government to "smash Nazism" and to "fight desperately until the Nazi power is completely broken".

[ 128 ] In his Notes and recollections , Mises wrote of his experience being personally persecuted by the Nazis for his attacks on Italian Fascism and the National Socialist party: [ 129 ] The Nazis looted my library and collections. The manuscripts I had worked on during my years in Vienna were lost. I was deeply affected by these losses. However, I managed to escape and start anew. The Nazis chased me out of my home country and off the continent. I had to leave everything behind, but I found refuge in the United States, where I could continue my work and fight for the ideas of liberty.

Reception [ edit ] Debates about Mises's arguments [ edit ] Economic historian Bruce Caldwell wrote that in the mid-20th century, with the ascendance of positivism and Keynesianism , Mises came to be regarded by many as the "archetypal 'unscientific' economist".

[ 130 ] In a 1957 review of his book The Anti-Capitalistic Mentality , The Economist said of Mises: "Professor von Mises has a splendid analytical mind and an admirable passion for liberty; but as a student of human nature he is worse than null and as a debater he is of Hyde Park standard".

[ 131 ] Conservative commentator Whittaker Chambers published a similarly negative review of that book in the National Review , stating that Mises's thesis that anti-capitalist sentiment was rooted in "envy" epitomized " know-nothing conservatism" at its "know-nothingest".

[ 132 ] More recent commenters, such as Tyler Cowen of George Mason University , have listed it alongside Socialism (1922), and Liberalism (1927) as one of the most important books of the 20th century, despite describing Human Action (1949) as "cranky and dogmatic".

[ 7 ] In the same blog post, Cowen states that: [ 7 ] Socialism is still the best and also historically most important critique of socialism, ever. His earlier articles about the impossibility of economic calculation under socialism are among the most important economics articles, ever.

Scholar Scott Scheall called economist Terence Hutchison "the most persistent critic of Mises's apriorism ", [ 104 ] : 233 starting in Hutchison's 1938 book The Significance and Basic Postulates of Economic Theory and in later publications such as his 1981 book The Politics and Philosophy of Economics: Marxians, Keynesians, and Austrians .

[ 104 ] : 242 Scheall noted that Friedrich Hayek, later in his life (after Mises died), also expressed reservations about Mises's apriorism, such as in a 1978 interview where Hayek said that he "never could accept the ... almost eighteenth-century rationalism in his [Mises's] argument".

[ 104 ] : 233–234 In a 1978 interview, Hayek said about Mises's book Socialism : [ 133 ] At first we all felt he was frightfully exaggerating and even offensive in tone. You see, he hurt all our deepest feelings, but gradually he won us around, although for a long time I had to – I just learned he was usually right in his conclusions, but I was not completely satisfied with his argument.

Economist Milton Friedman considered Mises inflexible in his thinking, but added that Mises's difficult life, persecution by Nazis, and lack of acceptance by academia are the likely culprits: [ 134 ] The story I remember best happened at the initial Mont Pelerin meeting when he got up and said, "You're all a bunch of socialists." We were discussing the distribution of income, and whether you should have progressive income taxes . Some of the people there were expressing the view that there could be a justification for it.
Another occasion which is equally telling: Fritz Machlup was a student of Mises's, one of his most faithful disciples. At one of the Mont Pelerin meetings, Machlup gave a talk in which I think he questioned the idea of a gold standard ; he came out in favor of floating exchange rates . Mises was so mad he wouldn't speak to Machlup for three years. Some people had to come around and bring them together again. It's hard to understand; you can get some understanding of it by taking into account how people like Mises were persecuted in their lives.

Economist Murray Rothbard , who studied under Mises, agreed he was uncompromising, but disputes reports of his abrasiveness. In his words, Mises was "unbelievably sweet, constantly finding research projects for students to do, unfailingly courteous, and never bitter" about the discrimination he received at the hands of the economic establishment of his time.

[ 135 ] After Mises died, his widow Margit quoted a passage that he had written about Benjamin Anderson . She said it best described Mises's own personality: [ 136 ] His most eminent qualities were his inflexible honesty, his unhesitating sincerity. He never yielded. He always freely enunciated what he considered to be true. If he had been prepared to suppress or only to soften his criticisms of popular, but irresponsible, policies, the most influential positions and offices would have been offered him. But he never compromised.

Critics more broadly argue that praxeology's reliance on a priori reasoning and rejection of empirical methods limit its ability to test and validate economic theories. This critique is grounded in the belief that economic theories should be subject to Popperian falsification, as seen in mainstream economics, which emphasizes data-driven analysis and the use of econometrics .

[ 137 ] Even within the Austrian tradition, there are debates about the extent and application of praxeology.

[ 138 ] For example, Friedrich Hayek , while sympathetic to Austrian principles, was more open to incorporating empirical evidence and saw limitations in a strictly a priori approach.

[ 139 ] In his book The Counter-Revolution of Science: Studies on the Abuse of Reason, Hayek critiques the overconfidence in the application of scientific methods to social sciences, including economics. While he does not explicitly target praxeology, his arguments suggest a more skeptical view of purely deductive methodologies. Hayek emphasizes the complexity of social phenomena and the limitations of any one method, advocating for a more pluralistic approach to economic inquiry.

[ 80 ] The Austrian School's methodological differences, particularly its reluctance to engage with quantitative methods, have led to its marginalization within the broader economics discipline. This isolation is a result of the school's focus on verbal logic and theoretical purity, which many mainstream economists view as insufficiently rigorous.

[ 140 ] Other commenters such as Eric Weinstein and Peter Thiel have remarked about the broader issue of dogmatism within Austrian economics. Weinstein emphasized the importance of being open to new ideas and criticized the tendency within Austrian economics to dismiss other methodologies.

[ 141 ] While the Austrian's prosaic approach provides valuable insights into the decision-making process, econometrically minded critics argue that it lacks the predictive power of other economic models that rely on more objective measures. This subjectivism can make it challenging to formulate generalizable laws or predictions.

[ 137 ] Works [ edit ] The Theory of Money and Credit (1912, enlarged US edition 1953) Full text available .

Nation, State, and Economy (1919) Full text available .

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth (1920) (long-form essay) Full text available .

Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis (1922, 1932, [ 142 ] 1951) Full text available .

Liberalism: In the Classical Tradition (1927, 1962) Full text available .

A Critique of Interventionism (1929) (collection of essays) Full text available .

Epistemological Problems of Economics (1933, 1960) Full text available .

Memoirs (1940) Full text available .

Interventionism: An Economic Analysis (1941, 1998) Omnipotent Government: The Rise of Total State and Total War (1944) Full text available .

Bureaucracy (1944, 1962) Full text available .

Planned Chaos (1947, added to 1951 edition of Socialism ) Full text available .

Human Action: A Treatise on Economics (1949, 1963, 1966, 1996) Full text available .

Planning for Freedom (1952, enlarged editions in 1962, 1974, and 1980) (Collection of essays and addresses) Full text available .

The Anti-Capitalistic Mentality (1956) Full text available .

Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution (1957) Full text available .

The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science (1962) Full text available .

The Historical Setting of the Austrian School of Economics (1969) (long-form essay) Full text available .

Notes and Recollections (1978, written in 1940–41) On the Manipulation of Money and Credit (1978) (collection of essays, reissued as The Causes of the Economic Crisis ) Full text available .

Economic Policy: Thoughts for Today and Tomorrow (1979, collection of lectures given in 1959) Full text available .

Money, Method, and the Market Process (1990) (collection of essays) Full text available .

Economic Freedom and Interventionism (1990) (collection of essays and addresses) Full text available .

The Free Market and Its Enemies (2004, collection of lectures given in 1951) Full text available .

Marxism Unmasked: From Delusion to Destruction (2006, collection of lectures given in 1952) Full text available .

Ludwig von Mises on Money and Inflation (2010, collection of lectures given in the 1960s) Full text available .

See also [ edit ] Politics portal Economics portal Libertarianism portal Contributions to liberal theory Liberalism in Austria List of Austrian-school economists Mises Institute – Alabama-based think tank Thymology Notes [ edit ] ^ Regarding personal names: Edler was a title before 1919, but now is regarded as part of the surname. It is translated as a noble (one) . Before the August 1919 abolition of nobility as a legal class, titles preceded the full name when given ( Graf Helmuth James von Moltke ). Since 1919, these titles, along with any nobiliary prefix ( von , zu , etc.), can be used, but are regarded as a dependent part of the surname, and thus come after any given names ( Helmuth James Graf von Moltke ). Titles and all dependent parts of surnames are ignored in alphabetical sorting. The feminine form is Edle .

^ On Mises's influence, see Rothbard, Murray, The Essential Ludwig von Mises , 2nd printing, the Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1983; on Eastman's conversion "from Marx to Mises", see Diggins, John P., Up From Communism Harper & Row, 1975, pp. 201–233; on Mises's students and seminar attendees, see Mises, Margit von, My Years with Ludwig von Mises , Arlington House, 1976, 2nd enlarged edit., Center for Future Education, 1984.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Ludwig von Mises" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . June 7, 2023 . Retrieved June 29, 2023 .

^ a b Hayek, Friedrich A. "Introduction". In Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis , by Ludwig von Mises. London: Jonathan Cape, 1936.

^ a b c d Mises, Margit von, My Years with Ludwig von Mises , Arlington House Publishers , 1976; 2nd enlarged ed., Cedar Falls, IA: Center for Futures Education, 1984.

ISBN 978-0915513000 .

OCLC 11668538 ^ Richard M. Ebeling (ed.), The Lost Papers of Ludwig von Mises , Liberty Fund, 2000. See also: Richard M. Ebeling, "The Rediscovered Writings of Ludwig von Mises," The Freeman , vol. 47, no. 2, February 1997. Available via the Mises Institute: https://mises.org/library/rediscovered-writings-ludwig-von-mises ^ a b c Cowen, Tyler. "Review of Human Action ".

Journal of Economic Literature 38, no. 4 (2000): 1127–1132.

^ Hayek, Friedrich A. (2012).

"The Transmission of the Ideals of Economic Freedom" .

Econ Journal Watch .

9 (2): 163– 169.

^ a b c Cowen, Tyler (October 16, 2022).

"Overrated or underrated?" .

Marginal Revolution .

^ Rothbard, Murray N. Man, Economy, and State with Power and Market. Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2004. See Rothbard's preface crediting Mises's foundational role.

^ Boettke, Peter J. "Austrian School of Economics." In The Elgar Companion to Austrian Economics, edited by Peter Boettke, Edward Elgar, 1994. Also see: Boettke, "Ludwig von Mises and the Austrian School of Economics," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1998.

^ a b c d Mises, Ludwig von.

Human Action: A Treatise on Economics . 3rd rev. ed. Chicago: Henry Regnery Company, 1966.

^ Beller, Steven (1989).

Vienna and the Jews, 1867–1938: A Cultural History . Cambridge University Press.

^ Greaves, Bettina Bien. "Preface to the Third Edition". In Liberalism: In the Classical Tradition , by Ludwig von Mises, 3rd ed., Liberty Fund, 1985.

^ "Austrian Institute – Ludwig von Mises" .

^ Hülsmann, Jörg (2007).

Mises: The Last Knight of Liberalism . Auburn, Alabama: Mises Institute.

ISBN 978-1610163897 .

^ a b c d e Hülsmann, Jörg Guido (2007).

Mises: The Last Knight of Liberalism . Ludwig von Mises Institute.

ISBN 978-1933550183 .

^ Erik Ritter von Kuehnelt-Leddihn , "The Cultural Background of Ludwig von Mises" , The Ludwig von Mises Institute , p. 1 ^ "Richard von Mises" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved August 8, 2013 .

^ a b c d Von Mises, Ludwig; Goddard, Arthur (1979).

Liberalism: A Socio-Economic Exposition (2nd ed.). Sheed Andrews and McMeel.

ISBN 978-0836251067 .

^ Hülsmann, Jörg (2007).

Mises: The Last Knight of Liberalism . Ludwig von Mises Institute. pp. 33, 60, 62.

ISBN 978-1610163897 .

^ a b "Biography of Ludwig von Mises (1881–1973) ('Chronology')" . Mises.org. August 2007 . Retrieved July 21, 2013 .

^ a b Mises, Ludwig von, The Historical Setting of the Austrian School of Economics , Arlington House, 1969, reprinted by the Ludwig von Mises Institute , 1984, p. 10, Rothbard, Murray, The Essential Ludwig von Mises , 2nd printing, Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1983, p. 30.

^ Rothbard, Murray, The Essential Ludwig von Mises , Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988, p. 25.

^ Mises in Wartime , Mises Institute ^ "The Free Market: Meaning of the Mises Papers, The" . Mises.org. April 1997 . Retrieved November 26, 2009 .

^ Mirowski, Philip ; Plehwe, Dieter (2009).

The Road From Mont Pèlerin: The Making of the Neoliberal Thought Collective .

Harvard University Press . p. 13.

ISBN 978-0674033184 .

^ Mises, Margit von.

My Years with Ludwig von Mises . New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House Publishers, 1976.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Christensen, Tricia (2024).

"Why are Veterans Reluctant to Discuss Their War Experiences?" .

^ a b Mises, Ludwig von (1966), Human Action: A Treatise on Economics , The Scholars edition. (Auburn, Alabama. Ludwig von Mises Institute), pp. 823.

^ Mises, Ludwig von. (2009) Memoirs . Translated by Arlene Oost-Zinner. Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute, pp. 52.

^ Mises, Ludwig von. (2009) Memoirs . Translated by Arlene Oost-Zinner. Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute, pp. 55.

^ Kitch, Edmund W. (April 1983). "The Fire of Truth: A Remembrance of Law and Economics at Chicago, 1932–1970".

Journal of Law and Economics .

26 (1): 163– 234.

doi : 10.1086/467030 .

S2CID 153525815 .

^ a b Moss, Laurence S. "Introduction".

The Economics of Ludwig von Mises: Toward a Critical Reappraisal . Sheed and Ward, 1976.

^ North, Gary . "Mises on Money".

LewRockwell.com . January 21, 2002 [1] ^ von Coudenhove-Kalergi, Richard Nikolaus (1953).

An idea conquers the world . London: Hutchinson. p. 247.

^ Kurien Society of Science and Art website Archived October 30, 2020, at the Wayback Machine , Listing of recipients of the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art ; Google Translated page , accessed June 5, 2013.

^ Rothbard, Murray, Ludwig von Mises: Scholar, Creator, Hero , the Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988, p. 61.

^ Austrian Student Scholars Conference Announcement Archived August 2, 2013, at the Wayback Machine , Grove City College website, 2013, accessed June 8, 2013.

^ "About – Collections – Mossey Library" .

lib.hillsdale.edu . Retrieved July 26, 2016 .

^ "Ludwig von Mises – a Primer" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 27, 2011.

^ Burns, Jennifer (2009).

Goddess of the Market: Ayn Rand and the American Right . Oxford University Press. pp. 106, 141.

ISBN 978-0199740895 .

^ Boettke, Peter (2016).

"Mises, Rand, and the 20th Century" .

^ "The Story of the Mises Institute" .

^ "Books & Library" .

Mises Institute . Archived from the original on January 24, 2022 . Retrieved January 24, 2022 .

^ "Summer Seminar Series" . July 20, 2017.

^ Moss, Laurence S., editor.

The Economics of Ludwig von Mises: Toward a Critical Reappraisal . Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, Inc., 1976.

ISBN 978-0836208047 ^ a b Huerta de Soto, Jesús, editor.

The Meaning of Ludwig von Mises: Contributions in Economics, Epistemology, Sociology, and Political Philosophy . Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1993.

ISBN 0792392906 ^ Lavoie, Don.

Rivalry and Central Planning: The Socialist Calculation Debate Reconsidered . Cambridge University Press, 1985.

^ a b Friedrich Hayek, "The Use of Knowledge in Society", American Economic Review , 1945 ^ Friedrich A. Hayek, The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism . University of Chicago Press, 1988.

^ a b c d e Von Mises, Ludwig (1990).

Economic calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth (PDF) .

Ludwig von Mises Institute . Archived from the original (PDF) on December 16, 2014 . Retrieved September 8, 2008 .

^ Mises, Ludwig von.

Bureaucracy . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1944.

^ Mises, Ludwig von (1922) Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis . Translated by J. Kahane. New edition, enlarged with an Epilogue. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1951. p. 117.

^ Johansson, Per-Olov .

An Introduction to Modern Welfare Economics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.

ISBN 978-0511582417 ; doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511582417 ^ a b Sowell, Thomas.

Economic Facts and Fallacies . 2nd ed. New York: Basic Books, 2011.

ISBN 978-0465022038 ^ Bohm, Peter.

Social Efficiency: A Concise Introduction to Welfare Economics . London: Macmillan, 1973.

ISBN 978-0333153789 ^ Mankiw, N. Gregory.

Principles of Microeconomics . 8th ed. Boston: Cengage Learning, 2018.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Feldman, Allan M., and Serrano, Roberto.

Welfare Economics and Social Choice Theory . 2nd ed. New York: Springer, 2006.

ISBN 978-0387293677 ^ O'Driscoll Jr., Gerald P.

Economics as a Coordination Problem: The Contributions of Friedrich A. Hayek . Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, Inc., 1977.

ISBN 978-0836208153 ^ a b Shmelev, Nikolai, and Popov, Vladimir.

The Turning Point: Revitalizing the Soviet Economy . 1st ed. New York: Doubleday, 1989.

ISBN 0385246544 ^ a b Sowell, Thomas.

Basic Economics: A Common Sense Guide to the Economy . 5th ed. New York: Basic Books, 2015.

ISBN 978-0465060733 ^ a b c d Rothbard, Murray N.

Man, Economy, and State: A Treatise on Economic Principles . Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand, 1962.

^ Boettke, Peter J.

F.A. Hayek: Economics, Political Economy and Social Philosophy . London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.

ISBN 978-1137411600 ^ Sowell, Thomas.

Intellectuals and Society . 2nd ed. New York: Basic Books, 2012.

[ ISBN missing ] .

^ Hayek, F.A.

Law, Legislation and Liberty: A New Statement of the Liberal Principles of Justice and Political Economy . University of Chicago Press, 1973.

^ Buchanan, James M.

Cost and Choice: An Inquiry in Economic Theory . University of Chicago Press, 1969.

^ Boettke, Peter J.

Living Economics: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow . Independent Institute, 2012.

^ Amartya Sen, Development as Freedom . Knopf, 1999.

^ Keynes, John Maynard.

The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money . Macmillan, 1936.

^ Marx, Karl.

Das Kapital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I . Translated by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling, edited by Friedrich Engels, Progress Publishers, 1867.

^ Robinson, Joan.

Economic Philosophy . Penguin Books, 1962.

^ Piketty, Thomas.

Capital in the Twenty-First Century .

^ Mill, John Stuart.

Principles of Political Economy with Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy . John W. Parker, 1848.

^ Weber, Max. "'Objectivity' in Social Science and Social Policy". In The Methodology of the Social Sciences . Translated and edited by Edward A. Shils and Henry A. Finch, Free Press, 1949.

^ a b Human Action (Chapter 2, "The Epistemological Problems of the Sciences of Human Action") ^ Vaughn, Karen I.

Austrian Economics in America: The Migration of a Tradition . Cambridge University Press, 1994.

^ Kirzner, Israel M.

Competition and Entrepreneurship . University of Chicago Press, 1973.

^ Lavoie, Don.

National Economic Planning: What is Left?

Ballinger Publishing Company, 1985.

^ G.C. Harcourt, editor.

The Microeconomic Foundations of Macroeconomics . London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1977.

ISBN 978-0333215364 .

^ a b Cowen, Tyler, and Tabarrok, Alex.

Modern Principles of Economics . 6th ed. New York: Macmillan Learning, 2024.

[ ISBN missing ] .

^ a b Hayek, Friedrich A.

The Counter-Revolution of Science: Studies on the Abuse of Reason . Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, 1952.

^ Hayek, Friedrich A. "Ludwig von Mises: A Last Knight of Liberalism".

Reason , October 1973.

^ Smith, Adam.

An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations . London: W. Strahan and T. Cadell, 1776. Book I, Chapter V.

^ Mill, John Stuart.

Principles of Political Economy . John W. Parker, 1848..

^ Hayek, Friedrich A.

The Pure Theory of Capital . University of Chicago Press, 1941.

^ Hayek, Friedrich A.

Individualism and Economic Order . University of Chicago Press, 1948.

^ a b Gorz, André.

Critique of Economic Reason . Verso, 1989.

^ a b Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke.

Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion . Princeton University Press, 2009 ^ a b Heyne, Paul, Peter Boettke, and David Prychitko.

The Economic Way of Thinking . 13th ed., Pearson, 2014.

^ Mises, Ludwig von.

The Anti-Capitalistic Mentality . Van Nostrand, 1956.

^ Ferguson, Niall.

The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the World . Penguin Books, 2008.

ISBN 978-1594201929 .

^ Caldwell, Bruce, editor.

Mont Pèlerin 1947: Transcripts of the Founding Meeting of the Mont Pèlerin Society . Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 2022.

ISBN 978-0817924843 ^ Rothbard, Murray, Ludwig von Mises: Scholar, Creator, Hero , the Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988, p. 67.

^ Vaughn, Karen I (1998).

Austrian Economics in America . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521637657 .

pp. 66–67.

^ Reisman, George, Capitalism: a Treatise on Economics , "Introduction", Jameson Books, 1996; and Mises, Margit von, My Years with Ludwig von Mises , 2nd enlarged edit., Center for Future Education, 1984, pp. 136–137.

^ Mises, Ludwig von, The Historical Setting of the Austrian School of Economics , Arlington House, 1969, reprinted by the Ludwig von Mises Institute , 1984, p. 62 ^ Hayek, Friedrich A.

The Collected Works of F.A. Hayek . Various editors. University of Chicago Press, various volumes.

^ Ferguson, William D.

The Political Economy of Collective Action, Inequality, and Development . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2020.

ISBN 978-1503604612 ^ Olson, Mancur.

The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965.

ISBN 978-0674537514 .

^ Mises, Ludwig von.

Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution . New Haven: Yale University Press, 1957, pp. 44–47.

^ Mises, Ludwig von.

Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution . New Haven: Yale University Press, 1957, pp. 119–121.

^ Gimbel, Steven.

Einstein's Jewish Science: Physics at the Intersection of Politics and Religion . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013.

^ Hayek, Friedrich A.

Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics . University of Chicago Press, 1967.

^ Mises, Ludwig von.

Human Action: A Treatise on Economics . Scholar's Edition, Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1998. pp. 11–13.

^ a b c d Scheall, Scott (July 2017). "What is extreme about Mises's extreme apriorism?".

Journal of Economic Methodology .

24 (3): 226– 249.

doi : 10.1080/1350178X.2017.1356439 .

S2CID 151703666 .

^ Linsbichler, Alexander.

Was Ludwig von Mises a Conventionalist? A New Analysis of the Epistemology of the Austrian School of Economics . Vienna: Springer, 2017.

ISBN 978-3319461694 .

^ Mises Institute. "Rothbard's Account of the Action Axiom: A Neo-Aristotelian-Thomistic Defense".

The Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics . Auburn, AL: Mises Institute, 2023.

^ Facchini, François. "Apriorism, Introspection, and the Axiom of Action: A Realist Solution".

The Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics 10, no. 3 (2007): 234–249.

^ Mises, Ludwig von.

Human Action: A Treatise on Economics . Scholar's Edition, Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1998. pp. 30–36.

^ Mises, Ludwig von.

Epistemological Problems of Economics . Translated by George Reisman. 3rd ed. Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2003. Preface to the English-language edition, p. lxvi.

ISBN 0945466366 .

^ Mises, Ludwig von (1962).

The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science: An Essay on Method (Princeton: D. Van Nostrand), p. 79.

^ Rothbard, Murray N. (2000), Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays , Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute.

^ Berndt, Ernst R.

The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Contemporary . Addison-Wesley, 1991.

^ Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin.

Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction . Cambridge University Press, 2015.

^ Mankiw, N. Gregory.

Principles of Economics . 8th ed., Cengage Learning, 2021.

^ Caldwell, Bruce, editor.

Austrian Economics: Tensions and New Directions . Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1990.

^ Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique". In The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets , edited by Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, 19–46.

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy , Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1976.

[ ISBN missing ] .

^ Megill, Allan.

Karl Marx: The Burden of Reason (Why Marx Rejected Politics and the Market) . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2002.

ISBN 978-0742511668 ^ Del Águila Marchena, Levy.

Communism, Political Power and Personal Freedom in Marx . Palgrave Macmillan, 2019.

ISBN 978-3030828936 ^ "Why Intervention Persists" . March 16, 2005.

^ "The Anti-Imperialism of Mises" . June 24, 2013.

^ "Ludwig von Mises on World War I | Ludwig von Mises" . April 6, 2017.

^ Ralph Raico, Mises on Fascism, Democracy, and Other Questions , Journal of Libertarian Studies (1996) 12:1 pp. 1–27 ^ Richard Seymour, [ The Meaning of Cameron ], (Zero Books, John Hunt, London, 2010), p. 32 , ISBN 1846944562 ^ a b Ludwig von Mises, "Liberalism" , Chapter 10, The Argument of Fascism, 1927.

^ Mises: The Last Knight of Liberalism (2007) p. 677 ^ Mises, Ludwig von (1981).

Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis , trans. J. Kahane (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund), p. 499.

^ Mises, Ludwig von (1922) Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis . Translated by J. Kahane. New edition, enlarged with an Epilogue. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1951. p. 575.

^ von Mises, Ludwig (1944).

Omnipotent Government: The Rise of the Total State and Total War (PDF) .

Liberty Fund . p. 264 (282 in the PDF).

ISBN 978-0865977549 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Mises, Ludwig von.

Notes and Recollections . Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1978.

^ Caldwell, Bruce (2004).

Hayek's Challenge . The University of Chicago Press. pp.

125– 126.

ISBN 978-0226091914 .

^ "Liberalism in Caricature" , The Economist ^ Quoted in Sam Tanenhaus , Whittaker Chambers: A Biography , (Random House, New York, 1997), p. 500.

ISBN 978-0375751455 .

^ UCLA Oral History (Interview with Friedrich Hayek) , American Libraries / Internet Archive , 1978. Retrieved on April 4, 2009 ( Blog.Mises.org Archived June 27, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ), source with quotes.

^ "Best of Both Worlds (Interview with Milton Friedman)" .

Reason . June 1995.

^ Murray Rothbard, "The Future of Austrian Economics" on YouTube , 1990 talk at Mises University at Stanford, at MisesMedia Youtube channel.

^ Kirzner, Israel M.

(2001).

Ludwig von Mises: The Man and his Economics . Wilmington, Delaware: ISI Books. p.

31 .

ISBN 978-1882926688 .

OCLC 47734733 .

^ a b "Subjectivism in the Austrian School of Economics". In Subjectivism and Interpretative Methodology in Theory and Practice , edited by Gary M. Shiu and Fu-Lai Tony Yu, Anthem Press, 2020.

^ Kirzner, Israel M.

The Economic Point of View: An Essay in the History of Economic Thought . D. Van Nostrand Company, 1960.

^ Hayek, Friedrich A.

The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism . Edited by W.W. Bartley III, University of Chicago Press, 1988.

^ Caldwell, Bruce.

Beyond Positivism: Economic Methodology in the Twentieth Century . Routledge, 1982.

^ Weinstein, Eric. "Peter Thiel".

The Portal , episode 1, Apple Podcasts, 2019.

Link.

^ von Mises, Ludwig (1932).

Gemeinwirtschaft: Untersuchungen über den Sozialismus (in German) (2 ed.). Jena: Gustav Fischer – via Internet Archive .

Further reading [ edit ] Butler, Eamonn , Ludwig von Mises – A Primer , Institute of Economic Affairs (2010).

Ebeling, Richard M.

Political Economy, Public Policy, and Monetary Economics: Ludwig von Mises and the Austrian Tradition , London/New York: Routledge, 2010, 354 pages, ISBN 978-0415779517 .

Ebeling, Richard M.

"Ludwig von Mises: The Political Economist of Liberty, Part I" , ( The Freeman , May 2006).

Ebeling, Richard M.

"Ludwig von Mises: The Political Economist of Liberty, Part II" , ( The Freeman , June 2006).

Ebeling, Richard M.

"Ludwig von Mises and the Vienna of His Time, Part I" , ( The Freeman , March 2005).

Ebeling, Richard M.

"Ludwig von Mises and the Vienna of His Time, Part II" , ( The Freeman , April 2005).

Ebeling, Richard M.

"Austrian Economics and the Political Economy of Freedom" , ( The Freeman , June 2004).

Gordon, David (2011-02-23) Mises's Epistemology , Ludwig von Mises Institute .

Jones, Daniel Stedman.

Masters of the Universe: Hayek, Friedman, and the Birth of Neoliberal Politics (2012), pp. 49–51.

Rothbard, Murray N.

"Mises, Ludwig Edler von", The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , 1987, v. 3, pp. 479–480.

Shelton, Judy (1994).

Money Meltdown: Restoring Order to the Global Currency System . New York: Free Press. p.

399 .

ISBN 978-0029291122 .

OCLC 797359731 .

Reviewed in: Dornbusch, Rudi (July 10, 1994).

"Money Meltdown" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on March 29, 2015 . Retrieved May 25, 2013 .

The hero in this book is Ludwig von Mises.

.

von Mises, Margit (1976).

My Years with Ludwig von Mises . Arlington House Publishers.

ISBN 978-0870003684 .

Yeager, Leland (2008).

"Mises, Ludwig von (1881–1972)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

Mises, Ludwig von (1881–1973) .

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, California: Sage; Cato Institute. pp.

334– 336.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n205 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Ludwig von Mises at Wikimedia Commons Works related to Ludwig von Mises at Wikisource Quotations related to Ludwig von Mises at Wikiquote Bergner, Matthias.

"Mises, Ludwig" (in German). Deutsche Biographie . Retrieved April 19, 2024 .

Ludwig von Mises Institute Europe Blaug, Mark , ed. (1986). "MISES, Ludwig Edler Von".

Who's Who in Economics: A Biographical Dictionary of Major Economists 1700–1986 (2nd ed.). Wheatsheaf Books. p.

606 .

ISBN 978-0745002309 – via Internet Archive .

Mises.de (books and articles in the original German versions by Mises and other authors of the Austrian School) Ludwig von Mises at Find a Grave Ludwig von Mises publications indexed by Google Scholar Ludwig von Mises Institute Works by Ludwig von Mises at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Book reviews "Review of The Economic Munich by Philip Cortney" .

The Freeman , March 1955.

Full issue available .

v t e Works by Ludwig von Mises The Theory of Money and Credit (1912) Socialism (1922) Liberalism (1927) Omnipotent Government (1944) Bureaucracy (1944) Human Action (1949) The Anti-Capitalistic Mentality (1956) Theory and History (1957) v t e Austrian school economics Influences Classical economics French liberal school Frédéric Bastiat Jean-Baptiste Say Gustave de Molinari School of Salamanca Physiocracy Founders Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk Friedrich Hayek Carl Menger Ludwig von Mises Friedrich von Wieser Other contributors Bruce L. Benson Walter Block Peter Boettke Thomas DiLorenzo Frank Fetter Roger Garrison Gottfried Haberler Henry Hazlitt Robert Higgs Hans-Hermann Hoppe Steven Horwitz Jesús Huerta de Soto Israel Kirzner Ludwig Lachmann Peter Leeson Fritz Machlup Robert Murphy William H. Peterson David Prychitko Larry Reed George Reisman Richard Ritter von Strigl Murray Rothbard Joseph Salerno Mark Skousen Gerhard Tintner See also List of Austrian-school economists The Use of Knowledge in Society v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece 2 Korea Sweden Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH Google Scholar MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐njlx2
Cached time: 20250818011221
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.549 seconds
Real time usage: 1.840 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13470/1000000
Revision size: 82725/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 320500/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 27708/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 342452/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.827/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22014399/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1451.262      1 -total
 27.55%  399.814      2 Template:Reflist
 13.56%  196.849      1 Template:Infobox_academic
 12.02%  174.444     16 Template:Cite_web
 10.24%  148.661      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.64%  110.895      1 Template:Libertarianism_US
  7.42%  107.704      1 Template:IPA
  5.75%   83.375     16 Template:Cite_book
  4.96%   72.006      1 Template:Short_description
  4.76%   69.052      8 Template:Rp Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4826588:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818011221 and revision id 1306492217. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ludwig_von_Mises&oldid=1306492217 " Categories : 1881 births 1973 deaths 20th-century American economists 20th-century Austrian economists 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century Austrian male writers 20th-century Austrian philosophers 20th-century American memoirists 20th-century Austrian educators American economics writers American libertarians American male non-fiction writers American political philosophers American political writers Austrian anti-communists Jewish emigrants from Austria after the Anschluss to the United States Austrian libertarians Austrian non-fiction writers Austrian political philosophers Classical liberal economists Austrian School economists Burials at Ferncliff Cemetery Critics of Marxism Distinguished fellows of the American Economic Association Edlers of Austria Academic staff of the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies Jewish American non-fiction writers Jewish anti-communists Jewish philosophers Libertarian theorists Libertarian economists New York University faculty Writers from Lviv Recipients of the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art Social philosophers University of Vienna alumni Yiddish-speaking people American anti-communists Member of the Mont Pelerin Society Austro-Hungarian military personnel of World War I Jews from Galicia (Eastern Europe) American critics of Christianity Utilitarians Libertarian historians Hidden categories: Articles containing German-language text Pages with missing ISBNs Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Articles containing Latin-language text All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2024 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from July 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ludwig von Mises 60 languages Add topic

