Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 O'Neill – The High Frontier 2.1.1 NASA Ames/Stanford 1975 Summer Study 2.1.2 Space Studies Institute 3 Motivation 4 Advantages Toggle Advantages subsection 4.1 Access to solar energy 4.2 Outside gravity well 4.3 In-situ resource utilization 4.4 Asteroids and other small bodies 4.5 Population 4.6 Zero g recreation 4.7 Passenger compartment 5 Requirements Toggle Requirements subsection 5.1 Regulation 5.2 Initial capital outlay 5.3 Location 5.4 Protection from radiation 5.5 Atmosphere 5.6 Food production 5.7 Artificial gravity 5.8 Meteoroids and dust 5.9 Heat rejection 5.10 Attitude control 5.11 Interior design 6 Concepts Toggle Concepts subsection 6.1 Base concepts 6.1.1 Dumbbell-shape assembly concept 6.2 Further concepts 7 Space station projects 8 In fiction 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Space settlement 17 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Polski Português Русский සිංහල Simple English Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Space habitat ) Type of space station, intended as a permanent settlement This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Space settlement" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A Stanford torus interior (cutaway view) Interior view of a large scale O'Neill cylinder , showing alternating land and window stripes A space settlement (also called a space habitat , spacestead , space city or space colony ) is a settlement in outer space , sustaining more extensively habitation facilities in space than a general space station or spacecraft . Possibly including closed ecological systems , its particular purpose is permanent habitation.

No space settlement has been constructed yet, but many design concepts, with varying degrees of realism, have been introduced in science-fiction or proposed for actual realization.

Space settlements include orbital settlements (also called orbital habitat , orbital stead , orbital city or orbital colony ) [ 1 ] around the Earth or any other celestial body, as well as cyclers and interstellar arks , as generation ships or world ships .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Space settlements are a form of extraterrestrial settlements , which more broadly includes habitats built on or within a body other than Earth, such as a settlement developed from a moonbase , a Mars habitat or an asteroid.

[ 4 ] Definition [ edit ] A space settlement is any large-scale habitation facility in outer space , or more particularly in an orbit.

The International Astronautical Federation has differentiated space settlements to space habitats and space infrastructure the following way: Habitat : pressurized volume(s) within which humans live and work, including relevant facilities for life support.

Settlement : group of permanently inhabited habitats installed near each other, possibly interconnected.

Infrastructure : set of constructed elements supporting habitats and/or settlements such as (and not limited to): power plant, water plant, greenhouse and waste management facilities, communication facilities, transportation facilities, EVAs, roads, spaceport, research platforms, and so on.

[ 5 ] While not automatically constituting a colonial entity, a space settlement can be an element of a space colony . The term "space colony" has been viewed critically, prompting Carl Sagan to propose the term space city.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] History [ edit ] Further information: Space station § History " The Brick Moon " – an 1869 serial by Edward Everett Hale – was the first fictional space station or habitat. (Described by other sources as a station or habitat.) The idea of space settlements either in fact or fiction goes back to the second half of the 19th century. " The Brick Moon ", a fictional story written in 1869 by Edward Everett Hale, is perhaps the first treatment of this idea in writing.

[ 8 ] In 1903, space pioneer Konstantin Tsiolkovsky speculated about rotating cylindrical space settlements in Beyond Planet Earth .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] In 1929 John Desmond Bernal speculated about giant space settlements.

Dandridge M. Cole in the late 1950s and 1960s speculated about hollowing out asteroids and then rotating the to use as settlements in various magazine articles and books, notably Islands In Space: The Challenge Of The Planetoids .

[ 11 ] O'Neill – The High Frontier [ edit ] Main article: O'Neill Cylinder A pair of O'Neill cylinders Around 1970, near the end of Project Apollo (1961–1972), Gerard K. O'Neill , an experimental physicist at Princeton University , was looking for a topic to tempt his physics students, most of them freshmen in engineering. He hit upon the idea of assigning them feasibility calculations for large space-settlements. To his surprise, the habitats seemed feasible even in very large sizes: cylinders 8 km (5 mi) in diameter and 32 km (20 mi) long, even if made from ordinary materials such as steel and glass. Also, the students solved problems such as radiation protection from cosmic rays (almost free in the larger sizes), getting naturalistic Sun angles, provision of power, realistic pest-free farming and orbital attitude control without reaction motors. O'Neill published an article about these colony concepts in Physics Today in 1974.

[ 12 ] He expanded the article in his 1976 book The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space .

NASA Ames/Stanford 1975 Summer Study [ edit ] Stanford torus exterior Collage of figures and tables of Stanford Torus space habitat, from «Space Settlements: A Design Study» book. Charles Holbrow and Richard D. Johnson, NASA, 1977.

The result motivated NASA to sponsor a couple of summer workshops led by O'Neill.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Several concepts were studied, with sizes ranging from 1,000 to 10,000,000 people, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] including versions of the Stanford torus . Three concepts were presented to NASA: the Bernal Sphere , the Toroidal Colony and the Cylindrical Colony.

[ 18 ] Exterior of a 1970s Stanford adaptation of the Bernal sphere O'Neill's concepts had an example of a payback scheme: construction of solar power satellites from lunar materials. O'Neill did not emphasize the building of solar power satellites as such, but rather offered proof that orbital manufacturing from lunar materials could generate profits. He and other participants presumed that once such manufacturing facilities had started production, many profitable uses for them would be found, and the colony would become self-supporting and begin to build other colonies as well.

The concept studies generated a notable groundswell of public interest. One effect of this expansion was the founding of the L5 Society in the U.S., a group of enthusiasts that desired to build and live in such colonies. The group was named after the space-colony orbit which was then believed to be the most profitable, a kidney-shaped orbit around either of Earth's lunar Lagrange points 5 or 4.

Space Studies Institute [ edit ] In 1977 O'Neill founded the Space Studies Institute , which initially funded and constructed some prototypes of the new hardware needed for a space colonization effort, as well as producing a number of feasibility studies. One of the early projects, for instance, involved a series of functional prototypes of a mass driver , the essential technology for moving ores efficiently from the Moon to space colony orbits.

Motivation [ edit ] See also: Human presence in space § Purposes There are a range of arguments for space settlements, including: As a base for crewed space exploration Relieving Earth of industry and population pressure [ 19 ] Recreational habitation, either as visitors or residents at space (see space hotel ) Economic growth, developing access to resources in space and a space economy , without destroying ecosystems and displacing peoples on Earth Space colonization , claiming extraterrestrial space for settler colonial independence For survival of human civilization and the biosphere , in case of a disaster on the Earth (natural or man-made) [ 20 ] Advantages [ edit ] A number of arguments are made for space settlements having a number of advantages: Access to solar energy [ edit ] Space has an abundance of light produced from the Sun. In Earth orbit, this amounts to 1400 watts of power per square meter.

[ 21 ] This energy can be used to produce electricity from solar cells or heat engine based power stations, process ores, provide light for plants to grow and to warm space settlements.

Outside gravity well [ edit ] Earth-to-space settlement trade would be easier than Earth-to-planetary habitat trade, as habitats orbiting Earth will not have a gravity well to overcome to export to Earth, and a smaller gravity well to overcome to import from Earth.

In-situ resource utilization [ edit ] Space settlements may be supplied with resources from extraterrestrial places like Mars , asteroids , or the Moon ( in-situ resource utilization [ISRU]; [ 20 ] see Asteroid mining ). One could produce breathing oxygen, drinking water, and rocket fuel with the help of ISRU.

[ 20 ] It may become possible to manufacture solar panels from lunar materials.

[ 20 ] Asteroids and other small bodies [ edit ] Most asteroids have a mixture of materials, that could be mined, and because these bodies do not have substantial gravity wells, it would require low delta-V to draw materials from them and haul them to a construction site.

[ 15 ] There is estimated to be enough material in the main asteroid belt alone to build enough space settlements to equal the habitable surface area of 3,000 Earths.

[ 22 ] Population [ edit ] A 1974 estimate assumed that collection of all the material in the main asteroid belt would allow habitats to be constructed to give an immense total population capacity. Using the free-floating resources of the Solar System, this estimate extended into the trillions.

[ 12 ] Zero g recreation [ edit ] If a large area at the rotation axis is enclosed, various zero-g sports are possible, including swimming, [ 23 ] [ 24 ] hang gliding [ 25 ] and the use of human-powered aircraft .

Passenger compartment [ edit ] Further information: Space and survival A space settlement can be the passenger compartment of a large spacecraft for colonizing asteroids , moons, and planets. It can also function as one for a generation ship for travel to other planets or distant stars (L. R. Shepherd described a generation starship in 1952 comparing it to a small planet with many people living in it.) [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Requirements [ edit ] Configuration of a Stanford torus The requirements for a space settlement are many. They would have to provide all the material needs for hundreds or thousands of humans, in an environment out in space that is very hostile to human life.

[ 28 ] Regulation [ edit ] The governance or regulation of space settlements is crucial for responsible habitation conditions. The physical as well as socio-political architecture of a space settlement, if poorly established, can lead to tyrannical and precarious conditions.

[ 4 ] Initial capital outlay [ edit ] Even the smallest of the settlement designs mentioned below are more massive than the total mass of all items that humans have ever launched into Earth orbit combined.

[ citation needed ] Prerequisites to building settlements are either cheaper launch costs or a mining and manufacturing base on the Moon or other body having low delta-v from the desired habitat location.

[ 15 ] Location [ edit ] A 1970s NASA concept for routs and locating a Stanford torus in cis-lunar space The optimal settlement orbits are still debated, and so orbital stationkeeping is probably a commercial issue. The lunar L 4 and L 5 orbits are now thought to be too far away from the Moon and Earth. A more modern proposal is to use a two-to-one resonance orbit that alternately has a close, low-energy (cheap) approach to the Moon, and then to the Earth.

[ citation needed ] This provides quick, inexpensive access to both raw materials and the major market. Most settlement designs plan to use electromagnetic tether propulsion , or mass drivers used instead of rocket motors. The advantage of these is that they either use no reaction mass at all, or use cheap reaction mass.

[ citation needed ] Protection from radiation [ edit ] If a space settlement is located at L4 or L5 , then its orbit will take it outside of the protection of the Earth's magnetosphere for approximately two-thirds of the time (as happens with the Moon), putting residents at risk of proton exposure from the solar wind (see Health threat from cosmic rays ).

Protection can be attained through passive or active shielding.

[ 29 ] Passive shielding through the use of materials has been the method to shield current spacecrafts.

Water walls or ice walls can provide protection from solar and cosmic radiation, as 7 cm of water depth blocks approximately half of incident radiation.

[ 30 ] Alternatively, rock could be used as shielding; 4 metric tons per square meter of surface area could reduce radiation dosage to several mSv or less annually, below the rate of some populated high natural background areas on Earth.

[ 31 ] Alternative concepts based on active shielding are untested yet and more complex than such passive mass shielding, but usage of magnetic and/or electric fields, like through spacecraft encapsulating wires, [ 32 ] to deflect particles could potentially greatly reduce mass requirements.

[ 33 ] Atmosphere [ edit ] The airglow above the horizon at the atmospheric and orbital boundary to space , captured from the ISS Air pressure , with normal partial pressures of oxygen (21%), carbon dioxide and nitrogen (78%), is a basic requirement of any space settlement. Basically, most space settlement designs concepts envision large, thin-walled pressure vessels. The required oxygen could be obtained from lunar rock. Nitrogen is most easily available from the Earth, but is also recycled nearly perfectly. Also, nitrogen in the form of ammonia ( NH 3 ) may be obtainable from comets and the moons of outer planets. Nitrogen may also be available in unknown quantities on certain other bodies in the outer Solar System . The air of a habitat could be recycled in a number of ways. One concept is to use photosynthetic gardens , possibly via hydroponics , or forest gardening .

[ citation needed ] However, these do not remove certain industrial pollutants, such as volatile oils, and excess simple molecular gases. The standard method used on nuclear submarines , a similar form of closed environment, is to use a catalytic burner, which effectively decomposes most organics. Further protection might be provided by a small cryogenic distillation system which would gradually remove impurities such as mercury vapor, and noble gases that cannot be catalytically burned.

[ citation needed ] Food production [ edit ] Organic materials for food production would also need to be provided. At first, most of these would have to be imported from Earth.

[ citation needed ] After that, feces recycling should reduce the need for imports.

[ citation needed ] One proposed recycling method would start by burning the cryogenic distillate, plants, garbage and sewage with air in an electric arc, and distilling the result.

[ citation needed ] The resulting carbon dioxide and water would be immediately usable in agriculture. The nitrates and salts in the ash could be dissolved in water and separated into pure minerals. Most of the nitrates, potassium and sodium salts would recycle as fertilizers. Other minerals containing iron, nickel, and silicon could be chemically purified in batches and reused industrially. The small fraction of remaining materials, well below 0.01% by weight, could be processed into pure elements with zero-gravity mass spectrometry , and added in appropriate amounts to the fertilizers and industrial stocks. It is likely that methods would be greatly refined as people began to actually live in space settlements.

Artificial gravity [ edit ] Main article: Artificial gravity This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Long-term on-orbit studies have proven that zero gravity weakens bones and muscles, and upsets calcium metabolism and immune systems. Most people have a continual stuffy nose or sinus problems, and a few people have dramatic, incurable motion sickness. Most habitat designs would rotate in order to use inertial forces to simulate gravity . NASA studies with chickens and plants have proven that this is an effective physiological substitute for gravity.

[ citation needed ] Turning one's head rapidly in such an environment causes a "tilt" to be sensed as one's inner ears move at different rotational rates. Centrifuge studies show that people get motion-sick in habitats with a rotational radius of less than 100 metres, or with a rotation rate above 3 rotations per minute. However, the same studies and statistical inference indicate that almost all people should be able to live comfortably in habitats with a rotational radius larger than 500 meters and below 1 RPM. Experienced persons were not merely more resistant to motion sickness, but could also use the effect to determine "spinward" and "antispinward" directions in the centrifuges.

[ citation needed ] Meteoroids and dust [ edit ] The habitat would need to withstand potential impacts from space debris , meteoroids , dust, etc. Most meteoroids that strike the earth vaporize in the atmosphere. Without a thick protective atmosphere meteoroid strikes would pose a much greater risk to a space settlement.

Radar will sweep the space around each habitat mapping the trajectory of debris and other man-made objects and allowing corrective actions to be taken to protect the habitat.

[ citation needed ] In some designs (O'Neill/NASA Ames "Stanford Torus" and "Crystal palace in a Hatbox" habitat designs have a non-rotating cosmic ray shield of packed sand (~1.9 m thick) or even artificial aggregate rock (1.7 m ersatz concrete). Other proposals use the rock as structure and integral shielding (O'Neill, "the High Frontier". Sheppard, "Concrete Space Colonies"; Spaceflight, journal of the B.I.S.). In any of these cases, strong meteoroid protection is implied by the external radiation shell ~4.5 tonnes of rock material, per square meter.

[ 34 ] Note that Solar Power Satellites are proposed in the multi-GW ranges, and such energies and technologies would allow constant radar mapping of nearby 3D space out-to arbitrarily far away, limited only by effort expended to do so.

Proposals are available to move even kilometer-sized NEOs to high Earth orbits, and reaction engines for such purposes would move a space settlement and any arbitrarily large shield, but not in any timely or rapid manner, the thrust being very low compared to the huge mass.

Heat rejection [ edit ] The habitat is in a vacuum, and therefore resembles a giant thermos bottle. Habitats also need a radiator to eliminate heat from absorbed sunlight. Very small habitats might have a central vane that rotates with the habitat. In this design, convection would raise hot air "up" (toward the center), and cool air would fall down into the outer habitat. Some other designs would distribute coolants, such as chilled water from a central radiator.

Attitude control [ edit ] Most mirror geometries require something on the habitat to be aimed at the Sun and so attitude control is necessary. The original O'Neill design used the two cylinders as momentum wheels to roll the colony, and pushed the sunward pivots together or apart to use precession to change their angle.

Interior design [ edit ] The interior of a space settlement should always have areas out of sight, to avoid the psychological effect of all reality being visible simultaneously, while also allowing for landscapes and wide vistas, so there is no sensation of living in a theater stage-like situation. Because of psychological reasons, the design should also avoid the perception that everything is human-controlled (for example, by having random artificial weather, or vegetation developing in a natural way).

[ 35 ] Concepts [ edit ] Base concepts [ edit ] The two common original concepts are the Bernal sphere and the O'Neill cylinder .

Dumbbell-shape assembly concept [ edit ] A dumbbell-shaped self-sufficient and self-reproducible habitat for 10 persons Various concepts merging into a cylindrical station A dumbbell -like spacecraft or habitat, connected by a cable to a counterweight or other habitat. This design has been proposed as a Mars ship, initial construction shack for a space habitat, and orbital hotel . It has a comfortably long and slow rotational radius for a relatively small station mass. Also, if some of the equipment can form the counter-weight, the equipment dedicated to artificial gravity is just a cable, and thus has a much smaller mass-fraction than in other concepts. For a long-term habitation, however, radiation shielding must rotate with the habitat, and is extremely heavy, thus requiring a much stronger and heavier cable.

[ 36 ] This speculative design was also considered by the NASA studies.

[ 37 ] Small habitats would be mass-produced to standards that allow the habitats to interconnect. A single habitat can operate alone as a bola. However, further habitats can be attached, to grow into a " dumbbell " then a "bow-tie", then a ring, then a cylinder of "beads", and finally a framed array of cylinders. Each stage of growth shares more radiation shielding and capital equipment, increasing redundancy and safety while reducing the cost per person. This concept was originally proposed by a professional architect because it can grow much like Earth-bound cities, with incremental individual investments, unlike those that require large start-up investments. The main disadvantage is that the smaller versions use a large structure to support the radiation shielding, which rotates with them. In large sizes, the shielding becomes economical, because it grows roughly as the square of the colony radius. The number of people, their habitats, and the radiators to cool them grow roughly as the cube of the colony radius.

Further concepts [ edit ] Interior of a Bernal sphere Island One , a Bernal sphere settlement for about 10,000–20,000 people.

Stanford torus : an alternative to Island One.

Lewis One, [ 38 ] a cylinder of radius 250 m with a non-rotating radiation shielding. The shielding protects the micro-gravity industrial space, too. The rotating part is 450m long and has several inner cylinders. Some of them are used for agriculture.

Island Three or O'Neill cylinder , an even larger  cylindrical design (3.2 [ 39 ] or 4 [ 40 ] km radius and 32 km long).

McKendree cylinder , another concept that would use carbon nanotubes, a McKendree cylinder is paired cylinders in the same vein as the Island Three concept, but each 460 km in radius and 4600 km long (versus 3.2-4 km radius and 32 km long in the Island Three).

[ 41 ] Kalpana One, revised, [ 24 ] a short cylinder with 250 m radius and 325 m length. The radiation shielding is 10 t/m 2 and rotates. It has several inner cylinders for agriculture and recreation. It is sized for 3,000 residents.

[ 42 ] Kalpana One concept Bubbleworld or Inside/Outside concept, originated by Dandridge M. Cole in 1964, [ 11 ] calls for drilling a tunnel through the longest axis of a large metallic asteroid and filling it with a volatile substance, possibly water. A very large solar reflector would be constructed nearby, focusing solar heat onto the asteroid, first to weld and seal the tunnel ends, then more diffusely to slowly heat the entire outer surface. As the metal softens, the water inside expands and inflates the mass, while rotational forces help shape it into a cylindrical form. Once expanded and allowed to cool, it can be spun to produce centrifugal pseudogravity, and the interior filled with soil, air and water. By creating a slight bulge in the middle of the cylinder, a ring-shaped lake can be made to form. Reflectors would allow sunlight to enter and to be directed where needed. This method would require a significant human and industrial presence in space to be at all feasible. The concept was popularized by science fiction author Larry Niven in his Known Space stories, describing such worlds as the primary habitats of the Belters , a civilization who had colonized the asteroid belt .

"Bubbleworld" is also the name of a different concept of space settlement thought of by Dani Eder in 1995 [ 43 ] (it is alternatively known as an Ederworld [ 44 ] ). This is a relatively thin, spherical shell surrounding a mass of gas great enough to be held together by gravity. If hydrogen is used as the gas, the shell would have a radius of about 240,000 km. The outside of the shell would have a living space 2,400 km thick (filled with breathable air) with an additional outer shell (possibly made of 500 m of steel) above it to hold in the air.

Asteroid terrarium , a similar idea to the bubble world, in the 2012 novel 2312 by hard science fiction writer Kim Stanley Robinson .

Bishop Ring , a speculative design using carbon nanotubes : a torus 1000 km in radius, 500 km in width, and with atmosphere retention walls 200 km in height. The habitat would be large enough that it could be "roofless", open to outer space on the inner rim.

[ 45 ] Artist's impression of a Bishop Ring .

Space station projects [ edit ] Space settlements are in principle space stations, developments in space station construction therefore share many elements. 
The following projects and proposals, while not truly space settlements, incorporate aspects of what they would have and may represent stepping stones towards eventually building of space settlements.

Concept art of the Lunar Gateway The Lunar Gateway is a planned lunar space station, the first outside of Low Earth Orbit , therefore being the first spacecraft designed in unshielded space.

The ISS Centrifuge Demo was proposed in 2011 as a demonstration project for an artificial gravity compartment, preparatory for a similar module of a Nautilus-X Multi-Mission Space Exploration Vehicle (MMSEV). The ISS module would have an outside diameter of 30 feet (9.1 m) with a 30 inches (760 mm) ring interior cross-section diameter and would provide 0.08 to 0.51g partial gravity. This test and evaluation centrifuge would have the capability to become a Sleep Module for ISS crew. The subsequent vehicle design would be a long-duration crewed space transport vehicle including the artificial gravity compartment intended to promote crew-health for a crew of up to six persons on missions of up to two years duration. The partial-g torus-ring centrifuge would utilize both standard metal-frame and inflatable spacecraft structures and would provide 0.11 to 0.69 g if built with the 40 feet (12 m) diameter option.

The Bigelow Commercial Space Station was announced in mid-2010. Bigelow has publicly shown space station design configurations with up to nine modules containing 100,000 cu ft (2,800 m 3 ) of habitable space. Bigelow began to publicly refer to the initial configuration as "Space Complex Alpha" in October 2010.

In fiction [ edit ] See also: Space stations in fiction Space settlements have been elements of different science-fiction stories, across different media, from books to movies like Elysium (2013) for a wheel shaped Stanford torus type and Interstellar (2014) for a cylindrical O'Neill type .

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Space habitats .

Arcology Bioastronautics Closed ecological system Domed city Dyson sphere Floating cities and islands in fiction Human outpost (artificially created controlled human habitat) Locomotion in space Megastructure Planetary chauvinism Research station – Facility for scientific research Space architecture Space observatory – Instrument in space to study astronomical objects Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Space stations and habitats in fiction Spaceflight Space station Spome Underground living Underground city Underwater habitat Notes [ edit ] ^ "The Kalpana One Orbital Space Settlement Revised" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 April 2024.

^ "NSS Roadmap to Space Settlement Milestone 30: Development of Interstellar Travel and Settlement" .

NSS . 2021-05-19 . Retrieved 2024-08-07 .

^ Hein, Andreas M.; Pak, Mikhail; Pütz, Daniel; Bühler, Christian; Reiss, Philipp (2012).

"World ships—architectures & feasibility revisited" .

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society .

65 (4): 119.

^ a b Cockell, C. S. (2010).

"Essay on the Causes and Consequences of Extraterrestrial Tyranny" .

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society .

63 : 15– 37.

ISSN 0007-084X . Retrieved 2024-08-07 .

^ Federation, International Astronautical (2024-02-08).

"IAF : Space Habitats Committee" .

IAF . Retrieved 2024-04-25 .

^ Bartels, Meghan (May 25, 2018).

"People are calling for a movement to decolonize space-here's why" .

Newsweek . Retrieved Oct 31, 2021 .

^ Scharmen, Fred (Jul 3, 2017). "Highest and Best Use: Subjectivity and Climates Off and After Earth".

Journal of Architectural Education .

71 (2). Informa UK Limited: 184– 196.

doi : 10.1080/10464883.2017.1340775 .

ISSN 1046-4883 .

S2CID 115502023 .

^ a b Ceylan, Salih (December 30, 2022).

"Architectural evolution of space settlements in cinema and television" .

Journal of Design for Resilience in Architecture and Planning .

3 ((Special Issue)): 66– 78.

doi : 10.47818/DRArch.2022.v3si072 .

ISSN 2757-6329 .

^ K. Tsiolkovsky.

Beyond Planet Earth.

Trans. by Kenneth Syers. Oxford, 1960.

^ "Tsiolkovsky's Greenhouse" .

up-ship.com . 21 July 2010.

^ a b Bonnici, Alex Michael (8 August 2007).

"Islands in Space: The Challenge of the Planetoids, the Pioneering Work of Dandridge M. Cole" .

Discovery Enterprise . Retrieved 26 November 2014 .

^ a b O'Neill, Gerard K. (September 1974).

"The Colonization of Space" .

Physics Today .

27 (9): 32– 40.

Bibcode : 1974PhT....27i..32O .

doi : 10.1063/1.3128863 .

^ Space Settlements: A Design Study (Report). NASA. 1975. Archived from the original on 2002-11-19.

^ Ames Summer Study on Space Settlements and Industrialization Using Nonterrestial Materials (Report). NASA. 1977. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28.

^ a b c Pournelle, Dr. Jerrold E. (1980).

A Step Farther Out . Ace Books.

ISBN 978-0491029414 .

^ O'Neill, Dr. Gerard K. (1977).

The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space . New York: William Morrow & Company.

^ O'Neill, Gerard K.; Reynolds, Ginie. Habitats in Space (Report).

JSTOR 24128636 .

^ Page, Thomas (29 May 2016).

"Space oddity: NASA's retro guide to future living" . CNN.

^ "Jeff Bezos foresees a trillion people living in millions of space colonies. Here's what he's doing to get the ball rolling" .

NBC News . 2019-05-15 . Retrieved 2024-08-06 .

^ a b c d Doehring, James; et al.

"Space Habitats" .

lifeboat.com . Lifeboat Foundation . Retrieved 29 June 2011 .

^ Kopp, G.; Lean, J. (2011).

"A new, lower value of total solar irradiance: Evidence and climate significance" .

Geophys. Res. Lett .

38 (1): L01706.

Bibcode : 2011GeoRL..38.1706K .

doi : 10.1029/2010GL045777 .

^ "Limits to Growth" , Chapter 7, Space Settlements: A Design Study . NASA, 1975.

^ Collins, Patrick; et al.

Artificial-Gravity Swimming-Pool . Space 98: Sixth International Conference and Exposition on Engineering, Construction, and Operations in Space. Albuquerque, New Mexico.

April 26–30, 1998.

^ a b Globus, Al.

"The Kalpana One Orbital Space Settlement Revised" (PDF) . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ Heppenheimer, T. A. (1977).

"Colonies in Space, Chapter 11: What's to Do on Saturday Night?" . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ Shepherd, L. R. (July 1952). "Interstellar Flight".

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society .

11 : 149– 167.

^ Gilster, Paul (28 February 2012).

"Les Shepherd, RIP" .

centauri-dreams.org . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

^ Chen, Muhao; Goyal, Raman; Majji, Manoranjan; Skelton, Robert E. (2021).

"Review of space habitat designs for long term space explorations" .

Progress in Aerospace Sciences .

122 : 100692.

doi : 10.1016/j.paerosci.2020.100692 .

^ "Radiation Shielding Techniques for Human Spaceflight" .

Professor Robert B. Laughlin, Department of Physics, Stanford University . 2015-07-17 . Retrieved 2024-08-08 .

^ Water Walls Architecture: Massively Redundant andn Highly Reliable Life Support for Long Duration Exploration Missions (PDF) (Report). NASA . Retrieved November 13, 2022 .

^ "Mass Shielding" , Appendix E, Space Settlements: A Design Study . NASA (SP-413), 1975.

^ Williams, Matt (2018-10-17).

"Plans for a modular Martian base that would provide its own radiation shielding" .

Phys.org . Retrieved 2024-08-08 .

^ Shepherd, Simon George.

"Spacecraft Shielding" .

dartmouth.edu . Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College . Retrieved 3 May 2011 .

^ "A Space Habitat Design" .

quadibloc.com . Retrieved 8 February 2021 .

^ "Space Settlements: A Design Study, chapter 3, appendix A" .

nss.org . Retrieved 2025-06-10 .

^ Curreri, Peter A.

A Minimized Technological Approach towards Human Self Sufficiency off Earth (PDF) . Space Technology and Applications International Forum (STAIF) Conference. Albuquerque, NM. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-06-06.

11–15 February 2007. Retrieved 18 December 2010 ^ "Space Settlements: A Design Study -- Chapter 4: Choosing Among Alternatives" . Archived from the original on 2009-11-03.

^ Globus, Al.

"Lewis One Space Colony" . Retrieved 2006-05-28 .

^ "O'Neill Cylinder Space Settlement" .

NSS . 2017-08-03 . Retrieved 2025-01-09 .

^ "How We Could Actually Build a Space Colony" .

Popular Mechanics . 2014-10-02 . Retrieved 2025-01-09 .

^ McKendree, Thomas Lawrence.

Implications of Molecular Nanotechnology Technical Performance Parameters on Previously Defined Space System Architectures . The Fourth Foresight Conference on Molecular Nanotechnology. Palo Alto, California, USA.

9–11 November 1995.

^ "Kalpana One Space Settlement" . Archived from the original on 2013-02-15.

^ "Bubbleworld (Dani Eder)" .

yarchive.net . Retrieved 2024-01-09 .

^ "Ederworlds" .

Orion's Arm - Encyclopedia Galactica . Retrieved 2024-01-09 .

^ Bishop, Forrest (1997).

"Open Air Space Habitats" .

iase.cc . Institute of Atomic-Scale Engineering.

References [ edit ] NASA's table of contents for the studies See the "online books" about halfway down the page.

External links [ edit ] Gallery about space habitats , in Wikimedia Commons .

Lifeboat Foundation Space Habitats , a space habitat advocacy group.

Space Settlements: A Design Study , 1977 book by NASA about designing a space settlement Lucas, Paul (21 February 2005).

"Homesteading the High Frontier: The Shape of Space Stations to Come" .

Strange Horizons . Archived from the original on 2006-11-14.

Frank, Adam (1 May 2011).

"Visions Of The High Frontier: Space Colonies of 1970" .

NPR .

NASA video about space habitats and space settlements construction as seen around 1970"s (5 min) .

Video explaining rotating space habitats .

Opening the High Frontier , a video about affordable spaceflight and building a spacefaring civilization.

The 1975 space habitat video credited with inspiring Blue Origin (Jeff "Amazon" Bezos as a boy).

Segits.com , a website that refers to Space habitats as Segits or Self-sufficient Extra-terrestrial Green-habitat Intentional Transparent self-replicating communities.

v t e Space stations and settlements List of space stations List of commercial space stations Current International Space Station (ISS) Tiangong space station (TSS) Past Russia / Soviet Union Salyut Salyut 1 DOS-2 † Salyut 2 † ‡ Cosmos 557 † Salyut 3 ‡ Salyut 4 Salyut 5 ‡ Salyut 6 Salyut 7 Mir United States OPS 0855 ° Skylab China Tiangong program Tiangong-1 Tiangong-2 Private Genesis I ° II ° Canceled Individual projects Aurora Station Bigelow Commercial Space Station Deep Space Habitat Excalibur Almaz Exploration Gateway Platform Galaxy Industrial Space Facility Manned Orbiting Laboratory Nautilus-X OPSEK Orbital Technologies Commercial Space Station Skylab II ( FlexCraft ) Skylab B Sundancer Tiangong-3 Incorporated into ISS Space Station Freedom USOS Columbus MTFF Columbus (ISS module) Mir-2 ROS In development Russia Russian Orbital Service Station Private Axiom Station Haven-1 Orbital Reef Starlab International Lunar Gateway Proposed Bharatiya Antariksha Station Japanese Space Station Module (Mitsui) Lunar Orbital Station Voyager Station Concepts Bernal sphere Bishop Ring McKendree cylinder O'Neill cylinder Rotating wheel Space settlement Stanford torus Wet workshop Related List of films featuring space stations Space stations and habitats in fiction Mission to Mir (1997 documentary) Space Station 3D (2002 documentary) Orphans of Apollo (2008 documentary) Space Tourists (2009 documentary) A Beautiful Planet (2016 documentary) Notes: † Never inhabited due to launch or on-orbit failure, ‡ Part of the Almaz military program, ° Never inhabited, lacks docking mechanism.

v t e Spaceflight General Astrodynamics History Timeline Space Race Records Accidents and incidents Space launch Space policy Australia China European Space Agency European Union India Japan North Korea South Korea Russia Soviet Union United States Space law Outer Space Treaty Rescue Agreement Space Liability Convention Registration Convention Moon Treaty Space warfare Space command Space force Militarisation of space Private spaceflight Billionaire space race Applications Astronomy Earth observation Archaeology Imagery and mapping Reconnaissance Weather and environment monitoring Communications satellite Internet Radio Telephone Television Satellite navigation Commercial use of space Space launch market competition Space architecture Space exploration Space research Space technology Space weather Human spaceflight General Astronaut commercial Life-support system Animals in space Bioastronautics Space suit Extravehicular activity Overview effect Weightlessness Space toilet Space tourism Space colonization Space diving Programs Vostok Mercury Voskhod Gemini Soyuz Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz Space Shuttle Mir Shuttle–Mir International Space Station Shenzhou Tiangong New Shepard Artemis Health issues Effect of spaceflight on the human body Space adaptation syndrome Health threat from cosmic rays Space psychology Psychological and sociological effects Space and survival Space medicine Space nursing Space sexology Spacecraft Launch vehicle Rocket Space capsule Orbital module Reentry capsule Service module Spaceplane Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Lander Rover Self-replicating spacecraft Space telescope Spacecraft propulsion Rocket engine Electric propulsion Solar sail Gravity assist Destinations Sub-orbital Orbital Geocentric Geosynchronous Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic Space launch Direct ascent Escape velocity Expendable and reusable launch systems Launch pad Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceport Ground segment Flight controller Ground station Pass Mission control center Category Portal v t e Space colonization Core concepts Interplanetary spaceflight Interstellar travel Intergalactic travel Planetary habitability Space and survival Space settlement Terraforming Space habitats Bishop Ring McKendree cylinder O'Neill cylinder Stanford torus Colonization targets Lagrange points Solar System Mercury Venus Mars Asteroids mining Moon Titan Trans-Neptunian objects Free space Terraforming targets Mars Venus Europa Organizations Mars Society NASA National Space Society SpaceX The Planetary Society NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐9kkfp
Cached time: 20250814220946
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.981 seconds
Real time usage: 1.177 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5892/1000000
Revision size: 44645/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 187895/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8790/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 185733/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.639/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20375890/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1001.557      1 -total
 37.55%  376.060      1 Template:Reflist
 22.89%  229.304     25 Template:Cite_web
 11.96%  119.799      2 Template:Annotated_link
 10.19%  102.089      7 Template:Navbox
  8.14%   81.559      1 Template:Space_stations
  7.14%   71.559     11 Template:Fix
  7.07%   70.770      9 Template:Citation_needed
  6.60%   66.085      8 Template:Cite_journal
  6.30%   63.105      1 Template:Ref-improve Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:140282:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220946 and revision id 1297477282. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_settlement&oldid=1297477282 " Categories : Space habitats Human habitats Space farming Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Articles needing additional references from February 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012 Commons category link is locally defined Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 12:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Space settlement 17 languages Add topic

