Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Experiment description 2 Notes 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Cartesian diver 19 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Ido Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Cartesian devil" redirects here. For Descartes' philosophical thought experiment, see Evil demon .

Part of a series on René Descartes Philosophy Cartesianism Rationalism Foundationalism Mechanism Doubt and certainty Existence of God Dream argument Cogito, ergo sum Evil demon Trademark argument Causal adequacy principle Mind–body dichotomy Analytic geometry Coordinate system Cartesian circle Folium Rule of signs Cartesian diver Balloonist theory Wax argument Res cogitans Res extensa Works Rules for the Direction of the Mind The Search for Truth The World Discourse on the Method La Géométrie Meditations on First Philosophy Principles of Philosophy Passions of the Soul People Christina, Queen of Sweden Francine Descartes v t e Classic science experiment demonstrating the Archimedes' principle and the ideal gas law This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this article. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cartesian diver" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Floating and sinking demonstration (Cartesian diver). The tube is filled with water and air. When pressing the bottle, the additional water enters the test tube, thus increasing the average density of the system tube-water-air, resulting with negative buoyancy and the tube sinks.

Dancing Cartesian Devil Hand blown glass toy from Lauscha , Thuringian Forest In the bottle A Cartesian diver or Cartesian devil is a classic science experiment which demonstrates the principle of buoyancy ( Archimedes ' principle) and the ideal gas law . The first written description of this device is provided by Raffaello Magiotti , in his book Renitenza certissima dell'acqua alla compressione (Very firm resistance of water to compression) published in 1648. It is named after René Descartes as the toy is said to have been invented by him.

[ citation needed ] The principle is used to make small toys often called "water dancers" or "water devils". The principle is the same, but the eyedropper is instead replaced with a decorative object with the same properties which is a tube of near-neutral buoyancy, for example, a blown-glass bubble. If the tail of the glass bubble is given a twist, the flow of the water into and out of the glass bubble creates spin. This causes the toy to spin as it sinks and rises. An example of such a toy is the red "devil" shown here. 
The device also has a practical use for measuring the pressure of a liquid .

Plastic divers were given away in American cereal boxes as a free toy in the 1950s, and "Diving Tony," a version of the toy modelled after Kellogg's Frosted Flakes mascot Tony the Tiger , was made available in the 1980s.

Experiment description [ edit ] A Cartesian diver toy made from a drinking straw, paperclip and plastic bottle The trapped air in the straw makes the diver slightly buoyant, and it thus floats.

Squeezing the bottle increases the water pressure; as the bubble shrinks, the diver's density increases and it sinks.

The experiment requires a large water-filled bottle, inside which is a "diver":  a small, rigid tube, open at one end, very similar to an eyedropper with just enough air so that it is nearly neutrally buoyant , but still buoyant enough that it floats at the top while being almost completely submerged. Two alternative "divers" can be constructed. One sealed but a flexible bulb, and the other a sealed glass bulb (flashlight minus metal base) with wool threads trailing below. The flexible one will compress reducing volume, and the solid glass one will not change, but air bubbles will be trapped in the fibres, and be exposed to the pressure – thus will change volume.

The "diving" occurs when the flexible part of the larger container is pressed inwards, increasing the pressure inside the larger container, causing the "diver" to sink to the bottom until the pressure is released, when it rises back to the surface. If the container is rigid, as with a glass bottle, the cork sealing the bottle would be pressed inwards or drawn outwards.

Inside an oval bottle A double action diver [ 1 ] There is just enough air in the diver to make it positively buoyant . Therefore, the diver floats at the water's surface. As a result of Pascal's law , squeezing the airtight container increases the pressure of the air, part of which pressure is exerted against the water that constitutes one "wall" of the airtight container.  This water in turn exerts additional pressure on the air bubble inside the diver; because the air inside the diver is compressible but the water is an incompressible fluid, the air's volume is decreased but the water's volume does not expand, such that the pressure external to the diver a ) forces the water already in the diver further inward and b ) drives water from outside the diver into the diver.  Once the air bubble becomes smaller and more water enters the diver, the diver displaces a weight of water that is less than its own weight, so it becomes negatively buoyant and sinks in accordance with Archimedes' principle . When the pressure on the container is released, the air expands again, increasing the weight of water displaced and the diver again becomes positively buoyant and floats.

It might be thought that if the weight of displaced water exactly matched the weight of the diver, it would neither rise nor sink, but float in the middle of the container; however, this does not occur in practice. Assuming such a state were to exist at some point, any departure of the diver from its current depth, however small, will alter the pressure exerted on the bubble in the diver due to the change in the weight of the water above it in the vessel.  It is an unstable equilibrium . If the diver rises, by even the most minuscule amount, the pressure on the bubble will decrease, it will expand, it will displace more water, and the diver will become more positively buoyant, rising still more quickly. Conversely, should the diver drop by the smallest amount, the pressure will increase, the bubble contract, additional water enter, the diver will become less buoyant, and the rate of the drop will accelerate as the pressure from the water rises still further. This positive reinforcement will amplify any departure from equilibrium, even that due to random thermal fluctuations in the system. A range of constant applied pressures exists that will allow the diver either to float at the surface, or sink to the bottom, but to have it float within the body of the liquid for an extended period would require continuous manipulation of the applied pressure.

Divers inside an oval plastic bottle acquire new interesting properties. Indeed, an oval bottle can increase in volume when it is compressed, and if this happens, the drowned diver can ascend.

[ 1 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Panov (2018), pp. 11−16 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cartesian divers .

popular science 2020 JavaScript App for Cartesian diver simulation Java applet showing how a Cartesian diver works Rebecca Hopman and Kathryn Wieczorek, Making Cartesian Divers: Then and Now Richard Frazier, A Philosophical Toy Carrasquer, J., Álvarez, M.V., y Ponz, A. (2014). Exhibition "Dance, dance, you little devils", a view of the History of the Cartesian Devil through images. Teruel: Universidad de Zaragoza, http://web-ter.unizar.es/cienciate/expo/en/index.html Panov, Aleksei (2018).

Cartesian diver NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐m8n25
Cached time: 20250814225644
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.316 seconds
Real time usage: 0.433 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 842/1000000
Revision size: 7914/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 28345/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1848/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 18142/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.231/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17058138/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  374.104      1 -total
 21.14%   79.092      1 Template:Lang
 20.60%   77.061      1 Template:Descartes
 20.18%   75.509      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.32%   49.848      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 12.69%   47.459      1 Template:Short_description
 12.41%   46.415      1 Template:Ambox
  8.53%   31.902      1 Template:Redirect
  8.37%   31.317      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.03%   30.032      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:365443:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814225644 and revision id 1293307673. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cartesian_diver&oldid=1293307673 " Categories : Educational toys Water toys Buoyancy devices Science education materials Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Italian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 00:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cartesian diver 19 languages Add topic

