Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Constitution of 1791 2 Notable persons 3 Architecture 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Polish Enlightenment 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Polski Română Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Enlightenment in Poland ) Aspect of Polish history in the 18th-19th centuries Part of a series on the Culture of Poland History Middle Ages Renaissance Baroque Enlightenment Romanticism Positivism Young Poland Interbellum World War II Polish People's Republic Modern-day People Poles Ethnic minorities Refugees Crime Education Health care Life expectancy Languages Languages Polish Yiddish German Lithuanian Ruthenian Romani ( Baltic Romani North Central Romani Sinte Romani Vlax Romani ) Silesian Kashubian Vilamovian Traditions Mythology Cuisine Lublin Opole Podlaskie Pomeranian Silesian Świętokrzyskie Festivals Religion Roman Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Protestantism Islam Judaism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Hinduism Sikhism Slavic Native Faith in Poland Irreligiosity Art Artists Painters Architecture Literature Comics Authors Poets Music and performing arts Folk dance Theatre Composers Musicians Media Radio Television Cinema Sport Football Handball Horse Racing Motorsport Rugby union Volleyball Winter sports Monuments World Heritage Sites Castles Historic Monuments Symbols Flag Coat of arms National anthem National personification Poland portal v t e The ideas of the Age of Enlightenment in Poland were developed later than in Western Europe , as the Polish bourgeoisie was weaker, and szlachta (nobility) culture ( Sarmatism ) together with the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth political system ( Golden Liberty ) were in deep crisis. The period of Polish Enlightenment began in the 1730s–40s, peaked in the reign of Poland's last king , Stanisław August Poniatowski (1764-1795), went into decline with the Third Partition of Poland (1795) – a national tragedy inspiring a short period of sentimental writing – and ended in 1822, replaced by Romanticism .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Polish Enlightenment, while sharing many common qualities with the classical Enlightenment movements of Western Europe , also differed from them in many important aspects. Much of the thought of the Western Enlightenment evolved under the oppressive absolute monarchies and was dedicated towards fighting for more freedom. Western thinkers desired Montesquieu 's separation and balance of powers to restrict the nearly unlimited power of their monarchs . Polish Enlightenment, however, developed in a very different background. The Polish political system was almost the opposite of the absolute monarchy: Polish kings were elected and their position was very weak, with most of the powers in the hands of the parliament ( Sejm ). Polish reforms desired the elimination of laws that transformed their system into a near-anarchy, resulting from abuse of consensus voting in Sejm ( liberum veto ) that paralyzed the Commonwealth, especially during the times of the Wettin dynasty , reducing Poland from a major European player to the puppet of its neighbours. Thus, while men of the Enlightenment in France and Prussia wrote about the need for more checks and balances on their kings, Polish Enlightenment was geared towards fighting the abuses stemming from too many checks and balances.

Portrait of the Prozor Family , by Franciszek Smuglewicz , 1789 The differences did not end there. Townsfolk and bourgeoisie dominated Western Enlightenment movement, while in the Commonwealth most of the reformers came from szlachta (nobility). Commonwealth szlachta (forming 10% of its population) considered the idea of equality to be one of the foundations of its culture, and reformers fought to expand it towards other social classes.

Religious tolerance was an ideal of the szlachta.

Constitution of 1791 [ edit ] Ideas of that period led eventually to the Constitution of May 3, 1791 and other reforms (like the creation of the Commission of National Education , first ministry of education in the world) which attempted to transform the Commonwealth into a modern constitutional monarchy . Although attempts of political reform were thwarted by the civil war ( Targowica Confederation ) and military intervention of the Commonwealth's neighbours, ending in the partitions of Poland , the cultural impact of that period persevered Polish culture for many years.

[ 1 ] Załuski Library , Poland's first public library , by Zygmunt Vogel , 1801 The ideas of the Polish Enlightenment also had a significant impact abroad. From the Bar Confederation (1768) through the period of the Great Sejm and until the aftermath of the Constitution of May 3, 1791, Poland experienced a large output of political, particularly constitutional, writing.

Important institutions of the Enlightenment included the National Theatre founded in 1765 in Warsaw by King Stanisław August Poniatowski ; and in the field of advanced learning: the Commission of National Education established by the Sejm in 1773; the Society for Elementary Books ; as well as the Corps of Cadets (Knight's military school) among others. In expanding the field of knowledge, there was the Society of Friends of Science set up in 1800 soon after the Partitions. Popular newspapers included Monitor and Zabawy Przyjemne i Pożyteczne (Games Pleasant and Useful).

Notable persons [ edit ] Wojciech Bogusławski - father of Polish theatre Franciszek Bohomolec - poet, writer, publisher, teacher Tadeusz Czacki - education, economy, founder of Towarzystwo Przyjaciół Nauk and Liceum Krzemienieckie Joachim Chreptowicz - Last Grand Chancellor of the Lithuania, journalist, poet, translator, and physiocrat Jakub Jasiński - poet, general, radical supporter of revolution Franciszek Salezy Jezierski - writer, political activist Franciszek Karpiński - poet Franciszek Kniaźnin (Franciszek Dionizy Kniażin) - poet, writer Hugo Kołłątaj - priest, social and political activist, political thinker, historian and philosopher Stanisław Konarski - precursor of education reform, author of O skutecznym rad sposobie Onufry Kopczyński - teacher, precursor of Polish grammar Tadeusz Kościuszko -  military engineer, statesman, revolutionary.

Michał Dymitr Krajewski - writer, educational activist Ignacy Krasicki - one of Poland's greatest poets, writer, bishop, co-organiser of Thursday dinners Stanisław Leszczyński - king of Poland, political activist, writer ( Głos wolny wolność ubezpieczający ) Samuel Bogumił Linde - chairman of Towarzystwo do Ksiąg Elementarnych, creator of Słownik Języka Polskiego Adam Naruszewicz - poet, translator, historian Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz - poet, playwright, independence activist Jan Piotr Norblin - painter Józef Maksymilian Ossoliński - writer, social, science and cultural activist, founder of Zakład Narodowy im. Ossolińskich Grzegorz Piramowicz - writer, philosopher, educational activist Stanisław August Poniatowski - king, co-organiser of Thursday's dinners, great supporter of arts and sciences in Poland, Stanisław Staszic - writer, economist Jan Śniadecki - astronomer, mathematician, philosopher Jędrzej Śniadecki - chemist Stanisław Trembecki - poet ( Classicism style) Tomasz Kajetan Węgierski - poet, explorer Józef Wybicki - political activist, author of the words of Mazurek Dąbrowskiego , Polish national anthem Franciszek Zabłocki - poet, comedy writer, secretary of Towarzystwo do Ksiąg Elementarnych Andrzej and Józef Załuski - founders of first Polish public library , Biblioteka Załuskich Andrzej Zamoyski - kanclerz , politician, author of the Zamoyski Code Architecture [ edit ] Main article: Neoclassical architecture in Poland Roman theater on the Isle (1790–1793), a companion to the Palace on the Water .

The center of the neoclassical architecture in Poland was Warsaw under the reign of Stanisław August Poniatowski .

[ 2 ] Classicism came to Poland in the 18th century. The best known architects and artists, who worked in Poland were Dominik Merlini , Jan Chrystian Kamsetzer , Szymon Bogumił Zug , Stanisław Zawadzki , Efraim Szreger , Antonio Corazzi , Jakub Kubicki ,  Christian Piotr Aigner, Wawrzyniec Gucewicz and Bertel Thorvaldsen .

The first stage, called the Stanislavian style , followed by an almost complete inhibition and a period known as the Congress Kingdom classicism .

[ 3 ] The most famous buildings of the Stanislavian period include the Royal Castle in Warsaw, rebuilt by Dominik Merlini and Jan Christian Kamsetzer, Palace on the Water , Królikarnia and the palace in Jabłonna .

From the period of the Congress Kingdom are Koniecpolski Palace and the St. Alexander's Church in Warsaw, the Temple of the Sibyl in Puławy , rebuilding the Łańcut Castle . The leading figure in the Congress Kingdom was Antoni Corrazzi.

[ 4 ] Corazzi has created a complex of Bank Square in Warsaw, the edifices of the Treasury, Revenue and the Commission of Government, the building of the Staszic Palace , Mostowski Palace and designed the Grand Theatre.

Palaces Łazienki Palace , Warsaw , 1764–1795 Marynka's Palace, Puławy , 1790–1794 Królikarnia Palace , Warsaw , 1782–1786 Gorzeński Palace, Dobrzyca , 1795–1799 Presidential Palace , Warsaw , 1818 Staszic Palace , Warsaw , 1820–1823 Mostowski Palace , Warsaw , 1823–1824 Czartoryski Palace, Puławy , 1840–1843 City structures Działyński House, Poznań , 1773–1776 Zbaraski House, Kraków , 1777–1783 Town Hall, Siedlce , 1766–1769 Guardhouse, Poznań , 1783–1787 Great Theatre , Warsaw , 1825–1833 Commission Palace, Warsaw , 1823–1825 Treasury Ministry, Warsaw , 1825–1828 Bank of Poland [ pl ] , Warsaw , 1825–28 See also [ edit ] History of philosophy in Poland Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Jerzy Snopek, "The Polish Literature of the Enlightenment." Archived 2011-10-05 at the Wayback Machine (PDF 122 KB) Poland.pl.

Retrieved October 7, 2011.

^ John Stanley (March–June 2004).

"Literary Activities and Attitudes in the Stanislavian Age in Poland (1764–1795): A Social System?" .

findarticles.com . Archived from the original on 2011-05-14 . Retrieved 2009-04-23 .

^ Manfred Kridl (1967).

A survey of Polish literature and culture . Columbia University Press. pp. 192, 343.

^ Wojciech Słowakiewicz (2000).

Wielka encyklopedia polski (in Polish). Fogra.

Further reading [ edit ] Butterwick, Richard (May 2005). "What Is Enlightenment (Oswiecenie)? Some Polish Answers, 1765-1820".

Central Europe .

3 (1).

Fiszman, Samuel; Jan Kochanowski (1988).

The Polish renaissance in its European context . Indiana U.P.

ISBN 9780253346278 .

Janowski, Maciej (2004).

Polish Liberal Thought Before 1918 . Central European University Press.

ISBN 9789639241183 .

Suchodolski, Bogdan (1986).

A history of Polish culture . Interpress Publishers.

ISBN 9788322321423 .

Stanley, John "Towards A New Nation: The Enlightenment and National Revival in Poland," Canadian Review of Studies in Nationalism, 1983, Vol. 10 Issue 2, pp 83–110 v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polish_Enlightenment&oldid=1289646533 " Categories : Cultural history of Poland 18th century in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Age of Enlightenment Polish Enlightenment Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 22:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polish Enlightenment 10 languages Add topic

