Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Content 3 Abstracting and Indexing 4 References 5 External links 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 languages Deutsch Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal Journal of Consciousness Studies Front cover of an issue of the Journal of Consciousness Studies Discipline Cognitive science , neurophysiology , philosophy Language English Edited by Valerie G. Hardcastle Publication details History 1994–present Publisher Imprint Academic Frequency Bimonthly Open access Hybrid Impact factor .78 (2011) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 J. Conscious. Stud.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 1355-8250 OCLC no.

32043673 Links Journal homepage Current Issue Online access at Ingentaconnect The Journal of Consciousness Studies is an interdisciplinary peer-reviewed academic journal dedicated entirely to the field of consciousness studies. It is published by Imprint Academic, and was founded in 1994. It was previously edited by Joseph Goguen , and is currently edited by Professor Valerie Gray Hardcastle of the University of Cincinnati .

Background [ edit ] The journal was established in part to provide visibility across disciplines to various researchers approaching the problem of consciousness from their respective fields. The articles are usually in non-specialized language (in contrast to a typical academic journal) in order to make them accessible to those in other disciplines. This also serves to help make them accessible to laypersons.

In contrast to many other journals, it attempts to incorporate fields beyond the realm of the natural sciences and the social sciences such as the humanities , philosophy , critical theory , and comparative religion .

A review of new journals in Nature stated that 'there is no other journal quite like it, and one day we shall look back to its appearance as a defining moment.' (Gray, 1995).

[ 1 ] Content [ edit ] From time to time, the journal publishes collections of thematically or topically related academic papers. These often take the form of a double issue. Recent issues of the Journal of Consciousness Studies cover topics such as animal consciousness, emotional consciousness, grief, indigenous philosophies of consciousness, and introspection.

Some examples of articles published in the journal: "The Astonishing Hypothesis" (1994) - Francis Crick & J. Clark "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness" (1995) - David Chalmers "Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism" (2006) - Galen Strawson "Illusionism as the Obvious Default Theory of Consciousness" (2016) - Daniel Dennett "The Meta Problem of Consciousness" (2018) - David Chalmers "The Real Problem(s) with Panpsychism" (2021) - Anil Seth "Is Consciousness Everywhere (Essays on Panpsychism)" - Philip Goff "Is the Sun Conscious?" (2021) - Rupert Sheldrake "What Forms Could Introspective Systems Take? A Research Programme" (2023) - Francois Kammerer and Keith Frankish .

The journal reports on conferences, notably the Toward a Science of Consciousness (TSC) conference, which is organized by the Center for Consciousness Studies based at the University of Arizona in Tucson. See, for example, TSC 2012.

[ 2 ] Papers from the first Online Consciousness Conference were published in a special issue of JCS in April 2010.

[ 3 ] Abstracting and Indexing [ edit ] The Journal of Consciousness Studies is abstracted in the Philosopher's Index , Social Sciences Research Index, ISI Alerting Services (Includes Research Alert), Current Contents , Arts and Humanities Research Index , Social and Behavioural Sciences, Arts & Humanities Citation Index, Social Scisearch and PsycINFO .

References [ edit ] ^ Gray, Jeffrey (1995). "The Emperor's New Rag".

Nature .

377 (6546): 265.

Bibcode : 1995Natur.377..265G .

doi : 10.1038/377265a0 .

^ "A Thousand Flowers".

Journal of Consciousness Studies .

19 ( 7– 8): 247– 70. July–August 2012.

^ "JCS Journal of Consciousness Studies 17, No.3-4" . Archived from the original on 23 November 2010 . Retrieved 4 January 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Open Access articles External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Philosophy journals General American Philosophical Quarterly Analysis Australasian Journal of Philosophy Canadian Journal of Philosophy Erkenntnis European Journal of Philosophy Journal of the American Philosophical Association The Journal of Philosophy Mind The Monist Noûs Pacific Philosophical Quarterly The Philosophical Quarterly The Philosophical Review Philosophical Studies Philosophy and Phenomenological Research Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Synthese Thought Moral , social , and political philosophy Ethics Journal of Moral Philosophy Journal of Social Ontology Journal of Social Philosophy International Journal of Applied Philosophy Philosophy & Public Affairs Res Publica The Journal of Ethics Philosophy of mind Journal of Consciousness Studies Mind & Language Logic Journal of Philosophical Logic Journal of Symbolic Logic Logical Analysis and History of Philosophy Philosophy of science British Journal for the Philosophy of Science Aesthetics British Journal of Aesthetics Rhetoric Philosophy & Rhetoric History of philosophy Ancient Philosophy Apeiron Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie British Journal for the History of Philosophy Dionysius Epoché History of Philosophy Quarterly Isis Journal of the History of Ideas Journal of the History of Philosophy Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy Phronesis Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval Feminist philosophy Feminist Philosophy Quarterly Hypatia philoSOPHIA Public philosophy Philosophy Now The Philosophers' Magazine Think Philosophers Augustinian Studies Berkeley Studies Deleuze Studies Derrida Today Hegel-Studien Hegel Bulletin Heidegger Studies Hume Studies International Journal of Baudrillard Studies The Journal of Nietzsche Studies Kantian Review Kierkegaard Studies Yearbook The Leibniz Review New Nietzsche Studies New Vico Studies Sartre Studies International Categories and lists Category:Philosophy journals List of ethics journals List of philosophy journals Related The Philosopher's Index Philosophy Documentation Center PhilPapers Philosophy Research Index v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Journal_of_Consciousness_Studies&oldid=1268740682 " Categories : Consciousness Academic journals established in 1994 1994 establishments in Ohio Cognitive science journals Monthly journals English-language journals Works about consciousness Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Bimonthly journals (infobox) Hybrid open access journals (infobox) Articles with outdated impact factors from 2011 This page was last edited on 11 January 2025, at 08:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 languages Add topic

