Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Diving history 2 Fatalities Toggle Fatalities subsection 2.1 Death of Yuri Lipski 3 In media 4 References Toggle the table of contents Blue Hole (Red Sea) 13 languages العربية Cebuano Deutsch Español Français Italiano עברית Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Yuri Lipski ) Submarine sinkhole north of Dahab, Egypt This article is about the famous blue hole on the Sinai peninsula named "Blue Hole". For information on blue holes in general or for links to articles on other famous blue holes, see Blue hole .

Blue Hole Blue Hole seen from above. The area towards the sea is not "The Arch" but a shallow bank called "The Saddle".

Location Dahab , Egypt Waterbody Red Sea Nearest land Sinai Peninsula Coordinates 28°34′19.99″N 34°32′14.55″E ﻿ / ﻿ 28.5722194°N 34.5373750°E ﻿ / 28.5722194; 34.5373750 Dive type Freediving , Open-water , Technical Depth range 6 to 100 m (20 to 328 ft) Entry type Shore Water Salt The Blue Hole is a diving location on the southeast Sinai , a few kilometres north of Dahab , Egypt on the coast of the Red Sea .

The Blue Hole is a submarine sinkhole , with a maximum depth within the hole of just over 100 m (328 feet). There is a shallow opening to the sea around 6 m (20 feet) deep, known as "the saddle", and a 26 m (85 feet) long tunnel, known as "the Arch", whose ceiling is at a depth of 55 m (181 feet) and whose bottom falls away as it reaches the seaward side to about 120 m (394 feet).

[ 1 ] On the seaward side the floor drops steeply to over 1,000 metres (3,300 ft). The hole and the surrounding area have an abundance of coral and reef fish .

[ 2 ] The Blue Hole is popular for freediving because of the depth directly accessible from shore and the lack of current.

The dive site is reputed to have the most diver fatalities in the world with estimates of between 130 and 200 fatalities in recent years.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Diving history [ edit ] Map The Blue Hole was historically avoided by Bedouin tribes people who inhabited the area.

[ citation needed ] The Sinai Peninsula was occupied by Israel from the Six-Day War of 1967 until it was returned to Egypt by Israel under the Egypt–Israel peace treaty in 1979. During the Israeli occupation, the Blue Hole developed a significant international reputation as a dive site. In 1968 a group of Israeli divers led by Alex Shell were the first to dive the hole with modern scuba diving equipment . During the dive, they noticed the underwater arch.

[ citation needed ] Since 1982 the Blue Hole has become very busy and is dived almost every day by recreational divers. Local dive centres take appropriately qualified divers to 30 m (AOW level or CMAS** ) at the El Bells or Bells to Blue Hole sites. The Bells entry is from the shore further along from the Blue Hole.

[ 5 ] At 26 m at the bottom of the Bells is a mini arch that should not be confused with the arch in the Blue Hole itself. The dive is then a wall dive that finishes by crossing the Blue Hole saddle at a depth of 7 m. Recreational divers do not get to see the Blue Hole arch when doing the Bells to Blue Hole dive.

[ citation needed ] Fatalities [ edit ] Memorial plaques for divers killed in the hole, left by families and friends at the site Technical diver passing under the Arch.

The Blue Hole itself is no more dangerous than any other Red Sea dive site but diving through the Arch, a submerged tunnel which lies within the Blue Hole site, is an extreme dive that has resulted in many accidents and fatalities.
The number of Blue Hole fatalities is not accurately recorded; one source estimates 130 divers died during the fifteen-year period from 1997 to 2012, averaging over eight per year, another claims as many as 200.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] This includes some snorkelling deaths at the surface unrelated to diving the Arch.

[ 6 ] The Egyptian Chamber For Diving & Watersports now stations a policeman at the Blue Hole to ensure divers are diving with a certified guide who will make sure safety procedures are followed.

[ citation needed ] The ceiling of the Arch is 55 m (170 ft) deep, which requires suitable training and equipment as 40 metres is generally considered the limit for recreational diving. The Arch presents little problem for suitably equipped and competent technical divers. The main challenge is gas management because any delays or errors at this depth, plus the time to negotiate the horizontal section, will need more than a single tank of breathing gas to do safely. If gas is not carefully planned the diver may lack sufficient gas for the decompression stops or run out of gas altogether.

The main reasons suggested for the accident rate include that the: Notoriety of the site attracts divers and presents a challenge that tempts many who lack the necessary competence.

Accessibility of the site and the clear, warm waters of the Red Sea makes the dive look more benign than it is. At over 55 m, and with an overhead environment, the dive requires competence usually associated with moderately advanced technical certification ; local dive operations require a Tech 60 as a minimum qualification, unless you are on a Tech 60 course with them.

The entry to the Arch is not easy to find because of the indirect line between the Blue Hole and open water. Divers who miss the entry may inadvertently continue to descend past it, while the floor continues on down to well over 100 m providing no visual depth reference.

[ 4 ] Time taken to pass through the Arch may be underestimated. The tunnel appears shorter than it actually is because of the clarity of the water, the light at the outside end and the lack of reference points; divers report that the tunnel appears to be less than 10 m long but has been measured as 26 m.  Moreover, there is frequently a current flowing inward through the arch into the Blue Hole, increasing the time it takes to swim through and increasing gas consumption.

Depth and the time taken to find and navigate the tunnel inevitably makes this a decompression dive requiring decompression stops on ascent in order to avoid decompression sickness (DCS). Also, the rate of diving gas consumption increases with depth and effort, which can lead to divers running out of gas or beginning the ascent with insufficient gas to make the decompression stops required.

The likelihood of nitrogen narcosis causing confusion leading to poor judgement in an already demanding situation is significant at this depth. Although the effects of nitrogen narcosis may be mitigated by using trimix or heliox the Arch is insufficiently deep to make these mixes obligatory and helium may not be available at the site.

Temptation to dive on a single gas tank. The Arch has been dived on single, 11-litre tanks multiple times, but this is dangerously close to the minimum gas requirement for the dive and depends on a fit and relaxed diver with a low gas consumption rate committing no errors or hesitations during the dive. Diving the Arch without a stage tank and without adequate gas planning has resulted in drowning or DCS.

Death of Yuri Lipski [ edit ] A notable death was that of Yuri Lipski, a 22-year-old Russian diving instructor, on 28 April 2000 at a depth of 115 metres after an uncontrolled descent.

[ 2 ] [ 7 ] Lipski carried a video camera, which filmed his death. This has made it one of the most well-known diving deaths in the world.

[ 3 ] The video shows Lipski initiate a voluntary, uncontrolled descent, eventually landing on the sea floor at 115 metres where he panics, removes his regulator and tries to fill his buoyancy compensator but is unable to rise.  At 115 m he would have been subject to severe nitrogen narcosis , which may have impaired his judgement, induced hallucinations and caused panic and confusion . Lipski had a single tank assumed to be air .

Lipski's body was recovered the following day by Tarek Omar, one of the world's foremost deep-water divers, at the request of Lipski's mother.

[ 3 ] [ 7 ] Omar had earlier warned Lipski twice against attempting the dive.

[ 3 ] On the bottom, Omar found Lipski's helmet camera, still intact. The video it contained is available on YouTube, entitled "Fatal Diving Accident Caught On Tape".

[ 4 ] Omar says: Two days after we recovered his remains and gave [his mother] his belongings and equipment, she came to me asking that I help her disassemble them so she can pack them. The camera should have been damaged or even broken altogether because I had found it at a depth of 115 metres, and it is only designed to sustain 75 metres; but, to my surprise, the camera was still working. We played it and his mother was there. I regret that his mother will have this forever... If I had known the footage existed I’d have flooded it. I think the thing that really upset and saddened me about it was that his mom has it now – she has the footage of her own son drowning.

— Tarek Omar [ 7 ] In media [ edit ] Documentaries about diver deaths at the Blue Hole include: Sacred Truth: The Blue Hole of Dahab (2004), by Elena Konstantinou and Svetlana Klenova, NTV (Russia) Monty Halls' Dive Mysteries: The Curse of the Blue Hole (2013), by Monty Halls , Channel 5 (UK) The Deepest Breath (2023) by Laura McGann References [ edit ] ^ "Blue Hole Maps" .

Blue Hole Project . Archived from the original on March 21, 2008 . Retrieved May 4, 2024 .

^ a b c d Grossekathöfer, Maik (July 13, 2012).

"A Visit to the World's Deadliest Dive Site" .

Der Spiegel . Retrieved August 27, 2017 .

^ a b c d e Bower, Edmund (26 August 2017).

"Top diver's death casts long shadow over deep beauty of the Blue Hole" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 27 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 May 2024 .

^ a b c d "The Curse of The Blue Hole" .

Monty Halls' Dive Mysteries . Episode 1. 30 November 2013. Channel 5 . Retrieved 4 May 2024 .

^ Denggis, Markus.

"The Bells Dive Site" .

diveglobal.com [ unreliable source?

] . Archived from the original on 2019-02-13 . Retrieved 2017-11-07 .

^ Sutcliffe, Theodora.

"Fatal Attraction" .

Night Jar Magazine . Archived from the original on 31 August 2014 . Retrieved 4 May 2024 .

^ a b c Ghoneim, Niveen (October 20, 2016).

"Egyptian Diver Tarek Omar: The Keeper of Dahab's Divers' Cemetery" .

Cairo Scene . Retrieved August 27, 2017 .

v t e Blue holes By name Amberjack Hole Blue Hole (Guam) Blue Hole (Red Sea) Blue Holes (Saudi Arabia) Dean's Blue Hole Dragon Hole Great Blue Hole Green Banana Hole Taam Ja' Blue Hole Tablas Island Blue Hole v t e Recreational dive sites Reef diving regions Akumal Aliwal Shoal Marine Protected Area Aliwal Shoal Amed (Bali) Anilao Apo Island Apo Reef Arrecifes de Cozumel National Park Bay of Pigs Belize Barrier Reef Biscayne National Park Bohol Sea Bowie Seamount Bunaken Bunaken National Park Cahuita National Park Calve Island Capurganá Ċirkewwa Cliff Villa Peninsula Cozumel Dhilba Guuranda-Innes National Park Edmonds Underwater Park El Ikhwa Islands False Bay Għar Qawqla Gili Islands Great Barrier Reef Great Southern Reef Guadalupe Island Biosphere Reserve Haql Hol Chan Marine Reserve iSimangaliso Marine Protected Area Sodwana Bay John Pennekamp Coral Reef State Park Kadmat Island Ko Tao Lighthouse Reef Mantanani Islands Malapascua Martin's Haven Marsa Alam Mengalum Molasses Reef Molokini Neptune Islands Osprey Reef Palancar Reef Panglao, Bohol Pescador Island Petit Saint Vincent Poor Knights Islands Porteau Cove Provincial Park Puerto Galera Punta Cana Ras Muhammad National Park Rondo Island Rottnest Island San Andrés (island) San Pedro Nolasco Island Shaʽb Abu Nuħas Shadwan Island Similan Islands Sipadan Socorro Island Sound of Mull St. Crispin's Reef Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area Taganga Tiga Tsitsikamma Marine Protected Area Tubbataha Reef Utila Wakatobi Regency Weh Island Whittle Rock Reef dive sites Azure Window Cod Hole Daedalus Reef Darwin's Arch Devil's Throat at Punta Sur Elphinstone Reef Eyemouth Fanadir Frederiksted Pier French Reef Fowey Rocks Light Gamul Kebir Hilsea Point Rock Inland Sea, Gozo Kennack Sands The Manacles Magic Point Octopus Hole Pope's Eye Portsea Hole Second Valley Sund Rock St Abbs Stingray City, Grand Cayman Wolf Rock Artificial reefs Edithburgh jetty Gibraltar Artificial Reef Merkanti Reef Port Hughes jetty Port Noarlunga jetty Rapid Bay jetty Shark River Reef South Channel Fort Osborne Reef Underwater artworks Cancún Underwater Museum Christ of the Abyss Circle of Heroes Kristu tal-Baħħara Molinere Underwater Sculpture Park Snorkelling sites Fungus Rock Wreck diving regions Bullhead Point Historical and Archeological District Calve Island Chuuk Lagoon Coron Bay Edmonds Underwater Park Shipwrecks of Isle Royale Loch Long Maritime Heritage Trail – Battle of Saipan Michigan Underwater Preserves Pearl and Hermes Atoll Porteau Cove Provincial Park Robben Island Marine Protected Area Scapa Flow Shipwrecks of Cape Town Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area Tulagi Tulamben Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary List of shipwrecks in the Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary Ve Skerries Wardang Island Western Rocks, Isles of Scilly Whitefish Point Underwater Preserve Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary List of shipwrecks in the Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary Wreck Alley, San Diego Wreck dive sites 115 (barge) A HMS A1 HMS A3 USS Aaron Ward Abessinia USS Accokeek HMAS Adelaide Admiral Sampson Adolphus Busch Aeolian Sky USS Aeolus Agat World War II Amtrac Ajax Akka Albert C. Field USS Algol Algoma Al Munassir Amaryllis America USS Anderson Andrea Doria Antilla Antilles USS Apogon Appomattox Aquila Aratama Maru Arctic USS Arkansas Arratoon Apcar USS Arthur W. Radford Atlanta USS Atlanta Australasia B Bärenfels HMAS Bayonet Ben Doran Benwood Bianca C.

USCGC Bibb Binnendijk USS Blenny HMS Boadicea Booya HMSAS Bloemfontein Breda Brian Davis HMAS Brisbane HMHS Britannic Bud Bar Bungsberg Byron C HMAS Canberra HMCS Cape Breton USCGC Cape Henlopen Captain Keith Tibbetts Carl D. Bradley USS Carlisle Carnatic Carthaginian II Cayuga Cedarville Chaudière Christina Nilsson ROCS Chen Hai Chester A. Congdon City of Bangor City of Everett City of Launceston Clan Ranald Clifton USCGC Comanche Comet Constandis HMAS Coogee SMS Cormoran Cornelia B. Windiate HMS Coronation Crusader Cuba Cumberland USS Curb USCGC Cuyahoga D Dania Daniel Lyons David Tucker SMS Dresden D.R. Hanna USCGC Duane Dunraven Dwight L. Moody E Eagle Eastfield Eber Ward Edgar E. Clark HMT Elk Ellengowan USS Emmons SS Emperor RMS Empress of Ireland Erie L. Hackley Espagne Etruria F HMS Falmouth Fifi Fleetwing SS Francisco Morazan Francis Hinton Frank O'Connor F. T. Barney Fujikawa Maru Fumizuki G Gallinipper SATS General Botha USNS General Hoyt S. Vandenberg George A. Marsh George Dewey George M. Cox Georg Thiele HMS Ghurka USS Gilliam Glenlyon Glen Strathallan SAS Good Hope HMAS Goorangai Gothenburg Grace A. Channon Grecian Green Bay Gregory Poole Gunilda H MT Haven SS Henry Chisholm MT Hephaestus Hermann Künne HMS Hermes Herzogin Cecilie SS Hesper Hilma Hooker Hispania Home HMS Hood HMAS Hobart I Igara USS Indra SS Ironsides SS Isaac M. Scott Island City J HMAS J1 HMAS J2 HMAS J4 HMAS J5 James Eagan Layne J.S. Seaverns SS John B. Cowle John M. Osborn SS John Mitchell Jura K SS Kamloops Kashi Maru PS Keystone State King Cruiser USS Kittiwake Kizugawa Maru SMS Kronprinz Kyarra Kyle Spangler L PS Lady Elgin Lady Thetis HMS Laforey SS Lakeland USS Lamson USAT Liberty SS Louisiana Louis Sheid SS L.R. Doty USS LST-507 Lumberman M HMS M2 HMCS Mackenzie Madeira SMS Markgraf SS Marquette Mayflower (scow) Mikhail Lermontov Maine Maloja HMS Maori SS Maori SS Margaret Olwill Marguerite SS Mauna Loa USAT Meigs Mendi MV Mercedes I USCGC Mesquite Metamora SS Midland City USS Mindanao Minnedosa SS Miowera SS Milwaukee USS Mizpah Miztec USCGC Mohawk Mohegan RMS Moldavia SS Monarch SS Monrovia HMS Montagu SS M.M. Drake MV RMS Mulheim USS Muliphen SS Myron N Nagato Niagara Niagara (tug) HMCS Nipigon SS Norman Northerner O Oceana SS Onoko USS Oriskany Oslofjord Ozone P P29 P31 SS Panay SS Papoose Pedernales Persier HMAS Perth SS Pewabic SAS Pietermaritzburg USS Pilotfish Piłsudski SS Pioneer USCGC Point Swift Pool Fisher SS Port Kembla HMS Port Napier Preußen President Coolidge HMS Prince of Wales Q Queen Victoria R R.P. Resor Radaas USS Rankin Rainbow Warrior Regina HMS Repulse RMS Rhone Riva Palacio Robert C. Pringle Robert Wallace USS Rochester Rondo Rosehill Rosinco Rotorua Rouse Simmons Royal Adelaide Royal Charter Rozi Russia S HMS Safari Sagamore HMCS Saguenay Sakawa Salem Express Samuel Mather Samuel P. Ely Sanko Harvest USS Saratoga HMCS Saskatchewan S.C. Baldwin USS Schurz USS Scuffle USS Scrimmage HMS Scylla Selah Chamberlain HMS Sidon USCGC Spar South Australian USS Spiegel Grove Sport Stanegarth Stanwood Stella Stepas Darius HMS St Lawrence Superior City HMAS Swan Sweepstakes T Tahoe USCGC Tamaroa USS Tarpon Thesis Thistlegorm Thomas Friant Thomas Wilson Thunderbolt Toa Maru HMAS Tobruk Tokai Maru Torrey Canyon SAS Transvaal Treasure HMNZS Tui U U-40 U-352 U-1195 Um El Faroud V V 1605 Mosel Varvassi USS Vermilion Vernon Vienna W HMNZS Waikato Walter L M Russ HMS Warrior Washingtonian Waubuno HMNZS Wellington Wexford William C. Moreland Wisconsin USS Wilkes-Barre Y USS Yancey YO-257 Yongala HMCS Yukon Z Zenobia Zealandia Zingara Cave dive sites Cave diving regions of the world Cave dive sites: Blauhöhle Blue hole Blue Hole (Red Sea) Great Blue Hole Blue Hole (Guam) Boesmansgat Cenote Dzibilchaltun Chinhoyi Caves Cocklebiddy, Western Australia Devil's Throat at Punta Sur Engelbrecht Cave Fossil Cave Hranice Abyss Jordbrugrotta Kilsby sinkhole Molnár János Cave Nereo Cave Piccaninnie Ponds Pluragrotta Pollatoomary Ricks Spring The Shaft Sistema Dos Ojos Sistema Huautla Sistema Nohoch Nah Chich Sistema Ox Bel Ha Sistema Sac Actun Uamh an Claonaite Vortex Spring Wakulla Springs Wondergat Zacatón Freshwater dive sites Blue Hole (New Mexico) Blue Lake (Utah) Dinorwic quarry Dorothea quarry Dutch Springs Ewens Ponds Homestead caldera Little Blue Lake Logue Brook Dam Ponce de Leon Spring Rum Jungle Silfra Vortex Spring Wast Water Wazee Lake Training sites Blue Abyss Capernwray Dive Centre Deep Dive Dubai Deepspot Eccleston Quarry Hotel Terme Millepini National Diving and Activity Centre Nemo 33 Seacrest Cove 2 Slickstones Quarry, Cromhall Stoney Cove Swanage Pier Related topics Black-water diving Blue-water diving Low impact diving Recreational diving Scuba diving Scuba diving tourism Underwater archaeology Underwater diving Wall diving Outline of recreational dive sites Category: Underwater diving sites Index of recreational dive sites Portal:Underwater diving Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blue_Hole_(Red_Sea)&oldid=1300729797#Death_of_Yuri_Lipski " Categories : Red Sea Landforms of Egypt Sinkholes of Asia Underwater diving sites in Egypt Hidden categories: All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2024 CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 02:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blue Hole (Red Sea) 13 languages Add topic

