Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Function Toggle Function subsection 2.1 Transmission of texts 3 Grammar and lexicon 4 Modern use 5 Phonology 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Works cited 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Classical Chinese 51 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 贛語 한국어 Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikifunctions Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Literary form of written Chinese This article is about a written language. For the canon of literature written in it, see Chinese classics . For the spoken language contemporaneous with its emergence, see Old Chinese . For the set of modern character forms, see Traditional Chinese characters .

"Wenyan" and "Wen Yan" redirect here. For the Tang dynasty Buddhist master, see Yunmen Wenyan . For the film director, see Vivian Qu .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Classical Chinese" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Classical Chinese Literary Chinese 文言 Region The Sinosphere : China Japan Ryukyu Islands Korea Vietnam Era Originally written c.

5th century BCE – c.

2nd century CE Widely used as a literary language until the 20th century Language family Sino-Tibetan Sinitic Chinese Classical Chinese Writing system Chinese characters Language codes ISO 639-3 lzh Glottolog lite1248 Linguasphere 79-AAA-aa This article contains IPA phonetic symbols.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA .

Classical Chinese Chinese name Chinese 文言 Literal meaning literary language Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin wényán Bopomofo ㄨㄣˊ ㄧㄢˊ Gwoyeu Romatzyh wenyan Wade–Giles wen 2 -yen 2 Tongyong Pinyin wúnyán IPA [wə̌n.jɛ̌n] Wu Romanization ven 去 ghe Gan Romanization mun 4 -ngien 4 Hakka Pha̍k-fa-sṳ vùn-ngièn Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization màhnyìhn Jyutping man4 jin4 IPA [mɐn˩.jin˩] Southern Min Hokkien POJ bûn-giân Eastern Min Fuzhou BUC ùng-ngiòng Middle Chinese Middle Chinese mjun ngjon Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) *mən ŋan Alternative Chinese name Chinese 古文 Literal meaning ancient writing Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin gǔwén Bopomofo ㄍㄨˇ ㄨㄣˊ Gwoyeu Romatzyh guuwen Wade–Giles ku 3 -wên 2 Tongyong Pinyin gǔwún IPA [kù.wə̌n] Wu Romanization ku 去 ven 去 Gan Romanization gu 3 -mun 4 Hakka Pha̍k-fa-sṳ kú-vùn Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization gúmàhn Jyutping gu2 man4 IPA [ku˧˥.mɐn˩] Southern Min Hokkien POJ kó͘-bûn Eastern Min Fuzhou BUC gū-ùng Middle Chinese Middle Chinese ku X mjun Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) *kˤaʔ mən Vietnamese name Vietnamese alphabet Hán văn văn ngôn Chữ Hán 漢文 文言 Korean name Hangul 한문 Hanja 漢文 Transcriptions Revised Romanization hanmun Japanese name Kanji 漢文 Transcriptions Romanization kanbun Classical Chinese [ a ] is the language in which the classics of Chinese literature were written, from c.

the 5th century BCE .

[ 2 ] For millennia thereafter, the written Chinese used in these works was imitated and iterated upon by scholars in a form now called Literary Chinese , which was used for almost all formal writing in China until the early 20th century. Each written character corresponds to a single spoken syllable, and almost always to a single independent word. As a result, the characteristic style of the language is comparatively terse.

Starting in the 2nd century CE, use of Literary Chinese spread to the countries surrounding China, including Vietnam , Korea , Japan , and the Ryukyu Islands , where it represented the only known form of writing. Literary Chinese was adopted as the language of civil administration in these countries, creating what is known as the Sinosphere . Each additionally developed systems of readings and annotations that enabled non-Chinese speakers to interpret Literary Chinese texts in terms of the local vernacular.

While not static throughout its history, its evolution has traditionally been guided by a conservative impulse: many later changes in the varieties of Chinese are not reflected in the literary form. Due to millennia of this evolution, Literary Chinese is only partially intelligible when read or spoken aloud for someone only familiar with modern vernacular forms. Literary Chinese has largely been replaced by written vernacular Chinese among Chinese speakers; speakers of non-Chinese languages have similarly abandoned Literary Chinese in favour of their own local vernaculars. Although varieties of Chinese have diverged in various directions from the Old Chinese words in the Classical lexicon, many cognates can still be found.

Definition [ edit ] The Classic of Poetry , a collection of 305 literary works authored between the 11th and 7th centuries BCE in what is generally termed "pre-Classical Chinese" There is no universal agreement on the definition of "Classical Chinese". At its core, the term refers to the language used by the classics of Chinese literature roughly from the 5th century BCE to the end of the Han dynasty (202 BCE – 220 CE). The form of Chinese used in works written before the 4th century BCE, like the Five Classics , is distinct from that found in later works. The term "pre-Classical Chinese" is used to distinguish this earlier form from Classical Chinese proper, as it did not inspire later imitation to a comparable degree despite the works' equal importance in the canon.

[ 3 ] After the Han dynasty, the divergence of spoken language from the literary form became increasingly apparent. The term "Literary Chinese" has been coined to refer to the later forms of written Chinese in conscious imitation of the classics, with sinologists generally emphasizing distinctions such as the gradual addition of new vocabulary and the erosion of certain points of Classical grammar as their functions were forgotten. Literary Chinese was used in almost all formal and personal writing in China from the end of the Han dynasty until the early 20th century, when it was largely replaced by written vernacular Chinese .

[ 4 ] A distinct, narrower definition of the Classical period begins with the life of Confucius (551–479 BCE) and ends with the founding of the Qin dynasty in 221 BCE.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Function [ edit ] Further information: Adoption of Chinese literary culture The adoption of Chinese literary culture in the Sinosphere amid the existence of various regional vernaculars is an example of diglossia . The coexistence of Literary Chinese and native languages throughout China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam can be compared to the historical literary use of Latin in Europe, that of Old Church Slavonic in the Eastern Orthodox world, that of Arabic in Persia , or that of Sanskrit and Pali [ 8 ] in South and Southeast Asia. However, unlike these examples, written Chinese uses a logography of Chinese characters that are not directly tied to their pronunciation. This lack of a fixed correspondence between writing and reading created a situation where later readings of Classical Chinese texts were able to diverge much further from their originals than occurred in the other literary traditions, adding a unique dimension to the study of Literary Chinese.

Literary Chinese was adopted in Korea, Japan, and Vietnam. The Oxford Handbook of Classical Chinese Literature states that this adoption came mainly from diplomatic and cultural ties with China, while conquest, colonization, and migration played smaller roles.

[ 9 ] Unlike Latin and Sanskrit, historical Chinese language theory consisted almost exclusively of lexicography , as opposed to the study of grammar and syntax. Such approaches largely arrived with Europeans beginning in the 17th century. Christian missionaries later coined the term 文理 ( wénlǐ ; 'principles of literature', 'bookish language') to describe Classical Chinese; this term never became widely used among domestic speakers.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Transmission of texts [ edit ] According to the traditional " burning of books and burying of scholars " account, in 213 BCE Qin Shi Huang ordered the historical records of all non- Qin states to be burned, along with any literature associated with the Hundred Schools of Thought . The imperial library was destroyed upon the dynasty's collapse in 206 BCE, resulting in a potentially greater loss. Even works from the Classical period that have survived are not known to exist in their original forms, and are attested only in manuscripts copied centuries after their original composition. The " Yiwenzhi " section of the Book of Han (111 CE) is the oldest extant bibliography of Classical Chinese, compiled c.

90 CE ; only 6% of its 653 listed works are known to exist in a complete form, with another 6% existing only in fragments.

[ 12 ] Grammar and lexicon [ edit ] Main article: Classical Chinese grammar Compared to written vernacular Chinese, Classical Chinese is terse and compact in its style, and uses some different vocabulary. Classical Chinese rarely uses words two or more characters in length.

[ 13 ] Classical Chinese can be described as a pro-drop language : its syntax often allows either subjects or objects to be dropped when their reference is understood. Additionally, words are generally not restricted to use as certain parts of speech : many characters may function as either a noun, verb, or adjective. There is no general copula in Classical Chinese akin to how 是 ( shì ) is used in modern Standard Chinese. Characters that can sometimes function as a copula in specific circumstances include 為 ( wéi ; 'make', 'do') when indicating temporary circumstances, and 曰 ( yuē ; 'say') when used in the sense of 'to be called'.

[ 14 ] Classical Chinese has more pronouns compared to the modern vernacular. In particular, whereas modern Standard Chinese has one character generally used as a first-person pronoun, Classical Chinese has several—many of which are used as part of a system of honorifics . Many final and interrogative particles are found in Classical Chinese.

[ 15 ] Beyond differences in grammar and vocabulary, Classical Chinese can be distinguished by its literary qualities: an effort to maintain parallelism and rhythm is typical, even in prose works. Works also make extensive use of literary techniques such as allusion, which contributes to the language's brevity.

Modern use [ edit ] A Literary Chinese letter written in 1266, addressed to the "King of Japan" ( 日本國王 ) on behalf of Kublai Khan , prior to the Mongol invasions of Japan . Annotations explaining points of grammar have been added to the text, intended to aid Japanese-speaking readers.

Prior to the literary revolution in China that began with the 1919 May Fourth Movement , prominent examples of vernacular Chinese literature include the 18th-century novel Dream of the Red Chamber . Most government documents in the Republic of China were written in Literary Chinese until reforms spearheaded by President Yen Chia-kan in the 1970s to shift to written vernacular Chinese.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] However, most of the laws of Taiwan are still written in a subset of Literary Chinese. As a result, it is necessary for modern Taiwanese lawyers to learn at least a subset of the literary language.

Many works of literature in Classical and Literary Chinese have been highly influential in Chinese culture, such as the canon of Tang poetry . However, even with knowledge of its grammar and vocabulary, works in Literary Chinese can be difficult for native vernacular speakers to understand, due to its frequent allusions and references to other historical literature, as well as the extremely laconic style. Presently, pure Literary Chinese is occasionally used in formal or ceremonial contexts. For example, the National Anthem of the Republic of China is in Literary Chinese.

Buddhist texts in Literary Chinese are still preserved from the time they were composed or translated from Sanskrit. In practice there is a socially accepted continuum between vernacular and Literary Chinese. For example, most official notices and formal letters use stock literary expressions within vernacular prose.

Personal use of Classical phrases depends on factors such as the subject matter and the level of education of the writer. Excepting professional scholars and enthusiasts, most modern writers cannot easily write in Literary Chinese. Even so, most Chinese people with at least a middle school education are able to read basic Literary Chinese, because this ability is part of the Chinese middle school and high school curricula, and is a component of the college entrance examination. Literary Chinese in the school curriculum is taught primarily by presenting a literary work and including a vernacular gloss that explains the meaning of phrases. The examinations usually require the student to read a paragraph in Literary Chinese and then explain its meaning in the vernacular.

Contemporary use of Literary Chinese in Japan is mainly in the field of education and the study of literature. Learning kanbun , the Japanese readings of Literary Chinese, is part of the high school curriculum in Japan. Japan is the only country that maintains the tradition of creating Literary Chinese poetry based on Tang-era tone patterns .

Phonology [ edit ] Further information: Old Chinese phonology and Middle Chinese Chinese characters are poor at representing actual pronunciation of words and due to lack of reform they rarely reflect later sound changes in words. Efforts to reconstruct Old Chinese pronunciation began relatively recently. Literary Chinese is not read with a reconstructed Old Chinese pronunciation; instead, it is read with the pronunciations as categorized and listed in a rime dictionary originally based upon the Middle Chinese pronunciation in Luoyang between the 2nd and 4th centuries. Over time, each dynasty updated and modified the official rime dictionary: by the time of the Yuan and Ming dynasties , its phonology reflected that of early Mandarin. As the imperial examination system required the candidate to compose poetry in the shi genre, pronunciation in non-Mandarin speaking parts of China such as Zhejiang , Guangdong and Fujian is either based on everyday speech, such as in Standard Cantonese , or is based on a special set of pronunciations borrowed from Classical Chinese, such as in Southern Min . In practice, all varieties of Chinese combine the two extremes of pronunciation: that according to a prescribed system, versus that based on everyday speech. Mandarin and Cantonese, for example, also have words that are pronounced one way in colloquial usage and another way when used in Literary Chinese or in specialized terms coming from Literary Chinese, though the system is not as extensive as that of Min or Wu .

Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese readers of Literary Chinese each use distinct systems of pronunciation specific to their own languages. Japanese speakers have readings of Chinese origin called on'yomi for many words, such as for "ginko" ( 銀行 ) or "Tokyo" ( 東京 ), but use kun'yomi when the kanji represents a native word such as the reading of 行 in 行く ( iku ) or the reading of both characters in " Osaka " ( 大阪 ), as well as a system that aids Japanese speakers with a Classical word order.

As pronunciation in modern varieties is different from Old Chinese as well as other historical forms such as Middle Chinese , characters that once rhymed may not any longer, or vice versa. Poetry and other rhyme-based writing thus becomes less coherent than the original reading must have been. However, some modern Chinese varieties have certain phonological characteristics that are closer to the older pronunciations than others, as shown by the preservation of certain rhyme structures.

Another particular characteristic of Literary Chinese is its present homophony . Reading Classical texts with character pronunciations from modern languages results in many homophonous characters that originally had distinct Old Chinese pronunciations, but have since merged to varying degrees. This phenomenon is far more common in Chinese languages than in English: for example, each of the following words had a distinct Old Chinese pronunciation, but are now perfectly homophones with a pronunciation of yì [î] ⓘ in Standard Chinese: [ 18 ] *ŋjajs 議 ; 'discuss' *ŋjət 仡 ; 'powerful' *ʔjup 邑 ; 'city' *ʔjək 億 ; '100 million' *ʔjəks 意 ; 'thought' *ʔjek 益 ; 'increase' *ʔjik 抑 ; 'press down' *jak 弈 ; ' Go ' *ljit 逸 ; 'flee' *ljək 翼 ; 'wing' *ljek 易 ; 'change' *ljeks 易 ; 'easy' *slek 蜴 ; 'lizard'.

[ 19 ] The poem Lion-Eating Poet in the Stone Den was composed during the 1930s by the linguist Yuen Ren Chao to demonstrate this: it contains only words pronounced shi [ʂɻ̩] with various tones in modern Standard Chinese. The poem underlines how language had become impractical for modern speakers: when spoken aloud, Literary Chinese is largely incomprehensible. However, the poem is perfectly comprehensible when read, and also uses homophones that were present even in Old Chinese.

Romanizations have been devised to provide distinct spellings for Literary Chinese words, together with pronunciation rules for various modern varieties. The earliest was the Romanisation Interdialectique by French missionaries Henri Lamasse [ fr ] of the Paris Foreign Missions Society and Ernest Jasmin, based on Middle Chinese, followed by linguist Wang Li 's Wényán luómǎzì based on Old Chinese in 1940, and then by Chao's General Chinese romanization in 1975. However, none of these systems have seen extensive use.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] See also [ edit ] China portal Taiwan portal Languages portal Classical Chinese poetry Gugyeol Giải âm Sino-Xenic vocabulary Sino-Japanese vocabulary Sino-Korean vocabulary Sino-Vietnamese vocabulary Brushtalk Notes [ edit ] ^ Chinese language terms include 古文 ; gǔwén ; 'ancient writing' and 文言 ; wényán ; 'literary language', as well as 文言文 ; wényánwén ; "literary language writing" in written vernacular Chinese . The term is read as kanbun in Japanese, hanmun in Korean, and văn ngôn [ 1 ] or Hán văn in Vietnamese.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Saitō 2021 , p. XII.

^ Vogelsang 2021 , pp. xvii–xix.

^ Norman 1988 , pp. xi, 83.

^ Li 2020 , pp. 40–41.

^ Peyraube 2008 , "The Classical period proper begins with Confucius (551–479 BC), and ends around the founding of the Qin Empire in 221 BC. The attested language of the period was probably not very different from cultured speech. The gap between the written and the spoken language began to develop in the Han dynasty (206 BC―AD 220) and increased naturally with time.".

^ Pulleyblank 1995 , p. 3, "The classical period proper begins with Confucius 孔子 (−551 to −479) and continues through the Warring States period to the unification and founding of the empire by Qin 秦 in −221. This was the period of the major philosophers and also of the first works of narrative history.".

^ Norman 1988 , pp. 83–84, 108–109.

^ Collins, Steven (2003). "What Is Literature in Pali?".

Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia . University of California Press. pp.

649– 688.

ISBN 978-0-520-22821-4 .

JSTOR 10.1525/j.ctt1ppqxk.19 .

^ Denecke & Nguyen 2017 .

^ Chao 1976 , p. 25.

^ Zetzsche 1999 , p. 161.

^ Vogelsang 2021 , p. 262.

^ Creel, Chang & Rudolph 1948 , pp. 4–5.

^ Pulleyblank 1995 , pp. 20–22.

^ Brandt 1936 , pp. 169, 184.

^ Tsao 2000 , pp. 75–76.

^ Cheong, Ching (2001).

Will Taiwan Break Away: The Rise of Taiwanese Nationalism . World Scientific. p. 187.

ISBN 978-981-02-4486-6 .

^ Creel, Chang & Rudolph 1948 , p. 4.

^ Baxter 1992 , pp. 802–803.

^ Branner 2006 , pp. 209–232.

^ Chen 1999 , pp. 173–174.

Works cited [ edit ] Barnes, A. C.; Starr, Don; Ormerod, Graham (2009).

Du's Handbook of Classical Chinese Grammar . York: Alcuin.

ISBN 978-1-904623-74-8 .

Baxter, William H.

(1992).

A Handbook of Old Chinese Phonology . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-11-012324-1 .

———; Sagart, Laurent (2014).

Old Chinese: A New Reconstruction . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-994537-5 .

Brandt, J. J. (1936).

Introduction to Literary Chinese (2nd ed.). H. Vetch – via Google Books.

——— (1973).

Wenli Particles . Vetch and Lee – via Google Books.

Branner, David Prager (2006). "Some composite phonological systems in Chinese". In Branner, David Prager (ed.).

The Chinese Rime Tables: Linguistic Philosophy and Historical-Comparative Phonology . Current Issues in Linguistic Theory. Vol. 271. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp.

209– 232.

ISBN 978-90-272-4785-8 .

Chao, Yuen Ren (1976).

Aspects of Chinese Sociolinguistics: Essays by Yuen Ren Chao . Stanford University Press. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0-8047-0909-5 – via Google Books.

Chen, Ping (1999).

Modern Chinese: History and Sociolinguistics . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-64572-0 .

Creel, Herrlee Glessner ; Chang, Tsung-ch’ien; Rudolph, Richard C., eds. (1948).

Literary Chinese by The Inductive Method: The Hsiao Ching . Vol. 1 (2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press.

OCLC 4372662 – via Google Books.

———; ———; ———, eds. (1952).

Literary Chinese by The Inductive Method: Selections from the Lun Yü . Vol. 2 (2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-608-18227-8 – via Google Books.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Dawson, Raymond Stanley (1984).

A New Introduction to Classical Chinese (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-815460-0 .

Denecke, Wiebke; Nguyen, Nam (2017). "Shared Literary Heritage in the East Asian Sinographic Sphere". In Denecke, Wiebke; Li, Wai-Yee; Tian, Xiaofei (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Classical Chinese Literature (PDF) . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199356591.013.33 .

ISBN 978-0-19-935659-1 .

Kin, Bunkyō (2021). King, Ross (ed.).

Literary Sinitic and East Asia: A Cultural Sphere of Vernacular Reading . Language, Writing and Literary Culture in the Sinographic Cosmopolis. Vol. 3. Translated by King, Ross; Burge, Marjorie; Park, Si Nae; Lushchenko, Alexey; Hattori, Mina. Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-43730-2 .

King, Ross, ed. (2023).

Cosmopolitan and Vernacular in the World of Wen 文 . Language, Writing and Literary Culture in the Sinographic Cosmopolis. Vol. 5. Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-43769-2 .

Denecke, Wiebke. "A Model for Premodern East Asia?". In King 2023 .

Li, Yu (2020).

The Chinese Writing System in Asia: An Interdisciplinary Perspective . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-90731-7 .

Norman, Jerry (1988).

Chinese . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-29653-3 .

Peyraube, Alain (2008). "Ancient Chinese". In Woodard, Roger (ed.).

The Ancient Languages of Asia and the Americas . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-68494-1 .

Pulleyblank, Edwin George (1995).

Outline of Classical Chinese Grammar . Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.

ISBN 978-0-7748-0541-4 .

Saitō, Mareshi (2021). King, Ross; Laffin, Christina (eds.).

Kanbunmyaku: The Literary Sinitic Context and the Birth of Modern Japanese Language and Literature . Language, Writing and Literary Culture in the Sinographic Cosmopolis. Vol. 2. Translated by Bussell, Sean; Felt, Matthieu; Lushchenko, Alexey; Park, Caleb; Park, Si Nae; Wells, Scott. Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-43346-5 .

Tsao, Feng-fu (2000). "The Language Planning Situation in Taiwan". In Baldauf, Richard B.; Kaplan, Robert B. (eds.).

Language Planning in Nepal, Taiwan, and Sweden . Multilingual Matters.

ISBN 978-1-85359-483-0 .

Vogelsang, Kai (2021).

Introduction to Classical Chinese . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-198-83497-7 .

Zetzsche, Jost Oliver (1999).

The Bible in China: The History of the Union Version or the Culmination of Protestant Missionary Bible Translation in China . Monumenta Serica.

ISBN 3-8050-0433-8 – via Google Books.

External links [ edit ] Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Classical Chinese Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: zh:文言 Literary Chinese  edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia Lewis, Mark Edward (2014).

Chinese Philosophical Texts . University of Stanford.

Eno, Robert (2010).

Wenyanwen Primer . Indiana University.

hdl : 2022/23480 .

Kieschnick, John (2015).

A Primer in Chinese Buddhist Writings . University of Stanford.

v t e Chinese language Sinitic languages Major linguistic groups Mandarin Northeastern Changchun Harbin Shenyang Taz Beijing Beijing Taiwan Jilu Tianjin Jinan Jiaoliao Dalian Qingdao Weihai Central Plains Dongping Gangou Guanzhong Xi'an Luoyang Xuzhou Dungan Xinjiang Southwestern Sichuanese Chengdu–Chongqing (?) Minjiang Leshan Renshou–Fushun [ zh ] Zigong Kunming Nanping Wuhan Gui–Liu Wuming Jianghuai Nanjing Nantong Nanping Lanyin Lanzhou dialect [ zh ] Ürümqi dialect [ zh ] Xinjiang Other Junjiahua Qinjiang Gyami Jin Zhangjiakou–Hohhot Zhi–Yan Wu Taihu Shanghai Suzhou Wuxi Changzhou (?) Hangzhou Shaoxing Ningbo Jinxiang Jiangyin Shadi Taizhou Wu Taizhou Tiantai Oujiang Wenzhou Rui'an Wencheng Wuzhou Jinhua Chu–Qu Quzhou Jiangshan Qingtian Xuanzhou Xuancheng Huizhou Ji-She [ zh ] Xiu-Yi [ zh ] Qi-De [ zh ] Yanzhou [ zh ] Jing-Zhan [ zh ] Gan Chang–Du Nanchang Yi–Liu Ying–Yi Da–Tong Xiang Changyi Changsha Loushao Shuangfeng Xiangxiang Wugang Ji–Xu Yong–Quan Qiyang Min Eastern Houguan [ zh ] Fuzhou Fuqing Changle Gutian Matsu Fu–Ning [ zh ] Ningde Fu'an Other Manjiang Zhongshan Longdu Nanlang Pu–Xian Putian Xianyou Southern Hokkien Quanzhou Zhangzhou Amoy Chawan Taiwan Philippines Penang Medan Singapore Southern Malaysia Teochew Swatow Haklau Pontianak Zhongshan Sanxiang Other Zhenan Longyan Leizhou Zhanjiang Hainan Wenchang Haikou Banqiao Inland Northern Jian'ou Jianyang Central Shao–Jiang Hakka Huiyang [ zh ] Changting Meixian Pontianak Singkawang Taiwan Sixian Hailu Raoping Tingzhou Wuhua Yue Yuehai Guangzhou Hong Kong Malaysia Xiguan Jiujiang Shiqi Weitou Dapeng Yunfu Siyi Taishan Xinhui [ zh ] Other Gao–Yang Goulou Wu–Hua Yong–Xun Luo–Guang Qin–Lian Pinghua Northern Pinghua Tongdao Younian Southern Pinghua Yongjiang Guandao Rongjiang Unclassified Shaozhou Tuhua Xiangnan Tuhua Danzhou Badong Yao Shehua Waxiang Yeheni Huizhou Mai Laobeizi (?) Macro-Bai Bai Cai-Long Caijia Longjia Luren Standard forms of Chinese Mandarin ( Standard Chinese ) Sichuanese Taiwanese Philippine Malaysian Singaporean Other varieties Cantonese Hokkien Hakka History, phonology, and grammar History Old Chinese Eastern Han Middle Chinese Old Mandarin Middle Mandarin Proto-Min Proto-Hakka Ba–Shu Gan Phonology Historical Old Old National Cantonese Hokkien Northern Wu Mandarin Literary and colloquial readings Grammar Numerals Classifiers Honorifics Cantonese grammar Classical grammar Idioms Chengyu Xiehouyu Written Chinese and input methods Literary forms Official Classical Adoption in Japan in Vietnam Vernacular Written Cantonese Written Dungan Written Hokkien Written Sichuanese Scripts Logographic Script styles Oracle bone Bronze Seal Clerical Semi-cursive Cursive Chinese characters Simplified Traditional Punctuation Braille Cantonese Mainland Chinese Taiwanese Two-cell Phonetic Romanization Gwoyeu Romatzyh Hanyu Pinyin MPS II Postal Tongyong Pinyin Wade–Giles EFEO Lessing-Othmer Yale Cyrillization Dungan Cyrillic Bopomofo Cantonese Bopomofo Taiwanese Phonetic Symbols Taiwanese kana Taiwanese Hangul Xiao'erjing Nüshu Input methods Logographic Biaoxingma Boshiamy [ zh ] Cangjie Simplified CKC Dayi Stroke count Wubi (Wang Ma) ZhengMa Q9 Pinyin Google Microsoft Sogou List of varieties of Chinese Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classical_Chinese&oldid=1306041207 " Categories : Classical Chinese Languages attested from the 5th century BC Classical languages Korean language Japanese language Languages of China Vietnamese writing systems Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from May 2024 Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Literary Chinese-language text Language articles with Linguasphere code Language articles with unreferenced extinction date Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing French-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 15:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Classical Chinese 51 languages Add topic

