Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Specialization 2 Work environment 3 Education and licensing Toggle Education and licensing subsection 3.1 Belgium 3.2 Scandinavia 3.3 Spain 3.4 United Kingdom 3.5 Eastern Europe 3.6 United States 4 Professional associations Toggle Professional associations subsection 4.1 ASCE 4.2 ICE 4.3 CSCE 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Civil engineer 18 languages العربية বাংলা Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Kiswahili Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Shqip தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Engineering of infrastructure Civil engineer Tennessee Valley Authority civil engineers monitoring water flow on a scale model of Tellico Dam Occupation Names Civil engineer Occupation type Profession Activity sectors Design and management of structures , transportation systems , infrastructure Description Competencies Technical knowledge, management skills, mathematical analysis A civil engineer is a person who practices civil engineering – the application of planning, designing, constructing, maintaining, and operating infrastructure while protecting the public and environmental health , as well as improving existing infrastructure that may have been neglected.

Civil engineering is one of the oldest engineering disciplines because it deals with constructed environment [ 1 ] including planning, designing, and overseeing construction and maintenance of building structures, and facilities, such as roads, railroads, airports, bridges, harbors, channels, dams, irrigation projects, pipelines, power plants, and water and sewage systems.

[ 2 ] The term "civil engineer " was established by John Smeaton in 1750 to contrast engineers working on civil projects with the military engineers , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] who worked on armaments and defenses. Over time, various sub-disciplines of civil engineering have become recognized [ 5 ] and much of military engineering has been absorbed by civil engineering.

[ 6 ] Other engineering practices became recognized as independent engineering disciplines, including chemical engineering , mechanical engineering , and electrical engineering .

In some places, a civil engineer may perform land surveying ; in others, surveying is limited to construction surveying , unless an additional qualification is obtained.

Specialization [ edit ] Civil engineers usually practice in a particular specialty, such as construction engineering , geotechnical engineering , structural engineering , land development , transportation engineering , hydraulic engineering , sanitary engineering , and environmental engineering .  A civil engineer is concerned with determining the right design for these structures and looking after the construction process so that the longevity of these structures is guaranteed after completion. These structures should also be satisfactory for the public in terms of comfort.

[ 7 ] Some civil engineers, particularly those working for government agencies, may practice across multiple specializations, particularly when involved in critical infrastructure development or maintenance.

Work environment [ edit ] While all civil engineers tend to spend at least some time working "on site", much of the modern civil engineering work is done in offices, working with plans or computers.

Civil engineers generally work in a variety of locations and conditions. Much of a civil engineer's work is dealing with non-engineers or others from different technical disciplines, so training should give skills preparing future civil engineers in organizational relationships between parties to projects, cost and time.

[ 8 ] Many spend time outdoors at construction sites so that they can monitor operations or solve problems onsite.

[ 2 ] The job is typically a blend of in-office and on-location work depending on the focus of each engineer. Most engineers work full-time.

Education and licensing [ edit ] In most countries, a civil engineer will have graduated from a post-secondary school with a degree in civil engineering, which requires a strong background in mathematics and the physical sciences ; this degree is typically a bachelor's degree , though many civil engineers study further to obtain master's , engineer , doctoral and post doctoral degrees. In many countries, civil engineers are subject to licensure . In some jurisdictions with mandatory licensing, people who do not obtain a license may not call themselves "civil engineers".

Belgium [ edit ] In Belgium, Civil Engineer (abbreviated Ir.

) ( French : Ingénieur Civil , Dutch : Burgerlijk Ingenieur ) is a legally protected title applicable to graduates of the five-year engineering course of one of the six universities and the Royal Military Academy. Their speciality can be all fields of engineering: civil , structural , electrical , mechanical , chemical , physics and even computer science .

[ 9 ] This use of the title may cause confusion to the English speaker as the Belgian "civil" engineer can have a speciality other than civil engineering. In fact, Belgians use the adjective "civil" in the sense of "civilian", as opposed to military engineers.

The formation of the civil engineer has a strong mathematical and scientific base and is more theoretical in approach than the practical oriented industrial engineer ( Ing.

) educated in a five-year program at a polytechnic . Traditionally, students were required to pass an entrance exam on mathematics to start civil engineering studies. This exam was abolished in 2004 for the Flemish Community , but is still organised in the French Community .

Scandinavia [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Civil engineer" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Scandinavian countries, "civil engineer" ( civilingenjör in Swedish; sivilingeniør in Norwegian; civilingeniør in Danish) is a first professional degree , approximately equivalent to Master of Science in Engineering , and a protected title granted to students by selected institutes of technology . As in English, the word has its origin in the distinction between civilian and military engineers; before the start of the 19th century only military engineers existed, and the prefix "civil" was a way to separate those who had studied engineering in a regular university from their military counterparts. Today the degree spans over all fields within engineering, including civil engineering, mechanical engineering, computer science, and electronics engineering, among others.

There is generally a slight difference between a Master of Science in Engineering degree and the Scandinavian civil engineer degree, the latter's programme having closer ties with the industry's demands. A civil engineer is the better-known of the two; still, the area of expertise remains obfuscated for most of the public. A noteworthy difference is the mandatory courses in mathematics and physics, regardless of the equivalent master's degree, e.g. computer science.

Although a "college engineer" ( högskoleingenjör, diplomingenjör, or mellaningenjör in Swedish; høgskoleingeniør in Norwegian; diplomingeniør in Danish) is roughly equivalent to a Bachelor of Science in Scandinavia, to become a "civil engineer" one often has had to do up to one extra year of overlapping studies compared to attaining a B.Sc./M.Sc. combination. This is because the higher educational system is not fully adapted to the international standard graduation system, since it is treated as a professional degree . Today (2009) this is starting to change due to the Bologna process .

A Scandinavian civilingenjör will in international contexts commonly use the title of "Master of Science in Engineering" and will occasionally wear an engineering class ring . At the Norwegian Institute of Technology (now the Norwegian University of Science and Technology ), the tradition with an NTH Ring goes back to 1914, before the Canadian iron ring .

Spain [ edit ] In Spain , a civil engineering degree can be obtained after four years of study in the various branches of mathematics, physics, mechanics, etc. The earned degree is called Grado en Ingeniería Civil . Further studies at a graduate school include master's and doctoral degrees.

Before the current situation, that is, before the implementation of Bologna Process in 2010, a degree in civil engineering in Spain could be obtained after three to six years of study and was divided into two main degrees. 
In the first case, the earned degree was called Ingeniero Técnico de Obras Públicas ( ITOP ), literally translated as "Public Works Engineer" obtained after three years of study and equivalent to a Bachelor of Civil Engineering. 
In the second case, the academic degree was called Ingeniero de Caminos, Canales y Puertos (often shortened to Ingeniero de Caminos or ICCP ), that literally means "Highways, Canals and Harbors Engineer", though civil engineers in Spain practice in the same fields as civil engineers do elsewhere. This degree is equivalent to a Master of Civil Engineering and is obtained after five or six years of study depending on the school granting the title.

The first Spanish Civil Engineering School was the Escuela Especial de Ingenieros de Caminos y Canales (now called Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros de Caminos, Canales y Puertos ), established in 1802 in Madrid, followed by the Escuela Especial de Ayudantes de Obras Públicas (now called Escuela Universitaria de Ingeniería Técnica de Obras Públicas de la Universidad Politécnica de Madrid ), founded in 1854 in Madrid. Both schools now belong to the Technical University of Madrid .

In Spain, a civil engineer has the technical and legal ability to design projects of any branch, so any Spanish civil engineer can oversee projects about structures, buildings (except residential structures which are reserved for architects), foundations, hydraulics, the environment, transportation, urbanism, etc.

Mechanical and Electrical engineering tasks are included under the Industrial engineering degree.

United Kingdom [ edit ] A chartered civil engineer (known as certified or professional engineer in other countries) is a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers , and has also passed membership exams. However, a non-chartered civil engineer may be a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers or the Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors. The description "civil engineer" is not restricted to members of any particular professional organisation although "chartered civil engineer" is.

Eastern Europe [ edit ] In many Eastern European countries, civil engineering does not exist as a distinct degree or profession [ citation needed ] but its various sub-professions are often studied in separate university faculties and performed as separate professions, whether they are taught in civilian universities or military engineering academies. Even many polytechnic tertiary schools give out separate degrees for each field of study. Typically study in geology , geodesy , structural engineering and urban engineering allows a person to obtain a degree in construction engineering .

Mechanical engineering , automotive engineering , hydraulics and even sometimes metallurgy are fields in a degree in "Machinery Engineering".

Computer sciences , control engineering and electrical engineering are fields in a degree in electrical engineering, while security , safety , environmental engineering , transportation , hydrology and meteorology are in a category of their own, typically each with their own degrees, either in separate university faculties or at polytechnic schools.

United States [ edit ] In the United States, civil engineers are typically employed by municipalities, construction firms, consulting engineering firms, architect/engineer firms, the military, state governments, and the federal government. Each state requires engineers who offer their services to the public to be licensed by the state.

[ 10 ] Licensure is obtained by meeting specified education, examination, and work experience requirements. Specific requirements vary by state.

Typically, licensed engineers must graduate from an ABET -accredited university or college engineering program with a minimum of bachelor's degree, [ 11 ] pass the Fundamentals of Engineering exam (FE), obtain several years of engineering experience under the supervision of a licensed engineer, then pass the Principles and Practice of Engineering Exam . After completing these steps and the granting of licensure by a state board, engineers may use the title "Professional Engineer" or PE in advertising and documents. Most states have implemented mandatory continuing education requirements to maintain a license.

[ 11 ] Professional associations [ edit ] ASCE [ edit ] Main article: American Society of Civil Engineers The ASCE (American Society of Civil Engineers) represents more than 150,000 members of the civil engineering profession worldwide.

[ 12 ] Official members of the ASCE must hold a bachelor's degree from an accredited civil engineering program and be a licensed professional engineer or have five years responsible charge of engineering experience.

[ 13 ] Most civil engineers join this organization to be updated of current news, projects, and methods (such as sustainability) related to civil engineering as well as contribute their expertise and knowledge to other civil engineers and students obtaining their civil engineering degree.

ICE [ edit ] Main article: Institution of Civil Engineers The ICE (Institution of Civil Engineers) is a professional association that has helped Civil Engineer's in their training and jobs since 1818.

The ICE (Institution of Civil Engineers) founded in 1818, represents, as of 2008, more than 80,000 members of the civil engineering profession worldwide. Its commercial arm, Thomas Telford Ltd, provides training, recruitment, publishing and contract services.

CSCE [ edit ] Main article: Canadian Society for Civil Engineering Founded in 1887, the CSCE (Canadian Society for Civil Engineering) represents members of the Canadian civil engineering profession. Official members of the CSCE must hold a bachelor's degree from an accredited civil engineering program. Most civil engineers join this organization to be updated of current news, projects, and methods (such as sustainability) related to civil engineering; as well as contribute their expertise and knowledge to other civil engineers and students obtaining their civil engineering degree. Local sections frequently host events such as seminars, tours, and courses.

See also [ edit ] Engineering portal Canal engineer Construction engineering Critical infrastructure Environmental engineering Sanitary engineering Geotechnical engineering Glossary of civil engineering Hydraulic engineering List of civil engineers National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying Professional engineer Structural engineer Structural engineering Transport engineering Urban planning References [ edit ] ^ "What is Civil Engineering?" . Department of Civil Engineering and Engineering Mechanics: Columbia University. Archived from the original on 24 December 2015 . Retrieved 17 December 2015 .

^ a b "Civil Engineers" .

BLS.gov . U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. May 2014.

Archived from the original on 2018-06-15 . Retrieved 2015-12-19 .

^ Mark Denny (2007). "Ingenium: Five Machines That Changed the World". p. 34. Johns Hopkins University Press.

^ Florman, Samuel (1987).

The Civilized Engineer . New York: St. Martin's Griffin. p. 51.

ISBN 978-0-312-02559-5 .

^ "Sub-disciplines of Civil Engineering | Faculty of Engineering" . Islamic University of Madinah: Faculty of Engineering. Archived from the original on 12 October 2018 . Retrieved 17 December 2015 .

^ Singh, Amarjit (January 2007). "Civil Engineering: Anachronism and Black Sheep".

Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice .

133 : 18– 30.

doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)1052-3928(2007)133:1(18) .

^ Jamal, Haseeb.

"Importance of Civil Engineering and Application of Civil Engg. in the World" .

www.aboutcivil.org .

Archived from the original on 2019-04-10 . Retrieved 2019-04-10 .

^ Faulkner, A. C.; Sargent, J. H.; Wearne, S. H. (June 1989). "Civil engineers' managerial roles and needs: report of survey".

Construction Management and Economics .

7 (2): 155– 174.

doi : 10.1080/01446198900000019 .

ISSN 0144-6193 .

^ "Faculté des Sciences Appliquées – Ingénieur Civil" (in French).

University of Liège .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 January 2011 .

^ National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying; Licensure Archived 2012-11-01 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved November 24, 2010.

^ a b Civil Engineering Study.com; Requirements for Becoming a Civil Engineer Archived 2015-12-12 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved December 19, 2015.

^ "About ASCE" .

www.asce.org . Retrieved 2024-02-22 .

^ About ASCE Archived 2010-12-13 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Media related to Civil engineers at Wikimedia Commons v t e Construction Types Home construction Offshore construction Underground construction Tunnel construction History Architecture Construction Industrialization Infrastructure Structural engineering Timeline of architecture Water supply and sanitation World's tallest buildings Professions Architect Building engineer Building estimator Building officials Chartered Building Surveyor Civil engineer Civil estimator Clerk of works Project manager Quantity surveyor Site manager Structural engineer Superintendent Trades workers ( List ) Banksman Boilermaker Bricklayer Carpenter Concrete finisher Construction foreman Construction worker Electrician Glazier Ironworker Millwright Plasterer Plumber Roofer Steel fixer Welder Organizations American Institute of Constructors (AIC) American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Asbestos Testing and Consultancy Association (ATAC) Associated General Contractors of America (AGC) Association of Plumbing and Heating Contractors (APHC) Build UK Construction History Society Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors (CICES) Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering (CIPHE) Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA) The Concrete Society Construction Management Association of America (CMAA) Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) FIDIC Home Builders Federation (HBF) Lighting Association National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) National Association of Women in Construction (NAWIC) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) National Kitchen & Bath Association (NKBA) National Railroad Construction and Maintenance Association (NRC) National Tile Contractors Association (NTCA) Railway Tie Association (RTA) Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) Scottish Building Federation (SBF) Society of Construction Arbitrators By country India Iran Japan Romania Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom United States Regulation Building code Construction law Site safety Zoning Architecture Style List Industrial architecture British Indigenous architecture Interior architecture Landscape architecture Vernacular architecture Engineering Architectural engineering Building services engineering Civil engineering Coastal engineering Construction engineering Structural engineering Earthquake engineering Environmental engineering Geotechnical engineering Methods List Earthbag construction Modern methods of construction Monocrete construction Slip forming Other topics Building material List of building materials Millwork Builder's signature Builders' rites Construction bidding Construction delay Construction equipment theft Cornerstone Floor loan Construction management Construction waste Demolition Design–build Design–bid–build DFMA Heavy equipment Interior design Illegal construction Lists of buildings and structures Megaproject Megastructure Plasterwork Damp Proofing Parge coat Roughcast Harling Real estate development Real-estate bubble Stonemasonry Sustainability Topping out Unfinished building Urban design Urban planning Outline Category Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5xcr2
Cached time: 20250817044019
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.537 seconds
Real time usage: 0.674 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2256/1000000
Revision size: 19803/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 70559/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2813/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53556/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.361/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26281820/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  589.094      1 -total
 23.68%  139.487      1 Template:Reflist
 15.77%   92.897      2 Template:Langx
 15.77%   92.884      6 Template:Cite_web
 12.49%   73.574      1 Template:Construction_overview
 12.26%   72.218      1 Template:Navbox
 10.84%   63.863      1 Template:Short_description
  9.46%   55.700      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.81%   51.897      1 Template:Ambox
  7.78%   45.820      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:195520:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044019 and revision id 1304311812. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civil_engineer&oldid=1304311812 " Categories : Civil engineers Engineering occupations Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles needing additional references from April 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Norwegian-language text Articles containing Danish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 07:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Civil engineer 18 languages Add topic

