Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Differences between a quinzhee and an igloo 2 Construction 3 Dangers 4 Lumitalos 5 See also 6 Bibliography 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Quinzhee 6 languages Deutsch Français עברית Nederlands Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canadian indigenous snow shelter Exterior of a quinzhee, facing the entrance A quinzhee or quinzee ( / ˈ k w ɪ n z iː / ⓘ ) is a Canadian snow shelter made from a large pile of loose snow that is shaped, then hollowed. This is in contrast to an igloo , which is built up from blocks of hard snow, and a snow cave , constructed by digging into the snow. The word is of Athabaskan origin [ 1 ] [ 2 ] and entered the English language by 1984.

[ 3 ] A quinzhee can be made for winter camping and survival purposes, or for fun.

A similar, but more elaborate snow house is called a lumitalo.

[ 4 ] Differences between a quinzhee and an igloo [ edit ] Quinzhees typically have an inside height after excavation which allows for sitting or crouching but not standing.

The snow for a quinzhee does not need to be of the same quality as required for an igloo . Quinzhees are not usually meant to be long-term shelters, while igloos can be used for seasonal habitation. Constructing  quinzhees is much easier than igloos, although the overall result is somewhat less sturdy and more prone to collapsing in harsh weather conditions. Quinzhees are normally constructed in times of necessity for survival, so aesthetic and long-term dwelling considerations are normally exchanged for economy of time and materials.

Construction [ edit ] Quinzhees are typically built in flat areas where snow is abundant, on days colder than −4 °C (25 °F). Builders break up layers of naturally fallen snow into powder and thoroughly mix bottom and top layers of snow to increase sintering , thus strengthening the eventual structure. Snow is typically piled 1.5 to 2 metres (5 to 7 ft) high in a dome 3 to 4 metres (10 to 13 ft) in diameter. It is then left for at least 2 hours to sinter, allowing both temperature and moisture in the snow to homogenize and the snow crystals to bond with each other. Packing can speed the bonding process and strengthen the structure. Small sticks, approximately 30 to 35 centimetres (12 to 14 in) are pushed into the structure to act as thickness guides when the interior is hollowed out. According to Halfpenny and Ozane (1989), the wall at the base should be at least 30 centimetres (12 in) wide and at the top about 20 centimetres (8 in) thick, though wall-base thicknesses of more than 60 centimetres (2.0 ft) are possible.

[ 5 ] Excavation may be accomplished more quickly if large blocks of interior snow are carved and slid out through a large, temporary "excavation door." Structural strength increases when all interior wall and ceiling surfaces follow an arched curve, with no flat sections. Once excavation is complete the excavation door can be permanently blocked using previously excavated blocks, and a smaller permanent door can be cut in the most desirable spot.

[ citation needed ] Time and effort are required to hollow out the center of a quinzhee, though these can be reduced by piling snow around a hollow structure, such as a tarp-covered pile of packs or a makeshift tent or dome.

[ 6 ] Melting and refreezing the inner surface of the quinzhee can strengthen it, as it does an igloo ; this can be done rapidly with a lamp [1] or candle, [ 7 ] but body heat is also adequate.

[ 8 ] Allowing the interior temperature to rise above freezing point risks weakening the shelter significantly, especially if the outside air temperature is near freezing. A small hole for air circulation should be poked through the ceiling. To avoid dripping melt-water, irregular or bumpy surfaces can be smoothed to direct the flow of water down the walls to gather around the edges. A non-airtight fabric door cover will minimize the amount of cold air coming into the quinzhee. An empty, well built snow structure, 16 or more hours old, in weather below −12 °C (10 °F) may be strong enough to support a group of adults standing on top of it.

[ citation needed ] Dangers [ edit ] All snow shelters eventually collapse or melt. Quinzhees can collapse from poor snow conditions, warm weather, blowing rain, construction problems (hitting a supporting wall), failure to let the snow sinter long enough, or from people climbing on them. Collapse poses a danger of suffocation for occupants.

Quinzhees should not be used when temperatures are warmer than −4 °C (25 °F) due to risk of collapse. The greatest risk of collapse occurs during the excavation process. Longer sintering time generally reduces risk of excavation collapse. To reduce undue loading on the roof of the quinzhee, the interior ceiling should be excavated first, then the interior walls and floor. One person should be outside the quinzhee while another is digging inside.  Place a shovel, branch, hiking pole, or such near the head of a sleeping person for roof support, to break a falling roof to create an air gap, and/or as a tool to dig out.  One shovel should be left outside to mark the door and aid rescuers in digging occupants out. Some users prefer a marker to be left outside the quinzhee nearest the heads of sleeping occupants to indicate where rescuers should start digging.

Lumitalos [ edit ] A lumitalo is a more elaborate snow-house or building made out of snow in a manner similar to a quinzhee. The term is Finnish in origin, and literally means “snow house”.

[ 9 ] The city of Houghton, Michigan , builds a lumitalo as part of its annual Winter Carnival held by Michigan Technological University .

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Igloo – Type of shelter built of snow Kamakura (snow dome) – Traditional festival in northern Japan Snow cave – Type of building shelter Snow fort – Structure made of snow Bibliography [ edit ] Halfpenny, James C. & Roy Ozanne (1989).

Winter: An Ecological Handbook . Boulder, CO: Johnson Books. pp.

230– 234.

References [ edit ] ^ Allen & Mike's Really Cool Backcountry Ski Book: Traveling and Camping Skills for a Winter Environment , Allen O'Bannon, illustrations by Mike McClelland, Chockstone Press, 1996, ISBN 1-57540-076-6 , pg. 80-86.

^ Streever, Bill (2009).

Cold: Adventures in the World's Frozen Places . New York: Little, Brown and Company. p.

187 .

ISBN 978-0-316-04291-8 .

^ "Does English still borrow words from other languages?" .

BBC News Online . 3 February 2014 . Retrieved 2014-02-05 .

Some examples that the Oxford English Dictionary suggests entered English during the past 30 years include tarka dal , a creamy Indian lentil dish (1984, from Hindi), quinzhee, a type of snow shelter (1984, from Slave or another language of the Pacific Coast of North America), popiah , a type of Singaporean or Malaysian spring roll (1986, from Malay), izakaya , a type of Japanese bar serving food (1987), affogato , an Italian dessert made of ice cream and coffee (1992).

^ Remlinger, Kathryn (2016).

"Say Yah to da Finns, Eh! Linguistically Performing Finnishness at Festivals" (PDF) . Journal of Finnish Studies. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 22, 2022.

^ Winter: An Ecological Handbook', James C. Halfpenny & Roy Ozanne, Johnson, 1989, p. 230-234 ^ "Survival Shelters: 15 Best Designs and How to Build Them" .

Outdoor Life . 17 October 2019.

^ Trigger.

"Quinzee (aka - Snow Cave)" .

www.alpharubicon.com . Retrieved 13 January 2025 .

^ Cruickshank, Dan (2 April 2008).

"What house-builders can learn from igloos" .

^ Lumitalo and other Heikinpäivä events Archived July 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine . Keweenaw Peninsula. February 8, 2002.

^ Houghton's Snow House Archived January 6, 2009, at the Wayback Machine . Keweenaw Peninsula. February 8, 2002.

External links [ edit ] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Quinzhee How to Build Winter Shelters and Survive How to build a Quinzee Snow Shelter v t e Hut dwelling designs and semi-permanent human shelters Traditional immobile Bahay kubo (Nipa hut) Barabara Beehive house Bothy Bunong Burdei Bure Cleit Clochán (beehive hut) Crotto Dugout Earth lodge Funco Girna Goahti Hogan Humpy Icelandic turf house Igloo Jacal Kapar Log cabin Maloca Menstruation Mitato Musgum mud huts Oca Orri Palloza Pit-house Qargi Qarmaq Quiggly hole Quinzhee Rondavel Roundhouse Ruka Sassi di Matera Shieling Sod house Sukkah Tongkonan Trullo Tukul Wigwam, wickiup and wetu Zemlyanka Housing portal Traditional mobile Chum Lavvu Shepherd's hut Tipi Yaranga Yurt and ger Ger district Open-air Beach fale Cabana Chickee Gazebo Lean-to Palapa Pergola Ramada Toguna Modern Beach hut Hexayurt Hopper hut Iris hut Logging camp Nissen hut Quonset hut Jamesway hut Romney hut Rondavel Slab hut Twynham hut Wilderness hut Alpine club hut Mountain hut Winter room Related topics Cabanes du Breuil Circular linhay Earth sheltering Shack Shed Skellig Michael Stilt house Tent Thatching Transhumance Tree house Vernacular architecture Village des Bories Category Portal v t e Native American architecture Styles Inca Muisca Neo-Andean Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Puuc Río Bec San Bartolo Mayan Revival Pueblo Revival Deco Territorial Territorial Revival Building types Barabara Corn crib Chickee Earth lodge Guachimontón Hogan Igloo Jacal Kiva Longhouse Maloca Mesoamerican pyramids ( Triadic Twin-pyramids ) Oca Plank house Pukara Qargi Qarmaq Quiggly hole Qullqa Ramada Ruka Shabono Sweat lodge Inipi Temazcal Tipi Tupiq Wigwam Structures Ballcourt Chultun Cuel E-Group Moki steps Platform mound Rope bridge Sacbe Ushnu Elements Ashlar Corbel arch Roof comb Sascab Sipapu Talud-tablero Other topics Mohawk skywalkers Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quinzhee&oldid=1286088065 " Categories : Buildings and structures made of snow or ice Indigenous architecture House types Traditional Native American dwellings Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 17:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quinzhee 6 languages Add topic

