Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and meaning Toggle Etymology and meaning subsection 1.1 Etymology 1.1.1 Axle hole 1.1.2 'Standing unstable' 1.2 Translation 2 Buddhism Toggle Buddhism subsection 2.1 Early Buddhism 2.2 Chinese Buddhism 2.3 Literal suffering and awakening 3 Hinduism 4 Jainism 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Duḥkha 47 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Bikol Central Български བོད་ཡིག Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar मराठी Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism For the Egyptian food, see Duqqa .

Translations of Duḥkha English suffering, unhappiness, pain, unsatisfactoriness, unease, stress Sanskrit दुःख ( IAST : Duḥkha ) Pali Dukkha Bengali দুঃখ ( duḥkhô ) Burmese ဒုက္ခ ( MLCTS : doʊʔkʰa̰ ) Chinese 苦 ( Pinyin : kǔ ) Japanese 苦 ( Rōmaji : ku ) Khmer ទុក្ខ ( UNGEGN : tŭkkh ) Korean 고 苦 ( RR : ko ) Shan တုၵ်ႉၶ ( [tṵ̂kkha] ) Sinhala දුක්ඛ සත්‌යය [ si ] ( dukkha satyaya ) Tibetan སྡུག་བསྔལ། ( Wylie : sdug bsngal; THL : dukngal ) Tamil துக்கம் ( thukkam ) Tagalog ᜇᜓᜃᜀ dukha Thai ทุกข์ [ th ] ( RTGS : thuk ) Vietnamese 苦 khổ 災害 Bất toại Glossary of Buddhism Duḥkha ( / ˈ d uː k ə / ; Sanskrit : दुःख , Pali : dukkha ) "suffering", "pain", "unease", or "unsatisfactoriness", is an important concept in Buddhism , Jainism and Hinduism . Its meaning depends on the context, and may refer more specifically to the "unsatisfactoriness" or "unease" of craving for and grasping after transient 'things' (sense objects, including thoughts), expecting pleasure from them while ignorant of this transientness.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ note 1 ] In Buddhism, dukkha is part of the first of the Four Noble Truths and one of the three marks of existence . The term also appears in scriptures of Hinduism , such as the Upanishads , in discussions of moksha (spiritual liberation).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] While the term dukkha has often been derived from the prefix du- ("bad" or "difficult") and the root kha ("empty," "hole"), meaning a badly fitting axle-hole of a cart or chariot giving "a very bumpy ride," [ 7 ] [ 8 ] it may actually be derived from duḥ-stha , a "dis-/ bad- + stand-", that is, "standing badly, unsteady," "unstable." [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Etymology and meaning [ edit ] Duḥkha (Sanskrit: दुःख; Pali: dukkha ) is a term found in the Upanishads and Buddhist texts, meaning anything that is "uneasy, uncomfortable, unpleasant, difficult, causing pain or sadness".

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] It is also a concept in Indian religions about the nature of transient phenomena which are innately "unpleasant", "suffering", "pain", "sorrow", "distress", "grief" or "misery".

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The term duḥkha does not have a one-word English translation, and embodies diverse aspects of unpleasant human experiences.

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] It is often understood as the opposite of sukha , meaning lasting "happiness," "comfort" or "ease".

[ 15 ] Etymology [ edit ] Axle hole [ edit ] The word has been explained in recent times as a derivation from Aryan terminology for an axle hole, referring to an axle hole which is not in the center and leads to a bumpy, uncomfortable ride. According to Winthrop Sargeant , The ancient Aryans who brought the Sanskrit language to India were a nomadic, horse- and cattle-breeding people who travelled in horse- or ox-drawn vehicles.

Su- and dus- are prefixes indicating good or bad. The word kha , in later Sanskrit meaning "sky," "ether," or "space," was originally the word for "hole," particularly an axle hole of one of the Aryan's vehicles. Thus sukha ... meant, originally, "having a good axle hole," while duḥkha meant "having a poor axle hole," leading to discomfort.

[ 7 ] Joseph Goldstein , American vipassana teacher and writer, explains the etymology as follows: The word dukkha is made up of the prefix du- and the root kha .

Du- means "bad" or "difficult".

Kha means "empty". "Empty", here, refers to several things—some specific, others more general. One of the specific meanings refers to the empty axle hole of a wheel. If the axle fits badly into the center hole, we get a very bumpy ride. This is a good analogy for our ride through saṃsāra .

[ 8 ] 'Standing unstable' [ edit ] However, according to Monier Monier-Williams , the actual roots of the Pali term dukkha appear to be Sanskrit दुस्- ( dus- , "bad") + स्था ( sthā , "to stand").

[ 9 ] [ note 2 ] Regular phonological changes in the development of Sanskrit into the various Prakrits led to a shift from dus-sthā to duḥkha to dukkha .

Analayo concurs, stating that dukkha as derived from duḥ-sthā , "standing badly," "conveys nuances of "uneasiness" or of being "uncomfortable." [ 16 ] Silk Road philologist Christopher I. Beckwith elaborates on this derivation.

[ 17 ] According to Beckwith: ...although the sense of duḥkha in Normative Buddhism is traditionally given as 'suffering', that and similar interpretations are highly unlikely for Early Buddhism. Significantly, Monier-Williams himself doubts the usual explanation of duḥkha and presents an alternative one immediately after it, namely: duḥ-stha "'standing badly,' unsteady, disquieted (lit. and fig.); uneasy", and so on. This form is also attested, and makes much better sense as the opposite of the Rig Veda sense of sukha, which Monier-Williams gives in full.

[ 11 ] [ note 3 ] Translation [ edit ] The literal meaning of duḥkha , as used in a general sense is "suffering" or "painful." [ note 4 ] Its exact translation depends on the context.

[ note 5 ] Contemporary translators of Buddhist texts use a variety of English words to convey the aspects of dukh . Early Western translators of Buddhist texts (before the 1970s) typically translated the Pali term dukkha as "suffering." Later translators have emphasized that "suffering" is a too limited translation for the term duḥkha, and have preferred to either leave the term untranslated, [ 15 ] or to clarify that translation with terms such as anxiety, distress, frustration, unease, unsatisfactoriness, not having what one wants, having what one doesn't want, etc.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ note 6 ] In the sequence "birth is painful," dukhka may be translated as "painful." [ 22 ] When related to vedana , "feeling," dukkha ("unpleasant," "painful") is the opposite of sukkha ("pleasure," "pleasant"), yet all feelings are dukkha in that they are impermanent, conditioned phenomena, which are unsatisfactory, incapable of providing lasting satisfaction.

[ citation needed ] The term "unsatisfactoriness" then is often used to emphasize the unsatisfactoriness of "life under the influence of afflictions and polluted karma." [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ note 7 ] Buddhism [ edit ] Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e Early Buddhism [ edit ] Duḥkha is one of the three marks of existence , namely anitya ("impermanent"), duḥkha ("unsatisfactory"), anatman (without a lasting essence).

[ note 8 ] Various sutras sum up how cognitive processes result in an aversion to unpleasant things and experiences ( duḥkha ), forming a corrupted process together with the complementary process of clinging to and craving for pleasure ( suhkha ). This is expressed as saṃsāra , an ongoing process of death and rebirth, [ note 9 ] but also more pointly and non-metaphysically in the process-formula of the five skandhas: Birth is duḥkha, maturation is duḥkha, aging is duḥkha, illness is duḥkha, death is duḥkha; Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are duḥkha; Association with the unbeloved is duḥkha; separation from the loved is duḥkha; Not getting what is wanted is duḥkha.

In conclusion, the five clinging-aggregates ( skandhas ) are duḥkha.

Early emphasis is on the importance of developing insight into the nature of duḥkha , the corrupted process of clinging and craving which starts with sense-contact, as described in the skandhas, and how this corruption can be overcome, namely by training the mind culminating in the process of the dhyanas. This is summarized in the teachings on the Four Noble Truths and other formulaic expressions of the Buddhist way to awakening .

Some modern philosophers have emphasized that the cessation of duḥkha is not merely a means to another end but is itself the highest good within early Buddhist ethics. Daniel Breyer interprets the Pāli Canon as presenting the cessation of suffering—not a positive or blissful state—as the final goal. According to this view, “it is not the positive state of nirvāṇa that counts as the ultimate good according to the Pāli Buddhist tradition, but its negative counterpart—the cessation and elimination of suffering.” [ 29 ] Within the Buddhist sutras, duḥkha has a broad meaning, and has also been specified in three categories: [ 30 ] Dukkha-dukkha , aversion to physical suffering –  this includes the physical and mental sufferings of birth , aging , illness , dying ; distress due to what is not desirable.

Viparinama-dukkha , the frustration of disappearing happiness –  this is the duḥkha of pleasant or happy experiences changing to unpleasant when the causes and conditions that produced the pleasant experiences cease.

Sankhara -dukkha , the unsatisfactoriness of changing and impermanent "things" –  the incapability of conditioned things to give us lasting happiness. This includes "a basic unsatisfactoriness pervading all existence, all forms of life, because all forms of life are changing, impermanent and without any inner core or substance." [ 31 ] On this level, the term indicates a lack of lasting satisfaction, or a sense that things never measure up to our expectations or standards.

Chinese Buddhism [ edit ] Chinese Buddhist tradition has been influenced by Taoism and Confucian theory that advocates that duhkha (古:十Ten directions, 口 hole or opening) is associated to the theory of seven emotions of endogenous disease through the formation of the spirit of the po a term that relates to the Western psychological notion of ego or the theological reference to the human soul . This theory is expounded in the application of traditional Chinese medicine for the treatment and prevention of pain and suffering from illness, disease and ignorance.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Literal suffering and awakening [ edit ] Awakening, that is, awakening to one's true mind of emptiness and compassion, does not necessarily end physical suffering. In the Buddhist tradition, suffering after awakening is often explained as the working-out or untangling of karma of one's previous present life.

Hinduism [ edit ] In Hinduism, duḥkha encompasses many meanings such as the phenomenological senses of pain and grief, a deep-seated dissatisfaction with the limitations of worldly existence, and the devastation of impermanence.

[ 34 ] In Hindu scriptures, the earliest Upani ṣ ads — the Bṛhadāraṇyaka and the Chāndogya — in all likelihood predate the advent of Buddhism.

[ note 10 ] In these scriptures of Hinduism, the Sanskrit word du ḥ kha (दुःख) appears in the sense of "suffering, sorrow, distress", and in the context of a spiritual pursuit and liberation through the knowledge of Atman ('essence').

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 35 ] The concept of sorrow and suffering, and self-knowledge as a means to overcome it, appears extensively with other terms in the pre-Buddhist Upanishads.

[ 36 ] The term Duhkha also appears in many other middle and later post-Buddhist Upanishads such as the verse 6.20 of Shvetashvatara Upanishad , [ 37 ] as well as in the Bhagavad Gita , all in the contexts of moksha and bhakti .

[ 38 ] [ note 11 ] The term also appears in the foundational Sutras of the six schools of Hindu philosophy , such as the opening lines of Samkhya karika of the Samkhya school.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] The Samkhya school identifies three types of suffering.

[ 42 ] The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali state that "for one who has discrimination, everything is suffering" ( duḥkham eva sarvaṁ vivekinaḥ ).

[ 43 ] Some of the Hindu scripture verses referring to duhkha are: Hindu Scripture Sanskrit English Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (Verse 4.4.14) ihaiva santo 'tha vidmas tad vayaṃ na ced avedir mahatī vinaṣṭiḥ ye tad vidur amṛtās te bhavanty athetare duḥkham evāpiyanti [ 44 ] While we are still here, we have come to know it [ ā tman ]. If you've not known it, great is your destruction.

Those who have known it – they become immortal. As for the rest – only suffering awaits them.

[ 5 ] Chāndogya Upaniṣad (Verse 7.26.2) na paśyo mṛtyuṃ paśyati na rogaṃ nota duḥkhatām sarvaṃ ha paśyaḥ paśyati sarvam āpnoti sarvaśaḥ [ 45 ] When a man rightly sees, he sees no death, no sickness or distress.

[ note 12 ] When a man rightly sees, he sees all, he wins all, completely.

[ 47 ] [ note 13 ] Bhagavad Gita (Verse 2.56) duḥkh eṣhv-anudvigna-manāḥ sukheṣhu vigata-spṛihaḥ vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ sthita-dhīr munir uchyate One whose mind remains undisturbed amidst misery, who does not crave for pleasure, and who is free from attachment, fear, and anger, is called a sage of steady wisdom.

[ 48 ] Bhagavad Gita (Verse 8.15) mām upetya punar janma duḥkh ālayam aśāśvatam nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ Reaching me, these great souls never again experience birth in this temporal abode of misery, for they have attained the ultimate perfection.

[ 49 ] Jainism [ edit ] Duḥkha is explained in the Tattvartha Sutra , an authoritative Jain scripture from the 2nd century.

[ 50 ] Sanskrit English samyagdarśanaśuddhaṃ yo jñānaṃ viratim eva cāpnoti duḥkha nimittam apīdaṃ tena sulabdhaṃ bhavati janma [For] him who obtains knowledge, which is pure through right worldview, and indeed non-passion, for him there is good birth,even though this is the cause of pain.

[ 51 ] See also [ edit ] Existential despair Four Noble Truths Nirodha Noble Eightfold Path Pathos Samudaya The Sickness Unto Death Suffering Sukha Taṇhā Notes [ edit ] ^ Translations of duhkha : * Nyanatiloka Thera 2004 , p. 61: dukkha (1) 'pain', painful feeling, which may be bodily and mental [...] 2. 'Suffering', 'ill'.

* Huxter 2016 , p. 10: "dukkha (unsatisfactoriness or suffering) (....) In the Introduction I wrote that dukkha is probably best understood as unsatisfactoriness." : [ 3 ] "(...) the three characteristics of samsara/sankhara (the realm of rebirth): anicca (impermance), dukkha (pain) and anatta (no-self)." See also the Anuradha Sutta: To Anuradha ^ Monier-Williams 1899 , p. 483, entry note: : "according to grammarians properly written dush-kha and said to be from duḥ- and kha [cf.

su-khá ]; but more probably a Prākritized form for duḥ-sthā , q.v." ^ Beckwith notes similarities between Pyrrhonism and Buddhism , and argues that the Greek philosopher Pyrrho (c. 360 – c. 270 BC) based his new philosophy, Pyrrhonism , on elements of Early Buddhism , most particularly the Buddhist three marks of existence . According to Beckwith, Pyrrho translated dukkha into Greek as astathmēta .

[ 18 ] Becwith's views are not supported by mainstream scholarship.

^ Harvey (2013 , p. 30): ""suffering" is an appropriate translation only in a general, inexact sense [...] In the passage on the first True Reality, dukkha in "birth is dukkha" is an adjective [...] The best translation here is by the English adjective "painful," which can apply to a range of things." ^ Gombrich, What the Buddha Thought , p.10: "there has been a lot of argument over how to translate the word dukkha; and again, the choice of translation must depend heavily on the context.

^ Contemporary translators have used a variety of English words to translate the term duḥkha ; translators commonly use different words to translate aspects of the term. For example, duḥkha has been translated as follows in many contexts: Suffering (Harvey, Williams, Keown, Anderson, Gombrich, Thich Nhat Hanh, Ajahn Succito, Chogyam Trungpa, Rupert Gethin, Dalai Lama, et al.

) Pain (Harvey, Williams, Keown, Anderson, Huxter, Gombrich, et al) Unsatisfactoriness (Dalai Lama, Bhikkhu Bodhi, Rupert Gethin, et al.

) Stress ( Thanissaro Bhikkhu : Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta , Anuradha Sutta bottom) Sorrow Anguish Affliction (Brazier) Dissatisfaction (Pema Chodron, Chogyam Trunpa) Distress (Walpola Rahula) Frustration (Dalai Lama, Four Noble Truths , p. 38) Misery Anxiety (Chogyam Trungpa, The Truth of Suffering , pp. 8–10) Uneasiness (Chogyam Trungpa) Unease (Rupert Gethin) Unhappiness ^ Unsatisfactory: Analayo (2013), Satipaṭṭhāna: The Direct Path to Realization : "Dukkha is often translated as “suffering”. Suffering, however, represents only one aspect of dukkha, a term whose range of implications is difficult to capture with a single English word [...] In order to catch the various nuances of “dukkha”, the most convenient translation is “unsatisfactoriness”, though it might be best to leave the term untranslated." Gombrich, How Buddhism Began : "The first Noble Truth is the single word dukkha , and it is explicated to mean that everything in our experience of life is ultimately unsatisfactory"; Dalai Lama, Thubten Chodron, Approaching the Buddhist Path , p.279 note 2: " Duhkha (P.

dukkha ) is often translated as "suffering," but this translation is misleading. Its meaning is more nuanced and refers to all unsatisfactory states and experiences, many of which are not explicitly painful. While the Buddha says that life under the influence of afflictions and polluted karma is unsatisfactory, he does not say that life is suffering." Roderick Bucknell, Martin Stuart-Fox, The Twilight Language , p.161: "Thus dukkha at the most subtle level appears to refer to a normally unperceived unsatisfactory quality"; Gombrich, What the Buddha Thought , p.10: "there has been a lot of argument over how to translate the word dukkha; and again, the choice of translation must depend heavily on the context. But what is being expressed is that life as we normally experience it is unsatisfactory." ^ Beckwith: "The Buddha says All dharmas [= pragmata ] are anitya "impermanent" dukkha "unsatisfactory, imperfect, unstable" anatman "without an innate self-identity" [ 12 ] ^ Paul Williams: "All rebirth is due to karma and is impermanent. Short of attaining enlightenment, in each rebirth one is born and dies, to be reborn elsewhere in accordance with the completely impersonal causal nature of one's own karma. The endless cycle of birth, rebirth, and redeath, is samsara." [ 28 ] ^ See, e.g., Patrick Olivelle (1996), Upani ṣ ads (Oxford: Oxford University Press), ISBN 978-0-19-283576-5 , p. xxxvi: "The scholarly consensus, well-founded I think, is that the Bṛhadāraṇyaka and the Chāndogya are the two earliest Upani ṣ ads ....  The two texts as we have them are, in all likelihood, pre-Buddhist; placing them in the seventh to sixth centuries BCE may be reasonable, give or take a century or so." ^ See Bhagavad Gita verses 2.56, 5.6, 6.22-32, 8.15, 10.4, 13.6-8, 14.16, 17.9, 18.8, etc; [ 39 ] ^ Max Muller translates Duḥkhatām in this verse as "pain".

[ 46 ] ^ This statement is comparable to the Pali Canon's Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta ( SN 56.11) where sickness and death are identified as examples of dukkha .

References [ edit ] ^ Huxter (2016) , p. 10.

^ a b Harvey (2015) , p. 26–31.

^ a b Anderson (2013) , p. 1, 22 with note 4.

^ Nyanatiloka Thera (2004) , p. 61.

^ a b c Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4 April 2014, trans. Patrick Olivelle (1996), p. 66.

^ a b Paul Deussen (1980).

Sixty Upaniṣads of the Veda, Vol. 1 . Motilal Banarsidass (Reprinted). pp.

482– 485, 497.

ISBN 978-81-208-1468-4 .

^ a b Sargeant 2009 , p. 303.

^ a b Goldstein 2013 , p. 289.

^ a b Monier-Williams 1899 , p. 483, entry note: .

^ Analayo (2013) , p. 242.

^ a b Beckwith (2015) , p. 30.

^ a b Alexander (2019) , p. 36.

^ a b Monier-Williams 1899 , p. 483.

^ a b c Rhys Davids & Stede (1921) , p. 324–325.

^ a b Walpola Rahula 2007 , Kindle Locations 542-550.

^ Analayo (2013) .

^ Beckwith (2015) , p. 28.

^ Beckwith (2015) , p. 22-23.

^ Walpola Rahula 2007 , Kindle locations 524-528.

^ Prebish 1993 .

^ Keown 2003 .

^ Harvey (2013) , p. 30.

^ Dalai Lama 1998 , p. 38.

^ Gethin 1998 , p. 61.

^ Smith & Novak 2009 , Kindle location 2769.

^ Keown 2000 , Kindle Locations 932-934.

^ Bhikkhu Bodhi 2011 , p. 6.

^ Williams 2002 , p. 74-75.

^ Vinding (2020).

Suffering-Focused Ethics: Defense and Implications . p. 29.

Daniel Breyer, who argues that the cessation of suffering is considered the highest good in the Pāli tradition of Buddhism in particular: "It is not the positive state of nirvāṇa that counts as the ultimate good according to the Pāli Buddhist tradition, but its negative counterpart—the cessation and elimination of suffering." ^ "What Are the Three Kinds of Suffering?" https://www.lionsroar.com/buddhism-by-the-numbers-the-three-kinds-of-suffering/ ^ Bikkhu Bodhi, dead link ^ "Huang di nei jing su wen" .

Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ Soothill, William Edward; Hodous, Lewis (2006).

A dictionary of Chinese Buddhist terms: with Sanskrit and English equivalents and a Sanskrit-Pali index (Repr. - Transferred to digital printing ed.). London New York, NY: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1455-1 .

^ Grebe, Matthias; Grössl, Johannes (13 July 2023).

T&T Clark Handbook of Suffering and the Problem of Evil . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 559.

ISBN 978-0-567-68245-1 .

^ Robert Hume, Chandogya Upanishad , The Thirteen Principal Upanishads, Oxford University Press, pages 261-262 ^ Paul Deussen (1980).

Sixty Upaniṣads of the Veda, Vol. 1 . Motilal Banarsidass (Reprinted). pp. 112, 161, 176, 198, 202– 203, 235, 455, etc.

ISBN 978-81-208-1468-4 .

^ Paul Deussen (1980).

Sixty Upaniṣads of the Veda, Vol. 1 . Motilal Banarsidass (Reprinted). p. 326.

ISBN 978-81-208-1468-4 .

^ Paul Deussen (1980).

Sixty Upaniṣads of the Veda, Vol. 1 . Motilal Banarsidass (Reprinted). p. 305.

ISBN 978-81-208-1468-4 .

^ Sargeant 2009 .

^ Original Sanskrit: Samkhya karika Compiled and indexed by Ferenc Ruzsa (2015), Sanskrit Documents Archives; Second Translation (Verse 1): Ferenc Ruzsa (1997), The triple suffering - A note on the Samkhya karika, Xth World Sanskrit Conference: Bangalore, University of Hungary, Budapest; Third Translation (all Verses): Samkhyakarika of Iswara Krishna John Davis (Translator), Trubner, London, University of Toronto Archives ^ Samkhya karika by Iswara Krishna, Henry Colebrooke (Translator), Oxford University Press ^ Gächter, Othmar (1998).

"Evil and Suffering in Hinduism" .

Anthropos .

93 (4/6): 393– 403.

ISSN 0257-9774 .

JSTOR 40464839 .

^ Bryant, Edwin (2009).

The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali . North Point Press. p. 302.

ISBN 978-0865477360 .

^ Brihadaranyaka Upanishad , Retrieved 16 May 2016 from "SanskritDocuments.Org" at Brihadaranyaka IV.iv.14 , Original: इहैव सन्तोऽथ विद्मस्तद्वयं विद्मस् तद् वयम्न चेदवेदिर्महती विनष्टिः । ये तद्विदुरमृतास्ते भवन्त्य् अथेतरे दुःख मेवापियन्ति ॥ १४ ॥ ^ Chandogya Upanishad 7,26.2.  Retrieved 16 May 2016 from Wikisource छान्दोग्योपनिषद् ४ ॥ षड्विंशः खण्डः ॥ , Quote: तदेष श्लोको न पश्यो मृत्युं पश्यति न रोगं नोत दुःखताँ सर्वँ ह पश्यः पश्यति सर्वमाप्नोति सर्वश इति । ^ Chandogya Upanishad 7.26.2 , Max Muller (Translator), Oxford University Press, page 124 ^ Chandogya Upanishad 7.26.2, trans. Patrick Olivelle (1996), p. 166.

^ Mukundananda, Swami.

"BG 2.56: Chapter 2, Verse 56 – Bhagavad Gita, The Song of God – Swami Mukundananda" .

www.holy-bhagavad-gita.org . Retrieved 21 March 2024 .

^ B.V. Tripurari, Swami.

"BG 8.15: Chapter 8, Verse 15 – Bhagavad Gita, Its Feeling and Philosophy – Swami B.V. Tripurari" (PDF) .

www.swamitripurari.com . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ www.wisdomlib.org (30 September 2017).

"Duhkha, Duḥkha, Duḥkhā: 31 definitions" .

www.wisdomlib.org . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ Boer, L. den.

Early Jaina Epistemology: a Study of the Philosophical Chapters of the Tattvārthādhigama; With an English Translation of the Tattvārthādhigamabhāṣya I, II.8 25, and V . 2020.

Sources [ edit ] Printed sources Alexander, James (2019), "The State Is the Attempt to Strip Metaphor Out of Politics", in Kos, Eric S. (ed.), Michael Oakeshott on Authority, Governance, and the State , Springer Analayo (2013), Satipatthana. The Direct Path to Realization (PDF) , Windhorse Publications Anderson, Carol (2013).

Pain and Its Ending: The Four Noble Truths in the Theravada Buddhist Canon . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-136-81332-0 .

Beckwith, Christopher I. (2015).

Greek Buddha: Pyrrho's Encounter with Early Buddhism in Central Asia (PDF) .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9781400866328 .

Bhikkhu Bodhi (2011), The Noble Eightfold Path: Way to the End of Suffering , Independent Publishers Group, Kindle Edition Dalai Lama (1998), The Four Noble Truths , Thorsons Gethin, Rupert (1998), Foundations of Buddhism , Oxford University Press Goldstein, Joseph (2013), Mindfulness: A Practical Guide to Awakening , Sounds True, Kindle Edition Harvey, Peter (2013).

The Selfless Mind: Personality, Consciousness and Nirvana in Early Buddhism . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-136-78336-4 .

Harvey, Peter (2015). "Dukkha, Non-Self, and the Teaching on the Four Noble Truths". In Emmanuel, Steven M. (ed.).

A Companion to Buddhist Philosophy . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-119-14466-3 .

Huxter, Malcolm (2016).

Healing the Heart and Mind with Mindfulness: Ancient Path, Present Moment . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-50540-2 .

Keown, Damien (2000), Buddhism: A Very Short Introduction , Oxford University Press, Kindle Edition Keown, Damien (2003), Dictionary of Buddhism , Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-860560-9 Monier-Williams, Monier (1899), A Sanskrit-English Dictionary (PDF) , London: Oxford University Press Nyanatiloka Thera (2004). "dukkha".

Buddhist Dictionary: Manual of Buddhist Terms and Doctrines (5 ed.). Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.

ISBN 9789552400193 .

Prebish, Charles (1993), Historical Dictionary of Buddhism , The Scarecrow Press, ISBN 0-8108-2698-4 Rhys Davids, Thomas William; Stede, William (1921).

Pali-English Dictionary . Motilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 978-81-208-1144-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Sargeant, Winthrop (2009), The Bhagavad Gita , SUNY Press Smith, Huston; Novak, Philip (2009), Buddhism: A Concise Introduction , HarperOne, Kindle Edition Walpola Rahula (2007), What the Buddha Taught , Grove Press, Kindle Edition Williams, Paul (2002), Buddhist Thought , Routledge, ISBN 0-415207010 Further reading [ edit ] Harvey, Peter (1990).

Introduction to Buddhism . Cambridge University Press.

Kalupahana, David J.

(1992).

A History of Buddhist Philosophy . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited.

Lopez, Donald S.

(2001).

The Story of Buddhism . HarperCollins.

Nanamoli, Bhikkhu (1995).

The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha: A New Translation of the Majjhima Nikaya . Boston: Wisdom Publications.

ISBN 0-86171-072-X .

Potter, Karl (2004).

The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Vol. IX: Buddhist philosophy from 350 to 600 AD .

Ronkin, Noa (2005).

Early Buddhist Metaphysics: the Making of a Philosophical Tradition . Routledge.

External links [ edit ] Everything Is Teaching Us , Ajahn Chah (2018), Amaravati Publications How does mindfulness transform suffering? I: the nature and origins of dukkha , JD Teasdale, M Chaskalson (2011) Explanations of dukkha , Tilmann Vetter (1998), Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies What Buddha Taught , Walpola Rahula Dukkha , edited by John T. Bullitt - Access to Insight The Buddha's Concept of Dukkha , Kingsley Heendeniya Ku 苦 entry [ permanent dead link ] (use "guest" with no password for one-time login), Digital Dictionary of Buddhism The Buddha Did Not Teach an End to Suffering , Douglas C. Bates v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal v t e Hinduism topics Glossary Index Timeline Philosophy Concepts Brahman Om Ishvara Atman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Puruṣārthas Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Niti Ahimsa Asteya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Dāna Damah Dayā Akrodha Schools Āstika : Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Dvaita Advaita Vishishtadvaita Nāstika : Charvaka Texts Classification Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Aitareya Kaushitaki Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Maitrayaniya Shvetashvatara Chandogya Kena Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Natyaveda Sthapatyaveda Vedanga Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other Bhagavad Gita Agamas Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Minor Upanishads Arthashastra Nitisara Dharmaśāstra Manusmriti Nāradasmṛti Yājñavalkya Smṛti Sutras Stotras Subhashita Tantras Yoga Vasistha Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Sangam literature Tirumurai Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Thiruppugal Thirukkural Kamba Ramayanam Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abhirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Vedarthasamgraha Deities Gods Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Agni Dattatreya Ganesha Hanuman Indra Kartikeya Krishna Rama Surya Varuna Vayu more Goddesses Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Bhumi Durga Kali Mahavidya Matrika Radha Rukmini Sati Shakti Shashthi Sita more Practices Worship Temple Murti Puja Bhakti Japa Bhajan Naivedhya Yajna Homa Tapas Dhyāna Tirthatana Sanskaras Garbhadhana Pumsavana Simantonayana Jatakarma Namakarana Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyarambha Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyeshti Varnashrama Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Vaishya Shudra Ashrama Brahmacharya Grihastha Vanaprastha Sannyasa Festivals Diwali Holi Shivaratri Raksha Bandhan Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami Ganesh Chaturthi Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Pongal Makar Sankranti New Year Bihu Gudi Padwa Pahela Baishakh Puthandu Vaisakhi Vishu Ugadi Kumbh Mela Haridwar Nashik Prayag Ujjain Ratha Yatra Teej Vasant Panchami Others Other Svādhyāya Namaste Bindi Tilaka Related Hindus Etymology List Denominations Law Calendar Anti-Hindu sentiment Criticism Hindu gurus and sants Hindu studies Iconography Mythology Nationalism Hindutva Persecution Pilgrimage sites India Relations with other religions Baháʼí Buddhism Islam Jainism Judaism Sikhism Theosophy Glossary Hinduism by country Hindu temples List Architecture Outline Category Portal WikiProject Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9dnk6
Cached time: 20250818005925
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.095 seconds
Real time usage: 1.308 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7514/1000000
Revision size: 36260/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 269128/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16272/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 183843/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.666/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19267734/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1037.552      1 -total
 19.14%  198.627      1 Template:Buddhist_term
 18.66%  193.578      1 Template:Infobox
 13.85%  143.717     21 Template:Cite_book
 13.52%  140.281      2 Template:Reflist
 12.67%  131.433     22 Template:Lang
  9.20%   95.447      1 Template:Buddhism
  8.96%   92.974      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.24%   85.445     15 Template:Refn
  7.03%   72.903      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8702:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818005925 and revision id 1306490547. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Duḥkha&oldid=1306490547 " Categories : Hindu philosophical concepts Buddhist philosophical concepts Suffering Sanskrit words and phrases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Pali-language text Articles containing Bengali-language text Articles containing Burmese-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Khmer-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Pages with plain IPA Articles containing Sinhala-language text Articles containing Standard Tibetan-language text Articles containing Tamil-language text Articles containing Tagalog-language text Articles containing Thai-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 00:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Duḥkha 47 languages Add topic

