Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Varieties Toggle Varieties subsection 2.1 Metaphysical realism 2.2 Naive or direct realism 2.3 Immanent realism 2.4 Scientific realism 2.4.1 Scientific realism in physics 2.5 Moral realism 2.6 Empirical structure realism 2.7 Aesthetic realism 3 History of metaphysical realism Toggle History of metaphysical realism subsection 3.1 Ancient Greek philosophy 3.2 Ancient Indian philosophy 3.3 Medieval philosophy 3.4 Early modern philosophy 3.5 Late modern philosophy 3.6 Contemporary philosophy 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Philosophical realism 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Banjar Български Bosanski Català Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Patois Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Metaphysical realism ) Philosophical concept Philosophical realism —usually not treated as a position of its own but as a stance towards other subject matters—is the view that a certain kind of thing (ranging widely from abstract objects like numbers to moral statements to the physical world itself) has mind-independent existence , i.e. that it exists even in the absence of any mind perceiving it or that its existence is not just a mere appearance in the eye of the beholder.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] This includes a number of positions within epistemology and metaphysics which express that a given thing instead exists independently of knowledge , thought , or understanding .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] This can apply to items such as the physical world , the past and future , other minds , and the self , though may also apply less directly to things such as universals , mathematical truths , moral truths , and thought itself. However, realism may also include various positions which instead reject metaphysical treatments of reality altogether.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Realism can also be a view about the properties of reality in general, holding that reality exists independent of the mind , as opposed to non-realist views (like some forms of skepticism and solipsism ) which question the certainty of anything beyond one's own mind. Philosophers who profess realism often claim that truth consists in a correspondence between cognitive representations and reality.

[ 9 ] Realists tend to believe that whatever we believe now is only an approximation of reality but that the accuracy and fullness of understanding can be improved.

[ 10 ] In some contexts, realism is contrasted with idealism . Today it is more often contrasted with anti-realism , for example in the philosophy of science .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The oldest use of the term "realism" appeared in medieval scholastic interpretations and adaptations of ancient Greek philosophy .

The position was also held among many ancient Indian philosophies.

[ 13 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term comes from Late Latin realis "real" and was first used in the abstract metaphysical sense by Immanuel Kant in 1781 ( CPR A 369).

[ 14 ] Varieties [ edit ] Metaphysical realism [ edit ] See also: Metaphysical anti-realism and Mathematical Platonism Metaphysical realism maintains that "whatever exists does so, and has the properties and relations it does, independently of deriving its existence or nature from being thought of or experienced." [ 15 ] In other words, an objective reality exists (not merely one or more subjective realities).

Naive or direct realism [ edit ] Main article: Naive realism See also: Indirect realism Naive realism , also known as direct realism, is a philosophy of mind rooted in a common sense theory of perception that claims that the senses provide us with direct awareness of the external world.

Direct Realism Perceptual realism is the common sense view that tables, chairs and cups of coffee exist independently of perceivers. Direct realists also claim that it is with such objects that we directly engage. The objects of perception include such familiar items as paper clips, suns and olive oil tins. It is these things themselves that we see, smell, touch, taste and listen to. There are, however, two versions of direct realism: naïve direct realism and scientific direct realism. They differ in the properties they claim the objects of perception possess when they are not being perceived. Naïve realism claims that such objects continue to have all the properties that we usually perceive them to have, properties such as yellowness, warmth, and mass. Scientific realism, however, claims that some of the properties an object is perceived as having are dependent on the perceiver, and that unperceived objects should not be conceived as retaining them. Such a stance has a long history: By convention sweet and by convention bitter, by convention hot, by convention cold, by convention colour; in reality atoms and void. [Democritus, c. 460-370 BCE, quoted by Sextus Empiricus in Barnes, 1987, pp. 252-253.] [ 16 ] In contrast, some forms of idealism assert that no world exists apart from mind-dependent ideas and some forms of skepticism say we cannot trust our senses. The naive realist view is that objects have properties, such as texture, smell, taste and colour, that are usually perceived absolutely correctly. We perceive them as they really are.

Immanent realism [ edit ] Main article: Immanent realism Immanent realism is the ontological understanding which holds that universals are immanently real within particulars themselves, not in a separate realm, and not mere names.  Most often associated with Aristotle and the Aristotelian tradition.

Scientific realism [ edit ] Main article: Scientific realism Scientific realism is, at the most general level, the view that the world described by science is the real world, as it is, independent of what we might take it to be.  Within philosophy of science , it is often framed as an answer to the question "how is the success of science to be explained?" The debate over what the success of science involves centers primarily on the status of unobservable entities apparently talked about by scientific theories . Generally, those who are scientific realists assert that one can make reliable claims about unobservables (viz., that they have the same ontological status) as observables.

Analytic philosophers generally have a commitment to scientific realism, in the sense of regarding the scientific method as a reliable guide to the nature of reality. The main alternative to scientific realism is instrumentalism .

[ 17 ] Scientific realism in physics [ edit ] Realism in physics (especially quantum mechanics ) is the claim that the world is in some sense mind-independent: that even if the results of a possible measurement do not pre-exist the act of measurement, that does not require that they are the creation of the observer (contrary to the " consciousness causes collapse " interpretation of quantum mechanics ). That interpretation of quantum mechanics, on the other hand, states that the wave function is already the full description of reality. The different possible realities described by the wave function are equally true. The observer collapses the wave function into their own reality. One's reality can be mind-dependent under this interpretation of quantum mechanics.

Moral realism [ edit ] Main article: Moral realism Moral realism is the position that ethical sentences express propositions that refer to objective features of the world.

Empirical structure realism [ edit ] Empirical structure realism (ESR) holds that what is preserved across scientific theory change is not particular entities or laws but so-called empirical structures. The empirical structure of a theory is defined as the partition of space–time regions which share the same empirically adequate descriptions of the theory. On this view, later physical theories refine the empirical structures of earlier ones, so that continuity lies in the ability to distinguish empirical situations rather than in retaining specific ontological commitments.

Balazs Gyenis argues that an "optimistic meta-induction" provides a realist stance that avoids problems associated with discarded theoretical entities.

[ 18 ] Aesthetic realism [ edit ] Aesthetic realism (not to be confused with Aesthetic Realism, the philosophy developed by Eli Siegel , or "realism" in the arts ) is the view that there are mind-independent aesthetic facts.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] History of metaphysical realism [ edit ] See also: History of naturalism Ancient Greek philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Platonic realism Plato (left) and Aristotle (right), a detail of The School of Athens , a fresco by Raphael . In Plato's metaphysics, ever-unchanging Forms , or Ideas, exist apart from particular physical things, and are related to them as their prototype or exemplar . Aristotle's philosophy of reality also aims at the universal . Aristotle finds the universal, which he calls essence , in the commonalities of particular things.

In ancient Greek philosophy , realist doctrines about universals were proposed by Plato and Aristotle .

[ 21 ] Platonic realism is a radical form of realism regarding the existence of abstract objects , including universals , which are often translated from Plato's works as "Forms". Since Plato frames Forms as ideas that are literally real (existing even outside of human minds), this stance is also called Platonic idealism . This should not be confused with "idealistic" in the ordinary sense of "optimistic" or with other types of philosophical idealism , as presented by philosophers such as George Berkeley . As Platonic abstractions are not spatial, temporal, or subjectively mental, they are arguably not compatible with the emphasis of Berkeley's idealism grounded in mental existence. Plato's Forms include numbers and geometrical figures, making his theory also include mathematical realism ; they also include the Form of the Good , making it additionally include ethical realism .

In Aristotle's more modest view, the existence of universals (like "blueness") is dependent on the particulars that exemplify them (like a particular "blue bird", "blue piece of paper", "blue robe", etc.), and those particulars exist independent of any minds: classic metaphysical realism .

Ancient Indian philosophy [ edit ] There were many ancient Indian realist schools, such as the Mimamsa, Vishishtadvaita, Dvaita, Nyaya, Yoga, Samkhya, Sauntrantika, Jain, Vaisesika, and others. They argued for their realist positions, and heavily criticized idealism, like that of the Yogachara , and composed refutations of the Yogacara position.

[ 22 ] Medieval philosophy [ edit ] Medieval realism developed out of debates over the problem of universals .

[ 23 ] Universals are terms or properties that can be applied to many things, such as "red", "beauty", "five", or "dog". Realism (also known as exaggerated realism ) in this context, contrasted with conceptualism and nominalism , holds that such universals really exist, independently and somehow prior to the world.

Moderate realism holds that they exist, but only insofar as they are instantiated in specific things; they do not exist separately from the specific thing. Conceptualism holds that they exist, but only in the mind, while nominalism holds that universals do not "exist" at all but are no more than words ( flatus vocis ) that describe specific objects.

Proponents of moderate realism included Thomas Aquinas , Bonaventure , and Duns Scotus (cf.

Scotist realism ).

[ 24 ] Early modern philosophy [ edit ] In early modern philosophy , Scottish Common Sense Realism was a school of philosophy which sought to defend naive realism against philosophical paradox and scepticism , arguing that matters of common sense are within the reach of common understanding and that common-sense beliefs even govern the lives and thoughts of those who hold non-commonsensical beliefs. It originated in the ideas of the most prominent members of the Scottish School of Common Sense, Thomas Reid , Adam Ferguson and Dugald Stewart , during the 18th century Scottish Enlightenment and flourished in the late 18th and early 19th centuries in Scotland and America.

The roots of Scottish Common Sense Realism can be found in responses to such philosophers as John Locke , George Berkeley , and David Hume . The approach was a response to the "ideal system" that began with Descartes' concept of the limitations of sense experience and led Locke and Hume to a skepticism that called religion and the evidence of the senses equally into question. The common sense realists found skepticism to be absurd and so contrary to common experience that it had to be rejected. They taught that ordinary experiences provide intuitively certain assurance of the existence of the self, of real objects that could be seen and felt and of certain "first principles" upon which sound morality and religious beliefs could be established. Its basic principle was enunciated by its founder and greatest figure, Thomas Reid: [ 25 ] If there are certain principles, as I think there are, which the constitution of our nature leads us to believe, and which we are under a necessity to take for granted in the common concerns of life, without being able to give a reason for them—these are what we call the principles of common sense; and what is manifestly contrary to them, is what we call absurd.

Late modern philosophy [ edit ] See also: Objective idealism , Transcendental realism (Schelling) , and Transcendental realism (Schopenhauer) In late modern philosophy , a notable school of thought advocating metaphysical realism was Austrian realism . Its members included Franz Brentano , [ 26 ] Alexius Meinong , [ 26 ] Vittorio Benussi , [ 26 ] Ernst Mally , [ 27 ] and early Edmund Husserl .

[ 26 ] These thinkers stressed the objectivity of truth and its independence of the nature of those who judge it.

[ 28 ] (See also Graz School .) Dialectical materialism , a philosophy of nature based on the writings of late modern philosophers Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels , is interpreted to be a form of ontological realism.

[ 29 ] According to Michael Resnik , Gottlob Frege 's work after 1891 can be interpreted as a contribution to realism.

[ 30 ] Contemporary philosophy [ edit ] See also: Structural realism (philosophy of science) , Australian realism , Modal realism , Critical realism (philosophy of the social sciences) , and New realism (philosophy) In contemporary analytic philosophy , Bertrand Russell , [ 31 ] Ludwig Wittgenstein , [ 32 ] J. L. Austin , [ 33 ] Karl Popper , [ 34 ] [ 35 ] and Gustav Bergmann [ 36 ] espoused metaphysical realism.

Hilary Putnam initially espoused metaphysical realism, [ 37 ] but he later embraced a form of anti-realism that he termed " internal realism ." [ 38 ] Conceptualist realism (a view put forward by David Wiggins ) is a form of realism, according to which our conceptual framework maps reality.

[ 39 ] Speculative realism is a movement in contemporary continental -inspired philosophy [ 40 ] that defines itself loosely in its stance of metaphysical realism against the dominant forms of post-Kantian philosophy .

[ 41 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-realism Critical realism Dialectical realism Epistemological realism Extended modal realism Legal realism Modal realism Objectivism Philosophy of social science Principle of bivalence Problem of future contingents Realism (disambiguation) Truth-value link realism Speculative realism Direct and indirect realism Notes [ edit ] ^ Craig, Edward (1996). "Realism and antirealism".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

^ Miller, Alexander (2019).

"Realism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 30 December 2020 .

^ Honderich, Ted (2005). "realism and anti-realism".

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press.

^ Elkana, Yehuda (1978).

"Two-Tier-Thinking: Philosophical Realism and Historical Relativism" .

Social Studies of Science .

8 (3): 309– 326.

doi : 10.1177/030631277800800304 .

ISSN 0306-3127 .

JSTOR 284907 .

^ Khlentzos, Drew (2016).

"Challenges to Metaphysical Realism" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.).

^ Kasavin, Ilya (2015-10-02).

"Philosophical Realism: The Challenges for Social Epistemologists" .

Social Epistemology .

29 (4): 431– 444.

doi : 10.1080/02691728.2014.971913 .

ISSN 0269-1728 .

^ Conway, Daniel (1999). "Beyond Truth and Appearance: Nietzsche's Emergent Realism". In Babich, Babette E. (ed.).

Nietzsche, Epistemology, and Philosophy of Science . Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Vol. 204. Dordrecht: Springer. pp.

109– 122.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-017-2428-9_9 .

ISBN 978-90-481-5234-6 .

^ Petrov, Kristian (2019).

" 'Strike out, right and left!': a conceptual-historical analysis of 1860s Russian nihilism and its notion of negation" .

Stud East Eur Thought .

71 (2): 73– 97.

doi : 10.1007/s11212-019-09319-4 .

S2CID 150893870 .

^ The statement veritas est adaequatio rei et intellectus ("truth is the adequation of thought and thing") was defended by Thomas Aquinas .

^ Blackburn p. 188 ^ Ronen, Ruth (1995).

"Philosophical Realism and Postmodern Antirealism" .

Style .

29 (2): 184– 200.

ISSN 0039-4238 .

JSTOR 42946277 .

^ Boyd, Richard.

"Realism, approximate truth, and philosophical method" .

University of Minnesota Digital Conservancy .

^ Sinha, Jadunath Indian Realism p. 15. Routledge, 2024.

^ Heidemann, D.

"Kant and the forms of realism" .

Synthese (2019).

^ Laird Addis, Greg Jesson, Erwin Tegtmeier (eds.), Ontology and Analysis: Essays and Recollections about Gustav Bergmann , Walter de Gruyter, 2007, p. 107.

^ "Perception, Objects of | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ Scientific Realism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) ^ Gyenis, Balazs (2025). "Empirical structure physicalism and realism, Hempel's dilemma, and an optimistic meta-induction".

Synthese .

206 (76).

doi : 10.1007/s11229-025-05160-x .

^ Nick Zangwill, The Metaphysics of Beauty , Cornell University Press, 2001, p. 3.

^ Gavin McIntosh (2004). "Review: The Metaphysics of Beauty".

Mind .

113 (449): 221– 226.

doi : 10.1093/mind/113.449.221 .

(subscription required) ^ Realism – philosophy – Britannica.com ^ Sinha, Jadunath Indian Realism p. 15. Routledge, 2024.

^ John Marenbon, Medieval Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction , Oxford University Press, 2016, p. 72.

^ Nominalism, Realism, Conceptualism – Catholic Encyclopedia (1913) ^ Cuneo and Woudenberg, eds.

The Cambridge companion to Thomas Reid (2004) p 85 ^ a b c d Gestalt Theory: Official Journal of the Society for Gestalt Theory and Its Applications (GTA) , 22 , Steinkopff, 2000, p. 94: "Attention has varied between Continental Phenomenology (late Husserl, Merleau-Ponty) and Austrian Realism (Brentano, Meinong, Benussi, early Husserl)".

^ Liliana Albertazzi, Dale Jacquette, The School of Alexius Meinong , Routledge, 2017, p. 191.

^ Mark Textor, The Austrian Contribution to Analytic Philosophy , Routledge, 2006, pp. 170–1: "[Husserl argues in the Logical Investigations that the rightness of a judgement or proposition] shows itself in our experience of self-evidence ( Evidenz ), which term Husserl takes from Brentano, but makes criterial not of truth per se but of our most secure awareness that things are as we take them to be, when the object of judgement, the state of affairs , is given most fully or adequately. ... In his struggle to overcome relativism, especially psychologism, Husserl stressed the objectivity of truth and its independence of the nature of those who judge it ... A proposition is true not because of some fact about a thinker but because of an objectively existing abstract proposition's relation to something that is not a proposition, namely a state of affairs." ^ Sean Creaven, Marxism and Realism: A Materialistic Application of Realism in the Social Sciences , Routledge, 2012, p. 33.

^ Michael Resnik , "II. Frege as Idealist and then Realist," Inquiry 22 (1–4):350–357 (1979).

^ Bertrand Russell, Philosophy of Logical Atomism , Open Court, 1998 [1918].

^ Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , Routledge 2001 [1921].

^ Austin, J. L., 1950, "Truth", reprinted in Philosophical Papers , 3rd ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press 1979, 117–33.

^ Karl Popper , Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge , 1963.

^ Thornton, Stephen (2015-01-01). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Karl Popper (Winter 2015 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

("Popper professes to be anti-conventionalist, and his commitment to the correspondence theory of truth places him firmly within the realist's camp.") ^ Gustav Bergmann , Logic and Reality , Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1964; Gustav Bergmann, Realism: A Critique of Brentano and Meinong , Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1967.

^ Putnam, H., Realism and Reason. Philosophical Papers, vol. 3.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.

^ Putnam, H.

Realism with a Human Face . Edited by James Conant. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1990, p. vii.

^ A. M. Ferner, Organisms and Personal Identity: Individuation and the Work of David Wiggins , Routledge, 2016, p. 28.

^ Paul John Ennis, Post-continental Voices: Selected Interviews , John Hunt Publishing, 2010, p. 18.

^ Mackay, Robin (March 2007).

"Editorial Introduction" .

Collapse .

2 (1): 3– 13.

References [ edit ] Blackburn, Simon (2005).

Truth: A Guide . Oxford University Press, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-19-516824-2 .

External links [ edit ] Miller, Alexander, "Realism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (SEP) O'Brien, Daniel, "Objects of Perception", The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy (IEP) An experimental test of non-local realism . Physics research paper in Nature which gives negative experimental results for certain classes of realism in the sense of physics.

v t e Philosophical logic Critical thinking and informal logic Analysis Ambiguity Argument Belief Bias Credibility Dialectic Antithesis , Socratic method , Unity of opposites Evidence Explanation Explanatory power Fact Fallacy List of fallacies Hypothesis Inquiry Opinion Parsimony (Occam's razor) Premise Propaganda Prudence Razor Reasoning Relevance Rhetoric Rigor Theory Vagueness Theories of deduction Constructivism Dialetheism Fictionalism Finitism Formalism Intuitionism Logical atomism Logicism Nominalism Platonic realism Pragmatism Realism Category v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kkzmh
Cached time: 20250816152220
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.495 seconds
Real time usage: 0.613 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2344/1000000
Revision size: 25300/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 161542/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2024/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 95816/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.283/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5365619/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  472.784      1 -total
 37.74%  178.424      1 Template:Reflist
 20.87%   98.687      9 Template:Navbox
 19.90%   94.063      5 Template:Cite_book
 16.23%   76.736      1 Template:Philosophical_logic
 14.43%   68.239      1 Template:Short_description
  9.57%   45.245      8 Template:Cite_journal
  9.04%   42.723      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.66%   40.954      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
  8.21%   38.829      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1271121:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816152220 and revision id 1306216533. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophical_realism&oldid=1306216533#Metaphysical_realism " Category : Philosophical realism Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 15:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophical realism 43 languages Add topic

