Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Honors and awards 3 Selected publications 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ernst von Glasersfeld 17 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Íslenska Italiano مصرى 日本語 Polski Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher (1917–2010) Vienna, 2008, photograph by Christian Michelides Ernst von Glasersfeld (March 8, 1917, Munich – November 12, 2010, Leverett , Franklin County, Massachusetts ) was a German philosopher , and emeritus professor of psychology at the University of Georgia , research associate at the Scientific Reasoning Research Institute , and adjunct professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of Massachusetts Amherst . He was a member of the board of trustees of the American Society for Cybernetics , from which he received the McCulloch Memorial Award in 1991. He was a member of the scientific board of the Instituto Piaget , Lisbon . Glasersfeld is known for the development of radical constructivism .

Biography [ edit ] Glasersfeld was born in Munich , where his father, Leopold, worked as a cultural attaché in Vienna before going into photography after World War I. He was a student of mathematics at the University of Vienna before having to move out because of the Nazi threat, considering that his Pan-European family (they subscribed to the ideology of Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi ) was known to be "enemies of any form of nationalism" and his grandfather was Jewish (a convert to Roman Catholicism ).

[ 1 ] The younger Glasersfeld thus spent large parts of his life in Ireland (1940s), in Italy (1950s) where he worked with Silvio Ceccato , and in the United States. He graduated from Lyceum Alpinum Zuoz , a Swiss boarding school.

[ 2 ] He studied and elaborated upon the work of Giambattista Vico , Jean Piaget 's genetic epistemology , Bishop Berkeley 's theory of perception, James Joyce 's Finnegans Wake , and other important texts. Von Glasersfeld developed his model of radical constructivism , which is an ethos shared by all of these writers to one degree or another.

The Ernst von Glasersfeld Archive, part of the Research Institute Brenner-Archiv at the University of Innsbruck, maintains the literary estate and also organizes the Ernst von Glasersfeld Lectures. The literary executors are Theo Hug and Josef Mitterer .

On the occasion of Ernst von Glasersfeld's 100th birthday in 2017, the international conference "Radical Constructivism – Past, Present and Future" took place at the University of Innsbruck.

Honors and awards [ edit ] 1991: Warren McCulloch Memorial Award of the American Society for Cybernetics 1997: Honorary doctorate of the University of Klagenfurt 2002: Reconnaissance du Mérite scientifique of the University of Quebec 2005: The Wiener Gold Medal of the American Society for Cybernetics 2005: Gregory Bateson-award of the Heidelberg Institute for Systemic Research e.V.

2007: Journal of Constructivist Foundations honoured him on his 90th birthday with a Festschrift Glasersfeld 2007: Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art , 1st class [ 3 ] 2008: Honorary doctorate of the University of Innsbruck 2009: Honorary Medal of the City of Vienna in gold Selected publications [ edit ] Glasersfeld, E. von, (2001) The radical constructivist view of science . In: A. Riegler (Ed.), Foundations of Science, special issue on "The Impact of Radical Constructivism on Science", vol.6, no. 1–3: 31–43.

Glasersfeld, E. von (1989). “ Cognition, Construction of Knowledge and Teaching .” Synthese, 80(1),121-140.

Glasersfeld, E. von (1990). “Environment and Communication.” In L.P. Steffe & T. Wood (eds.), Transforming Children’s Mathematics Education: International Perspectives, (pp. 30–38). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Glasersfeld, E. von (1992). “ Questions and Answers About Radical Constructivism Archived 23 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine .” In M.K. Pearsall (ed.), Scope, Sequence, and Coordination of Secondary Schools Science, Vol. 11, Relevant Research, (pp. 169–182). Washington DC: NSTA.

See also [ edit ] Yerkish – an artificial language Glasersfeld helped create References [ edit ] ^ Gisela Holfter & Horst Dickel, An Irish Sanctuary: German-speaking Refugees in Ireland 1933–1945 , Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG (2016), p. 94 ^ "Lyceum Alpinum Zuoz School" .

Paradise Education . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ "Reply to a parliamentary question" (PDF) (in German). p. 1825 . Retrieved 8 January 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hugh Gash and Alexander Riegler (eds.) (2011) Commemorative Issue for Ernst von Glasersfeld . Special Issue, Constructivist Foundations 6(2): 135-253, freely available at the journal's web site External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Ernst von Glasersfeld .

Ernst-von-Glasersfeld-Archive Archived 2017-07-13 at the Wayback Machine Ernst von Glasersfeld Biography of Ernst von Glasersfeld Ernst von Glasersfeld Digital Archive v t e Subfields of and cyberneticians involved in cybernetics Subfields Artificial intelligence Biological cybernetics Biomedical cybernetics Biorobotics Biosemiotics Neurocybernetics Catastrophe theory Computational neuroscience Connectionism Control theory Conversation theory Cybernetics in the Soviet Union Decision theory Emergence Engineering cybernetics Homeostasis Information theory Management cybernetics Medical cybernetics Second-order cybernetics Cybersemiotics Sociocybernetics Synergetics Cyberneticians Alexander Lerner Alexey Lyapunov Alfred Radcliffe-Brown Allenna Leonard Anthony Wilden Buckminster Fuller Charles François Genevieve Bell Margaret Boden Claude Bernard Cliff Joslyn Erich von Holst Ernst von Glasersfeld Francis Heylighen Francisco Varela Frederic Vester Charles Geoffrey Vickers Gordon Pask Gordon S. Brown Gregory Bateson Heinz von Foerster Humberto Maturana I. A. Richards Igor Aleksander Jacque Fresco Jakob von Uexküll Jason Jixuan Hu Jay Wright Forrester Jennifer Wilby John N. Warfield Kevin Warwick Ludwig von Bertalanffy Maleyka Abbaszadeh Manfred Clynes Margaret Mead Marian Mazur N. Katherine Hayles Natalia Bekhtereva Niklas Luhmann Norbert Wiener Pyotr Grigorenko Qian Xuesen Ranulph Glanville Robert Trappl Sergei P. Kurdyumov Anthony Stafford Beer Stuart Kauffman Stuart Umpleby Talcott Parsons Ulla Mitzdorf Valentin Turchin Valentin Braitenberg William Ross Ashby Walter Bradford Cannon Walter Pitts Warren McCulloch William Grey Walter v t e James Joyce Works Novels A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916) Ulysses (1922) Finnegans Wake (1939) Short stories Dubliners (1914, written 1904–07) " The Sisters " " Eveline " " After the Race " " An Encounter " " Araby " " The Boarding House " " Counterparts " " Clay " " A Painful Case " " Ivy Day in the Committee Room " " A Mother " " Two Gallants " " A Little Cloud " " Grace " " The Dead " Play Exiles (1918) Poetry Chamber Music (1907) Pomes Penyeach (1927) Posthumous publications Stephen Hero (1944) Giacomo Joyce (1968) The Cats of Copenhagen (2012) Finn's Hotel (2013) Adaptations Translations of Ulysses Ulysses in Nighttown (1958 play) Ulysses (1967 film) A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1977 film) Ulysses (1982 broadcast) The Dead (1987 film) James Joyce's The Dead (1999 musical) Bloom (2003 film) Waywords and Meansigns (2015–2017 audio) Related Harriet Shaw Weaver Obscenity trial of Ulysses in The Little Review United States v. One Book Called Ulysses Bellsybabble Bloomsday James Joyce Award James Joyce Centre James Joyce Tower and Museum Museum of Literature Ireland Quark Volta Cinematograph Zurich James Joyce Foundation Scholars of Anthony Burgess Frank Delaney Richard Ellmann Alan Warren Friedman Francisco García Tortosa Stuart Gilbert Adaline Glasheen Michael Groden Hugh Kenner Ira Nadel David Norris William H. Quillian C. George Sandulescu Fritz Senn John Simpson Ronald Symond William York Tindall José María Valverde Ernst von Glasersfeld Academic works about Hamlet and the New Poetic: James Joyce and T. S. Eliot James Joyce (biography) James Joyce Quarterly Joysprick Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake Family Nora Barnacle (wife) Lucia Joyce (daughter) John Stanislaus Joyce (father) Stanislaus Joyce (brother) Stephen James Joyce (grandson) Mary Gertrude Joyce (sister) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ernst_von_Glasersfeld&oldid=1306072029 " Categories : 1927 births 2010 deaths Educational psychologists German epistemologists German people of Austrian-Jewish descent 20th-century German philosophers Writers from Munich Giambattista Vico scholars James Joyce scholars Emigrants from Nazi Germany to the United States Recipients of the Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art, 1st class University of Georgia faculty 21st-century German philosophers Alumni of Lyceum Alpinum Zuoz Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 19:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ernst von Glasersfeld 17 languages Add topic

