Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Early days 1.2 1980s through 2009 1.3 Redesign 2 McKinsey Awards 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Business Review 23 languages العربية বাংলা Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American management magazine Harvard Business Review Editor-in-Chief Adi Ignatius [ 1 ] Former editors Thomas A. Stewart Categories Business Frequency 6 times per year Circulation 263,645 [ 2 ] Publisher Sarah McConville Founded 1922 ; 103 years ago ( 1922 ) Company Harvard Business Publishing Country United States Based in Brighton, Massachusetts , U.S.

Language English Website hbr .org ISSN 0017-8012 Some issues of Harvard Business Review Harvard Business Review ( HBR ) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] is a general management magazine [ 5 ] [ 6 ] published by Harvard Business Publishing , a not-for-profit, independent corporation that is an affiliate of Harvard Business School .

HBR is published six times a year [ 3 ] and is headquartered in Brighton, Massachusetts .

HBR covers a wide range of topics that are relevant to various industries, management functions, and geographic locations. These include leadership, negotiation, strategy, operations, marketing, and finance.

[ 7 ] Harvard Business Review has published articles by Clayton Christensen , Peter F. Drucker , Justin Fox , Michael E. Porter , Rosabeth Moss Kanter , John Hagel III , Thomas H. Davenport , Gary Hamel , C. K. Prahalad , Vijay Govindarajan , Robert S. Kaplan , Rita Gunther McGrath and others.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Several management concepts and business terms were first given prominence in HBR .

Harvard Business Review ' s worldwide English-language circulation is 250,000. HBR licenses its content for publication in nine international editions.

[ 10 ] Background [ edit ] Early days [ edit ] Harvard Business Review began in 1922 [ 6 ] as a magazine for Harvard Business School . Founded under the auspices of Dean Wallace Donham, HBR was meant to be more than just a typical school publication. "The paper [ HBR ] is intended to be the highest type of business journal that we can make it, and for use by the student and the business man. It is not a school paper," Donham wrote. Initially, HBR ' s focus was on macroeconomic trends, as well as on important developments within specific industries.

Following World War II , HBR emphasized the cutting-edge management techniques that were developed in large corporations , like General Motors , during that time period. Over the next three decades, the magazine continued to refine its focus on general management issues that affect business leaders, billing itself as the "magazine for decision makers". Prominent articles published during this period include " Marketing Myopia " by Theodore Levitt and "Barriers and Gateways to Communication" by Carl R. Rogers and Fritz J. Roethlisberger.

1980s through 2009 [ edit ] In the 1980s, Theodore Levitt became the editor of Harvard Business Review and changed the magazine to make it more accessible to general audiences. Articles were shortened and the scope of the magazine was expanded to include a wider range of topics. In 1994, Harvard Business School formed Harvard Business Publishing (HBP) as an independent entity.

In 2002, a management and editorial staff shakeup occurred at the publication after the revelation of an affair between editor-in-chief Suzy Wetlaufer and former General Electric CEO Jack Welch . The two met when Wetlaufer was interviewing Welch while researching an article for the magazine.

[ 11 ] Two senior Harvard Business Review editors left, citing an unfair office climate and complaining that the affair had broken ethical standards. Shortly after the resignations, Wetlaufer resigned on March 8, 2002 amid further rebuke by remaining staff.

[ 12 ] Three months later, the publisher, Penelope Muse Abernathy, was also forced out.

[ 13 ] Between 2006 and 2008, HBP went through several reorganizations but finally settled into the three market-facing groups that exist today: Higher Education, which distributes cases, articles, and book chapters for business education materials; Corporate Learning, which provides standardized on-line and tailored off-line leadership development courses; and Harvard Business Review Group, which publishes Harvard Business Review magazine and its web counterpart (HBR.org), and publishes books (Harvard Business Review Press).

Redesign [ edit ] In 2009, HBR brought on Adi Ignatius , the former deputy managing editor of Time magazine, to be its editor-in-chief .

[ 14 ] Ignatius oversees all editorial operations for Harvard Business Review Group. At the time that Ignatius was hired, the United States was going through an economic recession , but HBR was not covering the topic. "The world was desperate for new approaches. Business-as-usual was not a credible response," Ignatius has recalled. During this period the frequency of HBR switched from ten times per year to six times per year.

[ 15 ] As a result, Ignatius realigned HBR' s focus and goals to make sure that it "delivers information in the zeitgeist that our readers are living in." HBR continues to emphasize research-based, academic pieces that would help readers improve their companies and further their careers, but it broadened its audience and improved reach and impact by including more contemporary topics.

As part of the redesigned magazine, Ignatius also led the charge to integrate the print and digital divisions more closely, and gave each edition of HBR a distinct theme and personality, as opposed to being a collection of academically superlative, yet mostly unrelated articles.

HBR won the 2020 Webby Award for Business Blog/Website in the category Web.

[ 16 ] In 2025, HBR launched a subscription service.

[ 17 ] McKinsey Awards [ edit ] See also: Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award Since 1959, the magazine's annual McKinsey Award [ 18 ] has recognized the two most significant Harvard Business Review articles published each year, as determined by a group of highly independent judges. Past winners have included Peter F. Drucker, [ 8 ] who was honored seven times; Clayton M. Christensen; Theodore Levitt; Michael Porter; Rosabeth Moss Kanter ; John Hagel III; and C. K. Prahalad .

References [ edit ] ^ Harvard Business Review Names Adi Ignatius as Editor-in-Chief , a Harvard Business School press release ^ "eCirc for Consumer Magazines" .

Alliance for Audited Media . December 31, 2012. Archived from the original on January 23, 2017 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ a b "Harvard Business Review Revamps" .

The New York Times . December 10, 2009.

^ "Reviewing Harvard's Business Review" .

The New York Times . March 15, 2002.

^ "Harvard Business Review Announces New Podcast Network, HBR Presents" (Press release). April 3, 2019.

^ a b "Harvard Business Review (HBR) | PreventionWeb.net" .

preventionweb.net . Archived from the original on July 9, 2021 . Retrieved July 8, 2021 .

^ "Harvard Business Review Guidelines" . Hbr.org. December 31, 2012 . Retrieved September 10, 2013 .

^ a b "Private Sector; Seeing the Corporation's Demise" .

The New York Times . November 14, 1999.

^ "Justin Fox" .

CUNY TV .

^ "HBR Global Editions" .

Harvard Business Review . Hbr.org. April 28, 2016 . Retrieved July 20, 2023 .

^ Jennings, Marianne M. (April 18, 2002).

"Affair Takes Shine Off 2 Adulterers" .

Deseret News . Retrieved January 4, 2021 .

^ DePaulo, Lisa (May 6, 2002).

"If You Knew Suzy…" . New York Magazine.

^ Armstrong, David (July 9, 2002).

"Harvard Business Review Publisher Is Forced to Resign Amid Overhaul" .

Wall Street Journal . Retrieved January 4, 2021 .

^ Delbridge, Emily (November 21, 2019).

"The 8 Best Business Magazines of 2020" .

The Balance Small Business . New York City: Dotdash. Best for Professionals:Harvard Business Review . Retrieved February 8, 2020 .

^ Faisal Kalim (August 13, 2019).

" "Magazines are alive and well": Publishers refresh their strategies for the print format" .

WNIP . Retrieved June 1, 2020 .

^ Kastrenakes, Jacob (May 20, 2020).

"Here are all the winners of the 2020 Webby Awards" .

The Verge . Retrieved May 22, 2020 .

^ "Harvard Business Review Launches HBR Executive, a New Premium Subscription for Senior Leaders" .

Harvard Business School . June 2, 2025 . Retrieved June 4, 2025 .

^ Frederick Andrews (October 29, 1976).

"Management: How a Boss Works in Calculated Chaos" .

The New York Times .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Harvard Business Review .

Official website HBR Global Editions HBR Magazine HBR Case Study Solutions v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Business_Review&oldid=1293921712 " Categories : 1922 establishments in Massachusetts Bimonthly magazines published in the United States Business magazines published in the United States Harvard Business Publishing magazines Magazines established in 1922 Magazines published in Massachusetts Ten times annually magazines Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2021 Use American English from July 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 13:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Business Review 23 languages Add topic

