Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gladstonian era 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Gladstonian liberalism 2 languages العربية Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British Victorian-era political doctrine Gladstone in 1879 This article is part of a series on Liberalism in the United Kingdom Schools Classical Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Whiggist Conservative Muscular Economic Green Neo Radical Social Principles Capitalism Civil and political rights Due process Economic freedom Environmentalism Equality before the law Freedom of the press Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Laissez-faire Natural law Rule of law Social justice Welfare state History English Civil War Glorious Revolution Anti-Corn Law League Victorian era Chartism 1905–1915 liberal government Liberal welfare reforms Intellectuals Acton Arnold Bentham Berlin Beveridge Burke Byron Chesterton Collingwood Fawcett Freeden Green Hammond (Barbara) Hammond (John Lawrence) Hayek Hobhouse Keynes Locke Macaulay Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Muir Paine Priestley Ricardo Shelley Smith Spencer Taylor Mill Trevelyan (George) Trevelyan (George Macaulay) Wilson Wollstonecraft Politicians Asquith Bass Bright Burke Cable Campbell-Bannerman Chamberlain Clegg Cobden Fox Gladstone Hunt Jenkins Kennedy Lloyd George Mill (John Stuart) Muir Naoroji Rosebery Simon Steel Thorpe Parties Active Alliance Party of Northern Ireland Liberal Democrats Scottish Liberal Democrats Defunct Liberal Party Peelite Radicals Social Democratic Party Whigs Media The Economist Financial Times The Guardian The Independent The Sunday Times The Times Related topics Centrism Centre-left Centre-right Conservatism in the United Kingdom Liberal conservatism Politics of the United Kingdom Scottish Liberals for Independence Socialism in the United Kingdom Liberal socialism Liberalism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in England Schools Anarcho-capitalism Christian Cobdenism Conservative Gladstonianism Manchesterism Powellism Voluntaryism Principles Anglo-Saxon law Anti-imperialism ( Little Englander ) Common law Constitutionalism Economic liberalism English independence English nationalism Euroscepticism Freedom of speech Free market Labour theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Limited government Meritocracy Natural law Natural rights Private property Republicanism Rights of Englishmen Spoilt ballot Tax resistance History Abolitionism Age of Enlightenment Bill of Rights 1689 Brexit Classical liberalism English Civil War Radicalism Levellers Magna Carta People Acton Ahmed Benn Bloom Bool Bounds Burke Campbell Carpenter Cartwright Chakrabarti Cobden Delingpole Doctorow Gladstone Godwin Herbert Jackman Lilburne Locke Macaulay Millington Milton Morris Paine Pullman Radcliffe Spencer Spurrier St Clair Stuart Mill Tame Tatchell Webb Organisations Backlash (pressure group) Campaign Against Censorship Feminists Against Censorship Index on Censorship Levellers Libertarian Alliance Libertarian Party Liberty (advocacy group) Liberty and Property Defence League London Corresponding Society National Campaign for the Reform of the Obscene Publications Acts Open Rights Group Pirate Party UK Radicals Society for Constitutional Information Society for Individual Freedom Society of Gentlemen Supporters of the Bill of Rights The Freedom Association Works Areopagitica (1644) A Letter Concerning Toleration (1689) Two Treatises of Government (1689) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Common Sense (1776) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) The English Constitution Produced and Illustrated (1823) Social Statics (1851) The Man Versus the State (1884) The Road to Serfdom (1944) Taking Liberties (film) (2007) See also Anarchism in the United Kingdom Censorship in the United Kingdom "Christmas tree" files God Save the Queen (Sex Pistols song) Hate speech laws in the United Kingdom Haxey's case Internet censorship in the United Kingdom Internet Watch Foundation and Wikipedia List of songs banned by the BBC List of websites blocked in the United Kingdom List of works rejected by the British Board of Film Classification Terrorism Act 2000 Twitter joke trial The Black Book (list) UK Internet age verification system Web blocking in the United Kingdom England portal Libertarianism portal v t e Gladstonian liberalism or Gladstonianism is a political doctrine named after the British Victorian Prime Minister and Liberal Party leader William Ewart Gladstone . Gladstonian liberalism consisted of limited government expenditure and low taxation whilst making sure government had balanced budgets and the classical liberal stress on self-help and freedom of choice. Gladstonian liberalism also emphasised free trade , little government intervention in the economy and equality of opportunity through institutional reform. It is referred to as laissez-faire or classical liberalism in the United Kingdom and is often compared to Thatcherism .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Gladstonian financial rectitude had a partial lasting impact on British politics and the historian John Vincent contends that under Lord Salisbury 's premiership he "left Britain's low tax, low cost, low growth economy, with its Gladstonian finance and its free trade dogmas, and no conscript army, exactly as he had found it...Salisbury reigned, but Gladstone ruled".

[ 4 ] In the early 20th century the Liberal Party began to move away from Gladstonian liberalism and instead developed new policies based on social liberalism (or what Gladstone called "constructionism"). The Liberal government of 1905–1914 is noted for its social reforms and these included old age pensions and National Insurance . Taxation and public expenditure was also increased and New Liberal ideas led to David Lloyd George 's People's Budget of 1909–1910.

The first Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer , Philip Snowden , had Gladstonian economic views. This was demonstrated in his first Budget in 1924 as government expenditure was curtailed, taxes were lowered and duties on tea, coffee, cocoa and sugar were reduced. Historian A. J. P. Taylor remarked that this budget "would have delighted the heart of Gladstone".

[ 5 ] Ernest Bevin remarked on becoming Minister of Labour in 1940: "They say that Gladstone was at the Treasury from 1860 to 1930".

Gladstonian era [ edit ] For 30 years, Gladstone and liberalism were synonymous.

William Ewart Gladstone served as Prime Minister four times (1868–1874, 1880–1885, 1886 and 1892–1894). His financial policies, based on the notion of balanced budgets, low taxes and laissez-faire , were suited to a developing capitalist society. Called the "Grand Old Man" later in life, Gladstone was a dynamic popular orator who appealed strongly to the working class and to the lower middle class. Deeply religious, Gladstone brought a new moral tone to politics, with his evangelical sensibility and his opposition to aristocracy.

[ 6 ] His moralism often angered his upper-class opponents (including Queen Victoria) and his heavy-handed control split the Liberal Party.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In foreign policy, Gladstone was in general against foreign entanglements, but he did not resist the realities of imperialism . For example, he approved of the occupation of Egypt by British forces in 1882.  His goal was to create a European order based on co-operation rather than conflict and on mutual trust instead of rivalry and suspicion whilst the rule of law was to supplant the reign of force and self-interest. This Gladstonian concept of a harmonious Concert of Europe was opposed and ultimately defeated by a Bismarckian system of manipulated alliances and antagonisms.

[ 9 ] As Prime Minister from 1868 to 1874, Gladstone headed a Liberal Party which was a coalition of Peelites like himself, Whigs and Radicals. He was now a spokesman for "peace, economy and reform". In terms of historic reforms, his first ministry was his most successful.

[ 10 ] He was an idealist who insisted that government should take the lead in making society more efficient and more fair and that the government should expand its role in society in order to extend liberty and toleration.

[ 11 ] The Elementary Education Act 1870 set up state-run elementary (primary) schools, administered by locally elected school boards.

[ 12 ] The judicial system was made up of multiple overlapping and conflicting courts dating back centuries. The Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 merged them into one central system of courts, empowered to administer both law and equity .

[ 13 ] The Northcote-Trevelyan Report on civil service recruitment of twenty years earlier was implemented by Order in Council , replacing appointment by family and patronage with examinations to recognise talent and ability. The Trade Union Act 1871 made unions legal and protected their funding from lawsuits, but picketing of employers' premises was made illegal under the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1871 (repealed by the Conservatives in 1875). The secret ballot was enacted by the Ballot Act 1872 to prevent the buying of votes—politicians would not pay out the money if they were not sure how the person voted. While the Navy was in fine shape, the Army was not. Its organization was confused, its policies unfair and its cruel punishments were based chiefly on brutal flogging. At the county level, politicians named the officers of the county militia units, preferring social connections over ability. The regular army called for enlistments for twenty-one years, but with reforms initiated by Edward Cardwell , Gladstone's secretary for war, enlistments were reduced to six years, plus six years in reserve. Regiments were organized by territorial districts and equipped with modern rifles . The complex chain of command was simplified and in wartime the county militias were under the control of the central war office. Purchase of officer commissions was abolished and flogging in peacetime was also abolished. The reforms were not quite complete as the Royal Duke of Cambridge still had great authority despite his mediocre abilities.

[ 14 ] Historians have given Gladstone high marks on his successful reform program.

[ 15 ] The (Anglican) Church of Ireland , serving a small minority of the Irish, was disestablished through the Irish Church Act 1869 . Catholics no longer had to pay taxes to it.

[ 16 ] Other Liberal efforts focused on land reform, where the Landlord and Tenant (Ireland) Act 1870 entitled Irish tenants, if evicted, to compensation for any improvements which they had made to their land.

In the 1874 general election , Gladstone was defeated by the Conservatives under Benjamin Disraeli during a sharp economic recession. He formally resigned as Liberal leader and was succeeded by the Marquess of Hartington , but he soon changed his mind and returned to active politics. He strongly disagreed with Disraeli's pro- Ottoman foreign policy (see Great Eastern Crisis ) and in 1880 conducted the first outdoor mass-election campaign in Britain, known as the Midlothian campaign . The Liberals won a large majority in the 1880 election . Hartington and Lord Granville , the Liberal leader in the Lords, both declined Queen Victoria's invitation to form a government and Gladstone resumed office.

Gladstone's second government was dominated by Irish affairs. The Irish Parliamentary Party had become the main party in Ireland after the enactment of the secret ballot in 1872, and was now led by Charles Stewart Parnell . This was a time of great agrarian unrest in Ireland (the Land War ), partly assuaged by the Land Law (Ireland) Act 1881 which entitled Irish tenants to " the Three Fs " – a fair rent fixed by tribunal, fixity of tenure and the right to freely sell on their tenancy. Parnell was briefly imprisoned, but was released in return for a promise (the so-called Kilmainham Treaty ) to attempt to end the violence. The Representation of the People Act 1884 extended household suffrage – introduced in urban seats by Disraeli in 1867 – to rural seats. One of the effects was the enfranchisement of many Catholics, further increasing Parnell's power. In the 1885 general election , Parnell's party won the balance of power in the House of Commons and demanded Irish Home Rule as the price of support for a new Gladstone ministry. Gladstone personally supported Home Rule, but a strong Liberal Unionist faction led by the last of the Whigs, Hartington, opposed it, as did the radical Joseph Chamberlain . Irish nationalist reaction was mixed, Unionist opinion was hostile, and the bill was defeated in the House of Commons. The election addresses during the 1886 election revealed many English Gladstonian radicals to be against the bill also, reflecting fears at the constituency level that the interests of the working people were being sacrificed to finance Gladstone's proposals to buy out Anglo-Irish landlords.

[ 17 ] The result was a catastrophic split in the Liberal Party led by Hartington and Joseph Chamberlain , who formed the breakaway Liberal Unionist Party .

[ 18 ] The Liberals met heavy defeat in the 1886 general election at the hands of Lord Salisbury .

There was a final weak Gladstone ministry in 1892, but it also was dependent on Irish support and failed to get Irish Home Rule through the House of Lords. Gladstone finally retired in 1894, ostensibly because of his opposition to what he saw as excessive spending on the Royal Navy but in reality because his Cabinet refused to support his wish to curb the powers of the House of Lords. Following the Conservatives' creation of elected county councils in 1888, district and parish councils were created by the Liberal government's Local Government Act 1894 . Gladstone's successor, the Earl of Rosebery , led the party to another heavy defeat in the 1895 general election .

See also [ edit ] Classical liberalism Fiscal liberalism Liberalism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United Kingdom References [ edit ] Politics portal United Kingdom portal Liberalism portal ^ Heffer, Simon (10 May 2013).

"Margaret Thatcher was not right-wing" .

New Statesman . Archived from the original on 7 June 2013 . Retrieved 28 June 2017 .

^ Quinault, Roland (3 March 2016).

William Gladstone: New Studies and Perspectives . Taylor & Francis. p. 327.

ISBN 978-1-134-76694-9 .

^ "Liberalism rediscovered" .

The Economist . 5 February 1998 . Retrieved 28 June 2017 .

^ Vincent, John (24 July 1999).

"Reigning not Ruling" .

The Spectator .

^ Taylor, A. J. P. (1990).

English History, 1914–1945 . Oxford University Press. p. 212.

^ Parry, J. P. (1989).

Democracy and Religion: Gladstone and the Liberal Party, 1867–1875 . Cambridge University Press. p.

174 .

^ Matthew, H. C. G. "William Gladstone".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/10787 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Hammond, J. L.; Foot, M. R. D. (1952).

Gladstone and Liberalism . London: English Universities Press.

^ Goodlad, Graham D. (2000).

British foreign and imperial policy, 1865–1919 . London: Routledge. p. 21.

^ Roy Jenkins, Gladstone: A Biography (1997) pp 293–378.

^ Clayton Roberts and David Roberts, A History of England: 1688 to the Present (3rd ed. 1991) pp 623–24.

^ D. W.  Sylvester, "Robert Lowe and the 1870 Education Act." History of Education 3.2 (1974): 16–26.

^ David O'Keefe, "Sir George Jessel and the Union of Judicature." American Journal of Legal History 26 (1982): 227+.

^ Harold E. Raugh (2004).

The Victorians at War, 1815–1914: An Encyclopedia of British Military History . ABC-CLIO. pp.

82– 83.

ISBN 9781576079256 .

^ Ian St John (2016).

The Historiography of Gladstone and Disraeli . Anthem Press. pp.

117– 25.

ISBN 9781783085309 .

^ Desmond Bowen (2006).

Paul Cardinal Cullen and the Shaping of Modern Irish Catholicism . Wilfrid Laurier UP. p. 192.

ISBN 9780889208766 .

^ Goodlad, Graham D. (Sep 1989). "The Liberal Party and Gladstone's Land Purchase Bill of 1886".

The Historical Journal .

32 (3): 627– 641.

doi : 10.1017/s0018246x00012450 .

JSTOR 2639536 .

S2CID 154679807 .

^ Ian Cawood, The Liberal Unionist Party: A History (2012) pp 13–41.

Further reading [ edit ] Biagini, Eugenio F.

Liberty, retrenchment and reform: popular liberalism in the age of Gladstone, 1860–1880 (Cambridge UP, 2004).

Clarke, Peter F.

Lancashire and the new liberalism (Cambridge UP,  2007).

Hammond, J. L.and M. R. D. Foot.

Gladstone and Liberalism (1952).

Kelley, Robert L.

The Transatlantic Persuasion: The Liberal-Democratic Mind in the Age of Gladstone (1977).

Lubenow, William C. "The Liberals and the National Question: Irish Home Rule, Nationalism, and their Relationship to Nineteenth‐Century Liberalism." Parliamentary History 13.1 (1994): 119–142.

Moore, James.

The Transformation of Urban Liberalism: Party Politics and Urban Governance in Late Nineteenth-century England (Routledge, 2017).

Parry, Jonathan.

The politics of patriotism: English liberalism, national identity and Europe, 1830–1886 (Cambridge UP, 2006).

Vincent, Andrew. "The New Liberalism in Britain 1880–1914." Australian Journal of Politics & History 36.3 (1990): 388–405.

Warren, Allen. "‘The Return of Ulysses’: Gladstone, Liberalism and Late Victorian Politics." Parliamentary History 9.1 (1990): 184–196.

v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gladstonian_liberalism&oldid=1303795005 " Categories : William Ewart Gladstone Classical liberalism Eponymous economic ideologies Eponymous political ideologies History of liberalism Liberal Party (UK) Liberalism in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gladstonian liberalism 2 languages Add topic

