Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Victoria 2 Western Australia 3 Aboriginal Protection Boards 4 Impact 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Half-Caste Act 1 language Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1890s Australian laws removing mixed-race Aboriginal children from their families Half-Caste Act was the common name given to Acts of Parliament passed in the colony of Victoria ( Aboriginal Protection Act 1886 ) and the colony of Western Australia ( Aborigines Protection Act 1886 ) in 1886. They became the model for legislation to control Aboriginal people throughout Australia - Queensland 's Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act 1897 ; NSW / ACT 's Aboriginal Protection Act 1909 ; the Northern Territory Aboriginals Act 1910 ; South Australia 's Aborigines Act 1911 ; and Tasmania 's Cape Barren Island Reserve Act 1912 .

The various related Acts allowed the seizure of " half-caste " children (i.e.

mixed race children; a term now deemed offensive) and their forcible removal from their parents. This was theoretically to provide them with better homes than those afforded by typical Aboriginal people, where they could grow up to work as domestic servants, and also for social engineering . The removed children are now known as the Stolen Generations .

These Acts were a major impetus for a 1967 referendum question . Some of the controls first created by the Acts remained in place until the early 1970s.

Victoria [ edit ] The Victorian Half-Caste Act 1886 (in full, an Act to amend an Act entitled "An Act to Provide for the Protection and Management of the Aboriginal Natives of Victoria" ) was an extension and expansion of the Aboriginal Protection Act 1869 , which gave extensive powers over the lives of Aboriginal people in the colony of Victoria to the Board for the Protection of Aborigines , including regulation of residence, employment, custody of children and marriage.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The 1886 Act enabled the expulsion of Aboriginal people of mixed descent (" half-castes ") aged from eight to 34 from the Aboriginal reserves . This was intended to incorporate them into mainstream European society. These expulsions separated families and communities, causing distress and leading to protests. The expulsions and other policies led to a decline in the population of the reserves, and for much of their land to be sold or leased to European settlers. By 1926 all Victorian Aboriginal reserves had been closed except for Lake Tyers in Gippsland which had a population of about 250.

[ 4 ] Western Australia [ edit ] Gov. Broome (seated center) and the last Executive Council before the responsible government in Western Australia, c.1890.

The Western Australian Aboriginal Protection Board was established in 1886, with five members and a secretary, all of whom were nominated by the Governor, by the Aborigines Protection Act 1886 (WA), or Half-Caste Act .

[ citation needed ] The 1886 Act was enacted following the furor over the Fairbairn Report of 1882, which revealed slavery conditions among Aboriginal farm workers,  and the work of Rev.

John Gribble . The 1886 Act introduced employment contracts between employers and Aboriginal workers over the age of 14. There was no provision in the 1886 Act for contracts to include wages, but employees were to be provided with "substantial, good and sufficient rations", clothing, and blankets. The 1886 Act provided a resident magistrate with the power to indenture 'half-caste' and Aboriginal children from a suitable age until they turned 21. An Aboriginal Protection Board was also established to prevent the abuses reported earlier, but rather than protect Aborigines, it succeeded mainly in putting them under tighter government control. It was intended to enforce contracts, employment of prisoners, and apprenticeships, but there was not sufficient power to enforce clauses in the north, and they were openly flouted. The Act defined "Aboriginal" as "every Aboriginal native of Australia, every Aboriginal half-caste, or child of a half-caste". Governor Frederick Broome insisted that the act contains within it a clause permitting traditional owners to continue hunting on their tribal lands.

[ citation needed ] The effect of the Act was to give increasing power to the Board over Aboriginal people, rather than setting up a system to punish whites for wrongdoing in relation to Aboriginal people. An Aboriginal Department was set up under the office of the Chief Protector of Aborigines . Nearly half of the Legislative Council voted to amend the Act for contract labour as low as 10, but it was defeated.

McKenzie Grant , the member for The North , claimed that child labour of 6 or 7 was a necessary commonplace, as "in this way they gradually become domesticated". The Attorney General Septimus Burt , in the debate on the second-reading speech, claimed that contracts were being issued not for current work but to hold Aboriginal people as slaves on stations for potential future work to prevent them from being free to leave.

[ citation needed ] Aboriginal Protection Boards [ edit ] Main article: Aboriginal Protection Board Protectors of Aborigines were appointed by the Board under the conditions laid down in the various Acts. In theory, Protectors were empowered to undertake legal proceedings on behalf of Aboriginal people, dictate where Aboriginal people could live or work, and keep all wages earned by employed Aboriginal people.

[ citation needed ] As the Boards had limited funds, Protectors received very limited remuneration and so a range of people were appointed as local Protectors, including resident magistrates, jail wardens, Justices of the Peace and in some cases ministers of religion, but most were local police inspectors. The minutes of the Board show that they dealt with mostly matters of requests from religious bodies for financial relief and reports from Resident or Police Magistrates pertaining to trials and convictions of Aboriginal people under their jurisdiction.

[ citation needed ] Aboriginal Protection Boards also issued permits to allow Aboriginal people the right to leave their respective missions and enter mainstream society for a set period of time.

[ citation needed ] Impact [ edit ] These two acts became the model for legislation to control Aboriginal people throughout Australia, including Queensland 's Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act 1897 ; [ 5 ] NSW / ACT 's Aboriginal Protection Act 1909 ; the Northern Territory Aboriginals Act 1910 ; South Australia 's Aborigines Act 1911 ; and Tasmania 's Cape Barren Island Reserve Act 1912 .

[ citation needed ] The various related Acts allowed the seizure of enabled the forcible removal of " half-caste " children (i.e.

mixed race children; a term now deemed offensive [ 6 ] ) from their parents. This was theoretically to provide them with better homes than those afforded by typical Aboriginal people, where they could grow up to work as domestic servants, and also for social engineering .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] "Half-caste" people were distinguished from "full-blood" Aboriginal people.

[ 9 ] These Acts were a major impetus for a 1967 referendum question . Some of the controls first created by the Acts remained in place until the early 1970s.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Aboriginal history of Western Australia History of Indigenous Australians History of Western Australia Indian Act (Canada) Stolen Generations Detraditionalization Detribalization References [ edit ] ^ "Aboriginal Protection Act 1869 (Vic)" .

Documenting a Democracy .

Museum of Australian Democracy . Retrieved 13 February 2020 .

^ "Aboriginal people and the law" .

Acts and regulations Victoria . Retrieved 8 June 2022 .

^ "Glossary" .

abc.net.au . Archived from the original on 5 January 2013.

^ Broome, Richard (2019).

Aboriginal Australians (5th ed.). Crows Nest, NSW: Allen and Unwin. pp.

94– 98.

ISBN 9781760528218 .

^ Liberman, Kenneth (1980).

"The Decline of the Kuwarra People of Australia's Western Desert: A Case Study of Legally Secured Domination" .

Ethnohistory .

27 (2). Duke University Press: 119– 133.

doi : 10.2307/481223 .

ISSN 0014-1801 .

JSTOR 481223 . Retrieved 21 November 2024 .

See page 121 in particular.

^ "Synonyms for HALF-CASTE" .

Thesaurus.net . Retrieved 21 November 2024 .

^ Robert van Krieken (June 1999). "The barbarism of civilization: cultural genocide and the 'stolen generations' ".

The British Journal of Sociology .

50 (2): 297– 315.

doi : 10.1080/000713199358752 .

PMID 15260027 .

^ John Hutnyk (2005).

"Hybridity" (PDF) .

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

28 (1): 79– 102.

doi : 10.1080/0141987042000280021 .

S2CID 217537998 .

^ "A White Australia" .

Australians Together . Retrieved 12 June 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Ngankat-Kalo: Aboriginal Education 1901-2001" . Victorian Aboriginal Education Association Inc. (VAEAI).

Mission Voices: The Australian Broadcasting Corporation and Koorie Heritage Trust Inc.

Price, A. Grenfell (1944).

"Australian Native Policy: A Review" .

Geographical Review .

34 (3). [American Geographical Society, Wiley]: 476– 478.

doi : 10.2307/209978 .

ISSN 0016-7428 .

JSTOR 209978 .

Reviewing: Foxcroft, E.J.B. (1941).

Australian Native Policy: Its History Especially in Victoria . Melbourne University Press.

Paul Hasluck.

Black Australians: A Survey of Native Policy in Western Australia, 1829–1897 Norman B. Tindale.

Survey of the Half-Caste Problem in South Australia (The Results of the Harvard-Adelaide Universities Anthropological Expedition, 1938–9) v t e Aboriginal Victorians Peoples Barababaraba Bidhawal Brabiralung Braiakaulung Brataualung Bungandidj Boonwurrung Dadi Dadi Dhudhuroa Djab Wurrung Djadjawurrung Djargurd Wurrong Djilamatang Gadubanud Girai wurrung Gulidjan Gunaikurnai Gunditjmara Jardwadjali Jari Jari Jupagalk Krauatungalang Koori Kulin Kurung Kwatkwat Ladji Ladji Mardidjali Minyambuta Ngooraialum Ngurelban Pallanganmiddang Pangerang Tatungalung Taungurung Wadawurrung Warkawarka Wemba-Wemba Wergaia Woiwurrung Wotjobaluk Wurundjeri Yalukit Yorta Yorta Communities Coranderrk Deen Maar Indigenous Protected Area Ebenezer Mission Framlingham Lake Boga mission Registered Aboriginal Parties / Land councils Barengi Gadjin Bunurong Wathaurung Wurundjeri Sites Bend Road Box Gulley Carisbrook stone arrangement Chiltern-Mt Pilot National Park Cloggs Cave Grampians National Park Keilor Kow Swamp Lake Bolac stone arrangement Mount William stone axe quarry New Guinea II cave Sunbury earth rings Tarragal Caves Wurdi Youang See also Victorian Aboriginal Heritage Register Victoria Archaeological Survey State organisations Heritage Victoria Minister for Treaty and First Peoples Legislation Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006 Aboriginal Protection Act 1869 Half-Caste Act Laws concerning Indigenous Australians Cases: Members of the Yorta Yorta Aboriginal Community v Victoria Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Wergaia and Jupagulk Peoples v Victoria History Batman's Treaty Battle of Yering Blood Hole massacre Campaspe Plains massacre Convincing Ground massacre Coranderrk Gippsland massacres Mudgegonga rock shelter Munangabum Murdering Gully massacre By state or territory New South Wales Northern Territory Queensland South Australia Tasmania Victoria Western Australia v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Half-Caste_Act&oldid=1304859823 " Categories : 1886 in law 1880s in Victoria (state) 1880s in Western Australia History of Indigenous Australians Victoria (state) legislation Western Australia legislation 1886 in Australia Repealed Australian legislation Australian legislation concerning rights of indigenous peoples Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from March 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from March 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 16:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Half-Caste Act 1 language Add topic

