Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 1.1 Fictional quotations 1.1.1 In films 1.1.2 In literature 2 See also 3 References 4 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Epigraph (literature) 29 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català الدارجة Deutsch Español Euskara Français Gagauz 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Lombard मराठी Bahasa Melayu Мокшень 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Short quotation or saying at the beginning of a book or chapter Not to be confused with epigraph as an inscription studied in the archeological sub-discipline of epigraphy , epigraph (mathematics) , epitaph , epigram , or epithet .

Facsimile of the original title page for William Congreve 's The Way of the World published in 1700, on which the epigraph from Horace 's Satires can be seen in the bottom quarter.

In literature , an epigraph is a phrase, quotation , or poem that is set at the beginning of a document, monograph or section or chapter thereof.

[ 1 ] The epigraph may serve as a preface to the work; as a summary; as a counter-example; or as a link from the work to a wider literary canon, [ 2 ] with the purpose of either inviting comparison or enlisting a conventional context.

[ 3 ] A book may have an overall epigraph that is part of the front matter , one for each chapter, or both.

Examples [ edit ] Epigraph, consisting of an excerpt from the book itself, William Morris 's The House of the Wolfings As the epigraph to The Sum of All Fears , Tom Clancy quotes Winston Churchill in the context of thermonuclear war : "Why, you may take the most gallant sailor, the most intrepid airman or the most audacious soldier, put them at a table together – what do you get? The sum of their fears." [ 4 ] Sir Walter Scott frequently used epigraphs in his historical novels, including throughout his Waverley novels.

The long quotation from Dante 's Inferno that prefaces T. S. Eliot 's " The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock " is part of a speech by one of the damned in Dante's Hell.

The epigraph to E. L. Doctorow 's Ragtime quotes Scott Joplin 's instructions to those who play his music, "Do not play this piece fast. It is never right to play ragtime fast." The epigraph to Fyodor Dostoyevsky 's The Brothers Karamazov is John 12:24: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." The epigraph to Eliot's Gerontion is a quotation from Shakespeare 's Measure for Measure .

Eliot's " The Hollow Men " uses the line "Mistah Kurtz , he dead" from Joseph Conrad 's Heart of Darkness as one of its two epigraphs.

As an epigraph to The Sun Also Rises , Ernest Hemingway quotes Gertrude Stein , "You are all a lost generation." The epigraph to Theodore Herzl 's Altneuland is "If you will it, it is no dream..." which became a slogan of the Zionist movement.

Louis Antoine de Saint-Just 's line "Nobody can rule guiltlessly" appears before chapter one in Arthur Koestler 's 1940 anti-totalitarian novel Darkness at Noon .

A Samuel Johnson quotation serves as an epigraph in Hunter S. Thompson 's novel Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas : "He who makes a beast of himself gets rid of the pain of being a man." Stephen King uses many epigraphs in his writing, usually to mark the beginning of another section in a novel. An unusual example is The Stand wherein he uses lyrics from certain songs to express the metaphor used in a particular part.

Jack London uses the first stanza of John Myers O'Hara 's poem "Atavism" as the epigraph to The Call of the Wild .

Cormac McCarthy opens his 1985 novel Blood Meridian with three epigraphs: quotations from French writer and philosopher Paul Valéry , from German Christian mystic and Gnostic Jacob Boehme , and a 1982 news clipping from the Yuma Sun reporting the claim of members of an Ethiopian archeological excavation that a fossilized skull three hundred millennia old seemed to have been scalped.

The epigraphs to the preamble of Georges Perec 's Life: A User's Manual ( La Vie mode d'emploi ) and to the book as a whole warn the reader that tricks are going to be played and that all will not be what it seems.

J. K. Rowling 's novels frequently begin with epigraphs relating to the themes explored. For example, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows opens with two: a quotation from Aeschylus's tragedy The Libation Bearers and a quotation from William Penn .

Quotation from Woodrow Wilson 's The State on the title page of every issue of The Bohemian Review , a magazine endorsing independence of Czechs and Slovaks to Austria-Hungary in 1917–1918 ( example ).

Epigraph and dedication page, The Waste Land Fictional quotations [ edit ] Some writers use as epigraphs fictional quotations that purport to be related to the fiction of the work itself. Examples include: In films [ edit ] The film Le Samouraï opens with a fictional quotation from the Bushido .

The film Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby opens with a fictional quotation attributed to Eleanor Roosevelt for comedic effect.

In literature [ edit ] Robertson Davies invented the epigraph to Fifth Business –and ascribed it to " Tho. Overskou , Den Danske Skueplads ".

Some science fiction works, such as Isaac Asimov 's Foundation Trilogy , Frank Herbert 's Dune series (and some of his short stories), and Jack McKinney 's Robotech novelizations use quotations from an imagined future history of the period of their story.

Fantasy literature may also include epigraphs.  For example, Ursula K. Le Guin's Earthsea series includes epigraphs supposedly quoted from the epic poetry of the Earthsea archipelago.

Elizabeth C. Bunce 's Edgar Award-winning Myrtle Hardcastle mystery series, beginning with Premeditated Myrtle includes epigraphs by the fictional 19th century scholar H.M. Hardcastle at the beginning of each chapter of the five-book series.

The first and last books of Diane Duane 's Rihannsu series of Star Trek novels pair quotations from Lays of Ancient Rome with imagined epigraphs from Romulan literature.

F. Scott Fitzgerald 's The Great Gatsby carries on title page a poem called from its first hemistich "Then Wear the Gold Hat," purportedly signed by Thomas Parke D'Invilliers . D'Invilliers is a character in Fitzgerald's first novel, This Side of Paradise .

This cliché is parodied by Diana Wynne Jones in The Tough Guide To Fantasyland .

Jasper Fforde 's The Eyre Affair has quotations from supposedly future works about the action of the story.

John Green 's The Fault in Our Stars has a quotation from a fictitious novel, An Imperial Affliction , which features prominently as a part of the story.

Stephen King 's The Dark Half has epigraphs taken from the fictitious novels written by the protagonist.

Dean Koontz 's The Book of Counted Sorrows began as a fictional book of poetry from which Koontz would "quote" when no suitable existing option was available;  Koontz simply wrote all these epigraphs himself.  Many fans, rather than realizing the work was Koontz' own invention, apparently believed it was a real, but rare, volume; Koontz later collected the existing verse into an actual book.

[ 5 ] The Ring Verse at the beginning of J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings describes the Rings of Power , the central plot device of the novel.

Akame Majyo's Time Anthology begins each chapter with an excerpt from a fictional grimoire.

Brandon Sanderson , in his Mistborn and Stormlight Archive series uses various epigraphs including letters between various gods, so-called "death rattles" and quotes from the villain's diary.

Edward Gorey 's The Unstrung Harp is not only about a fictitious novel, but its author thinks of a fictional verse for its epigraph.

See also [ edit ] Epigram , a brief, interesting, memorable, and sometimes surprising or satirical statement Incipit , the first few words of a text, employed as an identifying label Flavor text , applied to games and toys Prologue , an opening to a story that establishes context and may give background Keynote , the first non-specific talk on a conference spoken by an invited (and usually famous) speaker in order to sum up the main theme of the conference.

References [ edit ] ^ "Epigraph" . University of Michigan . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ "Definition of Epigraph" . Literary Devices. 24 October 2013 . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

^ Bridgeman, Teresa (1998).

Negotiating the New in the French Novel: Building Contexts for Fictional Worlds . Page No-129: Psychology Press, 1998.

ISBN 0415131251 . Retrieved 17 December 2013 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Clancy, Tom (1991).

The Sum of All Fears . London: Harper Collins Publishing.

^ Koontz, Dean .

Podcast Episode 25: Book of Counted Sorrows 1 (Podcast) . Retrieved July 9, 2011 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Ahern, Rosemary, ed. (2012).

The Art of the Epigraph: How Great Books Begin . New York: Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 9781451693270 .

Barth, John (1984).

The Friday Book: Essays and Other Nonfiction . New York: Perigree Books. pp.

xvii– xviii.

ISBN 9780399512094 .

Stokes, Claudia (Summer 2018).

"Novel Commonplaces: Quotation, Epigraphs, and Literary Authority" .

American Literary History .

30 (2): 201– 221.

doi : 10.1093/alh/ajy005 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Epigraphs in literature .

Opening Quotes : an ever-growing collection of literary epigraphs Epigraph at Literary Devices v t e Book design Page layout and typography Annotation Footnote Gloss Marginal note Scholia Canons of page construction Catchword Column Footer Header Headpiece Illumination Initial Historiated Inhabited Margin Miniature Ornament Page numbering Pull quote Recto and verso Rubric Rubrication Typeface Font Front and back covers Anthropodermic bibliopegy Bookbinding Buckram Dust jacket Hardcover Leather Paperback Picture cover Treasure binding Endpapers Marbled Front matter Half-title bastard title Frontispiece Title page Edition notice Imprimi potest Nihil obstat Imprimatur Dedication Epigraph Table of contents Foreword Preface Acknowledgments Introduction Prologue Printer's mark Body matter Body text Chapters Illustrations Parts Sections Tipped-in pages Back matter Afterword Conclusion Epilogue Outro Postscript Addendum/Appendix Endnotes Glossary Bibliography Index Errata Colophon Postface Author page Other elements Book curse Bookplate ex-librīs Book rhyme Die-cutting Endband Extra-illustration Fore-edge painting Intentionally blank page Pop-ups Slipcase Thumb index Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epigraph_(literature)&oldid=1291961980 " Categories : Book design Quotations Literary theory Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 12:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epigraph (literature) 29 languages Add topic

