Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Baryon Acoustic Oscillation detection 3 The peculiar velocity survey 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents 6dF Galaxy Survey 4 languages 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 6dF Galaxy Survey 6dF view with -10 - 0 degree (DEC), 360 degree (RA) and 0 - 200 Mpc radius. Each black dot represents a galaxy.

Survey type Redshift survey Website www .6dfgs .net Related media on Commons [ edit on Wikidata ] The 6dF Galaxy Survey (Six-degree Field Galaxy Survey), 6dF or 6dFGS is a redshift survey conducted by the Anglo-Australian Observatory (AAO) with the 1.2m UK Schmidt Telescope between 2001 and 2009. The data from this survey were made public on 31 March, 2009.

[ 1 ] The survey has mapped the nearby universe over nearly half the sky. Its 136,304 spectra have yielded 110,256 new extragalactic redshifts and a new catalog of 125,071 galaxies. For a subsample of 6dF a peculiar velocity survey is measuring mass distribution and bulk motions of the local Universe. As of July 2009, it is the third largest redshift survey next to the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey (2dFGRS).

Description [ edit ] The 6dF survey covers 17,000 deg 2 of the southern sky which is approximately ten times the area of the 2dFGRS [ 2 ] and more than twice the spectroscopic areal coverage of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey.

[ 3 ] All redshifts and spectra are available through the 6dFGS Online Database , hosted at the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. An online 6dFGS atlas is available through the University of Cape Town.

The survey was carried out with the 1.2 meter UK Schmidt Telescope at Siding Spring Observatory in New South Wales, Australia with the 6dF instrument permitting the observation of a field of 6 degrees per pointing. The instrument possesses a multi-object fiber spectrograph with 150 optical fibers per field plate.

One feature of the 6dF Galaxy Survey compared to earlier redshift and peculiar velocity surveys is its near-infrared source selection. The main target catalogs are selected from the Two Micron All Sky Survey .

[ 4 ] There are several advantages of choosing galaxies in these bands.

The near-infrared spectral energy distributions of galaxies are dominated by the light of their oldest stellar populations, and hence, the bulk of their stellar mass. Traditionally, surveys have selected target galaxies in the optical where galaxies dominated by younger, bluer stars.

The effects of dust extinction are smaller at longer wavelengths. For the target galaxies, this means that the total near-infrared luminosity is not dependent on galaxy orientation and so provides a reliable measure of galaxy mass. Furthermore, this means the 6dF can map the local Universe nearer to the plane of the Milky Way than would otherwise be possible through optical selection.

Baryon Acoustic Oscillation detection [ edit ] The 6dF survey is one of the few surveys which are big enough to allow a baryon acoustic oscillation (BAO) signal to be detected. The low redshift of 6dF made it possible to derive the Hubble constant H 0 with an uncertainty competitive with the distance ladder technique. The result is reported in Beutler et al. (2011) [ 5 ] and is given by H 0 = 67 ± 3.2 km/s/Mpc.

The peculiar velocity survey [ edit ] The redshift of a galaxy includes the recessional velocity cause by the expansion of the Universe (see Hubble's law ) and the peculiar velocity of the galaxy itself. Therefore, a redshift survey alone does not provide an accurate three-dimensional distribution for the galaxies. However, by measuring both components separately, it is possible to obtain a survey of the (peculiar) velocities of the galaxies. In the 6dF survey distance estimators are based on the Fundamental plane of early-type galaxies.

[ 6 ] This requires measurements of the galaxies' internal velocity dispersions which is much more difficult than the determination of the redshift. This restricts the number of galaxies usable for the peculiar velocity survey to about 10% of the overall 6dF galaxies. Finally the peculiar velocities can be measured as the discrepancy between the redshift and the estimated distance.

References [ edit ] ^ The 6dF Galaxy Survey DR3, Heath Jones et al., (2009) ^ 2dFGRS; Colless et al. 2001 ^ SDSS DR7; Abazajian et al. 2009 ^ 2MASS; Jarrett et al. 2000 ^ Beutler et al. 2011 ^ FP; Dressler et al. 1987, Djorgovski & Davis 1987 External links [ edit ] 6dF homepage 6dFGS online database v t e Cosmology Background Age of the universe Big Bang Chronology of the universe Timeline of the universe Universe Observable universe Cosmic distance ladder Cosmogony History of cosmological theories Cosmological principle Copernican principle Discovery of cosmic microwave background History of the Big Bang theory Religious interpretations of the Big Bang Timeline of cosmological theories Past universe Cosmic background radiation Cosmic microwave background Cosmic neutrino background Gravitational wave background Inflation Nucleosynthesis Present universe FLRW metric Friedmann equations Hubble's law Expansion of the universe Accelerating expansion Redshift Future universe Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Components Dark energy Dark fluid Dark matter Quintessence Lambda-CDM model Structure formation Galaxy filament Galaxy formation Large quasar group Large-scale structure Reionization Shape of the universe Structure formation Experiments 2dF 6dF BOOMERanG COBE Illustris project Observational cosmology Planck SDSS WMAP astronomy portal v t e Astronomical surveys Photographic Digitized Sky Survey (DSS) The INT Photometric H-Alpha Survey (IPHAS) NGS-POSS Palomar Distant Solar System Survey (PDSSS) SLUGGS Infra-red 2MASS Akari (Astro-F) Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) UKIRT Infrared Deep Sky Survey (UKIDSS) SCUBA-2 All Sky Survey VISTA Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) Radio C-BASS GALEX Arecibo SDSS Survey (GASS) HIPASS NVSS Ohio Sky Survey PALFA Survey Spectroscopic 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey (2dFGRS) 6dF Galaxy Survey (6dFGS) Calar Alto Legacy Integral Field Area Survey (CALIFA) CfA Redshift Survey Dark Energy Survey (DES) DEEP2 Redshift Survey (DEEP2) Galaxy And Mass Assembly survey (GAMA) LAMOST Las Campanas Redshift Survey Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) VIMOS-VLT Deep Survey (VVDS) WiggleZ Category Commons Portals : Stars Outer space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=6dF_Galaxy_Survey&oldid=1281070226 " Categories : Astronomical surveys Observational astronomy Hidden category: Articles using Infobox astronomical survey using locally defined parameters This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 02:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents 6dF Galaxy Survey 4 languages Add topic

