Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and influence of his works 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos 24 languages Asturianu Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Ido Italiano Latina مصرى Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish neoclassical statesman, author, philosopher (1744–1811) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos Jovellanos painted by Goya , 1798 Born Baltasar Melchor Gaspar María ( 1744-01-05 ) 5 January 1744 Gijón , Spain Died 27 November 1811 (1811-11-27) (aged 67) Vega de Navia , Spain Occupations Author philosopher Seat V of the Real Academia Española In office 23 September 1783 – 27 November 1811 Preceded by Javier Arias Dávila y Centurión Succeeded by Tomás José González-Carvajal Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos (born Gaspar Melchor de Jove y Llanos , 5 January 1744 – 27 November 1811) was a Spanish neoclassical statesman, author, philosopher and a major figure of the Age of Enlightenment in Spain.

Life and influence of his works [ edit ] Jovellanos Street in Madrid Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos (pseudonym Jovino) was born at Gijón in Asturias , Spain . Selecting law as his profession, he studied at Oviedo , Ávila , and the University of Alcalá , before becoming a criminal judge at Seville in 1767.

[ 1 ] His integrity and ability were rewarded in 1778 by a judgeship in Madrid , and in 1780 by appointment to the council of military orders. In the capital Jovellanos was a respected member of the literary and scientific societies; he was commissioned by the Society of Friends of the Country (Madrid's economic society) in 1787 to write his most well-known and influential work, Informe en el expediente de ley agraria ("A report on the dossier of the Agrarian Law"), [ 1 ] a project which he completed in 1794, and published in 1795.

In his work on agrarian law, he called on the crown to eliminate the concentration of land ownership in the entailment of landed estates, ownership of land by the Catholic Church, and the existence of common lands unavailable to private ownership. In his view, Spain's wealth lay in its agricultural productivity which would allow its population to grow and prosper. In the eighteenth-century regime of land tenure, productivity was stifled by the latifundia (large landed estates) of the political elites and the Catholic Church as an institution, and common lands where there was no incentive for individuals to invest in its productivity. Jovellanos was influenced by Adam Smith 's The Wealth of Nations (1776), which saw self-interest as the motivating force for economic activity.

[ 2 ] Jovellanos's recommendations were not implemented in Spain, but did influence thinking about agrarian land reform in the viceroyalty of New Spain by Bishop Manuel Abad y Queipo in the early nineteenth century before its independence in 1821. In turn, his writings influenced Alexander von Humboldt 's thinking and writing on land issues in Mexico.

[ 3 ] Jovellanos also influenced thinking about agrarian land reform in Mexico in the late period of President Porfirio Díaz 's regime by Andrés Molina Enríquez , who was the intellectual father of the article that empowered the State to expropriate land and other resources following the Mexican Revolution Constitution of 1917 .

[ 4 ] Involved in the disgrace of his friend, Francisco de Cabarrús , Jovellanos spent the years 1790 to 1797 in what amounted to exile at Gijón, engaged in literary work and in founding the Asturian institution for agricultural, industrial, social and educational reform throughout his native province.

[ 1 ] He was summoned again to public life in 1797 when, turning down the post of ambassador to Russia , he accepted that of minister of grace and justice, under "the prince of peace", Godoy , whose attention had been directed to him by Cabarrús, then one of his favorites. Displeased with Godoy's policy and conduct, Melchor de Jovellanos combined with his colleague Saavedra to procure his dismissal. Godoy returned to power in 1798 and Jovellanos was again sent away to Gijón.

[ 1 ] Together with Asturian intellectual colleagues such as González Posada, Caveda y Solares and his sister Xosefa Xovellanos , Jovellanos then focused on the study of Asturias . He intended to start several projects in the study of his native Asturian language , including an Academy of Asturian Language and an Asturian dictionary, but in 1801 he was imprisoned [ why?

] in Bellver Castle ( Majorca ) and was forced to put all his cultural projects on hold.

[ citation needed ] The Peninsular War , and the advance of the French into Spain, set him once more at liberty.

Joseph Bonaparte , having gained the Spanish throne, made Jovellanos the most brilliant offers, but the latter rejected them all and joined the patriotic opposition. He became a member of the Supreme Central Junta and contributed to reorganizing the Cortes Generales . This accomplished, the Junta at once fell under suspicion, and Jovellanos was involved in its fall. In 1811 he was enthusiastically welcomed to Gijón; but the approach of the French forced him to leave once more. The vessel in which he sailed was compelled by bad weather to put in at Vega de Navia (now known as Puerto de Vega) in Asturias, and there he died from pneumonia on November 27, 1811.

[ 1 ] Pedro de Silva , the second President of the Principality of Asturias , is a direct descendant of Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos through his mother, María Jesús Cienfuegos-Jovellanos Vigil-Escalera.

[ 5 ] Works [ edit ] Jovellanos's prose works, especially those on political and legislative economy, constitute his real claim to literary fame. In them, depth of thought and clear-sighted sagacity are couched in a certain Ciceronian elegance and classical purity of style. Besides the Ley agraria , he wrote Elogios , [ 6 ] and a most interesting set of diaries or travel journals (1790–1801, first published in 1915) reflecting his trips across Northern Spain. He also published several other political and social essays.

His poetical works comprises a tragedy , Pelayo , the comedy El delincuente honrado , satires and miscellaneous pieces such as a translation of a French tragedy by Jean Racine , La Ifigenia [ 7 ] and a translation of the first book of Paradise Lost .

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Age of Enlightenment Enlightenment in Spain References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Chisholm 1911 , p. 525.

^ D.A. Brading, The First America , Cambridge University Press 1991, pp. 510-511 ^ Brading, The First America , p. 565.

^ Stanley F. Shadle, Andrés Molina Enríquez: Land Reformer of the Mexican Revolutionary Era . Tucson: University of Arizona Press 1994, pp. 23-25.

^ "Fallece a los 85 años la madre de Pedro de Silva" .

La Voz de Asturias . 2004-08-10. Archived from the original on 2011-07-20 . Retrieved 2011-01-08 .

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 525–526.

^ Frederick A. de Armas , "Jovellanos e Ifigenia: Racine, Boscan y la tradicion pictorica," Homenaje a Josep M. Sala-Valldaura , Scriptura 26 (2019): 63-72.

Further reading [ edit ] Polt, John Herman Richard.

Gaspar Melchor De Jovellanos . New York: Twayne Publishers, 1971.

Fernández-Medina, Nicolás. " Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos y el vitalismo en la España ilustrada: Una visión poética y reformista de la naturaleza ." Saberes en acción - La Societat Catalana d’Història de la Ciència i de la Tècnica y el Institut Interuniversitari López Piñero (UMH-UA-UJI-UV), 2021.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Jovellanos, Gaspar Melchor de ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 15 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

525– 526.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos .

Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos. Polymath Virtual Library, Fundación Ignacio Larramendi Works by Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e Real Academia Española seat V Manuel Villegas Piñateli (1714) Javier Arias Dávila y Centurión (1752) Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos (1783) Tomás José González-Carvajal (1814) Joaquín Ignacio Mencos (1841) Alejandro Pidal y Mon (1883) Miguel Echegaray (1916) Antonio Machado [1] Emilio García Gómez (1945) Juan Luis Cebrián (1997) [1] He was elected in 1927 but never took the seat v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaspar_Melchor_de_Jovellanos&oldid=1248007282 " Categories : 1744 births 1811 deaths Writers from Asturias People from Gijón Members of the Royal Spanish Academy Enlightenment philosophers History of Asturias 18th-century travel writers Spanish travel writers Complutense University of Madrid alumni University of Oviedo alumni 18th-century Spanish writers 18th-century Spanish male writers Spanish male writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles containing Spanish-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 27 September 2024, at 04:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos 24 languages Add topic

