Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Characteristics of his work 3 Other 4 Quotations 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 English translations 6 Musical reception (selection) 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 9.1 Nineteenth-century works on Jean Paul 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Jean Paul 41 languages العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Romantic writer (1763–1825) For other people with similar names, see Jean-Paul .

For the West Indian cricketer, see Jean Paul (cricketer) .

Not to be confused with Sean Paul .

Jean Paul Portrait by Heinrich Pfenninger, 1798 Born Johann Paul Friedrich Richter ( 1763-03-21 ) 21 March 1763 Wunsiedel , Holy Roman Empire Died 14 November 1825 (1825-11-14) (aged 62) Bayreuth , German Confederation Pen name Jean Paul Occupation Novelist Nationality German Alma mater University of Leipzig Period 1783–1825 Genre Humorous novels and stories Subject Education politics Literary movement german romanticism Romanticism Notable awards PhD (Hon) : University of Heidelberg (1817) Jean Paul ( German: [ʒɑ̃ paʊl] ⓘ ;  born Johann Paul Friedrich Richter , 21 March 1763 – 14 November 1825) was a German Romantic writer, best known for his humorous novels and stories.

Life and work [ edit ] Jean Paul was born at Wunsiedel , in the Fichtel Mountains ( Franconia ). His father was an organist at Wunsiedel. In 1765 his father became a pastor at Joditz near Hof and, in 1767 at Schwarzenbach , but he died on 25 April 1779, [ 1 ] leaving the family in great poverty.

[ citation needed ] Later in life, Jean Paul noted, "The words that a father speaks to his children in the privacy of home are not heard by the world, but as in whispering-galleries , they are clearly heard at the end and by posterity." [ 2 ] After attending the Gymnasium at Hof, in 1781 Jean Paul went to the University of Leipzig . His original intention was to enter his father's profession, but theology did not interest him, and he soon devoted himself wholly to the study of literature. Unable to maintain himself at Leipzig he returned in 1784 to Hof, where he lived with his mother. From 1787 to 1789, he served as a tutor at Töpen , a village near Hof; and from 1790 to 1794, he taught the children of several families in a school he had founded in nearby Schwarzenbach .

[ 1 ] Jean Paul began his career as a man of letters with Grönländische Prozesse (" Greenland Lawsuits"), published anonymously in Berlin in 1783–84, and Auswahl aus des Teufels Papieren ("Selections from the Devil's Papers", signed J. P. F. Hasus), published in 1789. These works were not received with much favour, and in later life even their author had little sympathy for their satirical tone.

[ 1 ] Jean Paul's outlook was profoundly altered by a spiritual crisis he suffered on 15 November 1790, in which he had a vision of his own death. His next book, Die unsichtbare Loge ("The Invisible Lodge"), a romance published in 1793 under the pen-name Jean Paul (in honour of Jean-Jacques Rousseau ), had all the qualities that were soon to make him famous, and its power was immediately recognized by some of the best critics of the day.

[ 1 ] Encouraged by the reception of Die unsichtbare Loge , Richter composed a number of books in rapid succession: Leben des vergnügten Schulmeisterleins Maria Wutz in Auenthal ("Life of the Cheerful Schoolmaster Maria Wutz", 1793), the best-selling Hesperus (1795), which made him famous, Biographische Belustigungen unter der Gehirnschale einer Riesin ("Biographical Recreations under the Brainpan of a Giantess", 1796), Leben des Quintus Fixlein ("Life of Quintus Fixlein", 1796), Der Jubelsenior ("The Parson in Jubilee", 1797), and Das Kampaner Tal ("The Valley of Campan", 1797). Also among these was the novel Siebenkäs in 1796–97.

Siebenkäs ' slightly supernatural theme, involving a Doppelgänger and pseudocide , stirred some controversy over its interpretation of the Resurrection , but these criticisms served only to draw awareness to the author. This series of writings assured Richter a place in German literature, and during the rest of his life every work he produced was welcomed by a wide circle of admirers.

[ 1 ] After his mother's death in 1797, Richter went to Leipzig , and in the following year, to Weimar , where he started work on his most ambitious novel, Titan , published between 1800 and 1803.

[ 1 ] Richter became friends with such Weimar notables as Johann Gottfried Herder , by whom he was warmly appreciated, but despite their close proximity, Richter never became close to Johann Wolfgang von Goethe or Friedrich Schiller , both of whom found his literary methods repugnant; but in Weimar, as elsewhere, his remarkable conversational powers and his genial manners made him a favorite in general society.

[ 1 ] The British writers Thomas Carlyle and Thomas De Quincey took an interest in Jean Paul's work.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Jean Paul monument in Bayreuth, created by Ludwig von Schwanthaler and unveiled in 1841 on the 16th anniversary of Richter's death In 1801, he married Caroline Meyer, whom he had met in Berlin the year before. They lived first at Meiningen , then at Coburg ; and finally, in 1804, they settled at Bayreuth . Here Richter spent a quiet, simple, and happy life, constantly occupied with his work as a writer. In 1808 he was delivered from anxiety about outward necessities by Prince Primate Karl Theodor von Dalberg , who gave him an annual pension of 1,000 florins, [ 1 ] which was later continued by the king of Bavaria.

[ 3 ] Jean Paul's Titan was followed by Flegeljahre ("The Awkward Age", 1804–5). His later imaginative works were Dr Katzenbergers Badereise ("Dr Katzenberger's Trip to the Medicinal Springs", 1809), Des Feldpredigers Schmelzle Reise nach Flätz ("Army Chaplain Schmelzle's Voyage to Flätz", 1809), Leben Fibels ("Life of Fibel", 1812), and Der Komet, oder Nikolaus Marggraf ("The Comet, or, Nikolaus Markgraf", 1820–22). In Vorschule der Aesthetik ("Introduction to Aesthetics", 1804) he expounded his ideas on art; he discussed the principles of education in Levana, oder Erziehungslehre ("Levana, or, Pedagogy", 1807); and the opinions suggested by current events he set forth in Friedenspredigt ("Peace Sermon", 1808), Dämmerungen für Deutschland ("Twilights for Germany", 1809), Mars und Phöbus Thronwechsel im Jahre 1814 ("Mars and Phoebus Exchange Thrones in the Year 1814", 1814), and Politische Fastenpredigten ("Political Lenten Sermons", 1817). In his last years he began Wahrheit aus Jean Pauls Leben ("The Truth from Jean Paul's Life"), to which additions from his papers and other sources were made after his death by C. Otto and E. Förster.

[ 1 ] Also during this time he supported the younger writer E. T. A. Hoffmann , who long counted Richter among his influences. Richter wrote the preface to Fantasy Pieces , a collection of Hoffmann's short stories published in 1814.

[ 5 ] In September 1821 Jean Paul lost his only son, Max, a youth of the highest promise; and he never quite recovered from this shock.

[ 1 ] He lost his sight in 1824, [ citation needed ] and died of dropsy at Bayreuth, on 14 November 1825.

[ 1 ] Characteristics of his work [ edit ] Jean Paul occupies an unusual position in German literature and has always divided the literary public. Some hold him in highest veneration while others treat his work with indifference. He took the Romantic formlessness of the novel to extremes: Schlegel called his novels soliloquies, in which he makes his readers take part (in this respect going even further than Laurence Sterne in Tristram Shandy ). Jean Paul habitually played with a multitude of droll and bizarre ideas: his work is characterized by wild metaphors as well as by digressive and partly labyrinthine plots. He mixed contemplation with literary theory : alongside spirited irony the reader finds bitter satire and mild humour; next to soberly realistic passages there are romanticized and often ironically curtailed idylls , social commentary and political statements.  The quick changes of mood attracted the composer Schumann whose Papillons was inspired by Jean Paul's Flegeljahre .

[ 6 ] His novels were especially admired by women. This was due to the empathy with which Jean Paul created the female characters in his works: never before in German literature were women represented with such psychological depth. At the same time however, his work contains misogynistic quips. Jean Paul's character may have been as diverse and as confusing as many of his novels: he was said to be very sociable and witty, while at the same time extremely sentimental: having an almost childlike nature, quickly moved to tears. It is obvious from his works that his interests encompassed not only literature but also astronomy and other sciences.

Paul's relationship with the Weimar classicists Goethe and Schiller always remained ambivalent: Schiller once remarked that Jean Paul was as alien to him as someone who fell from the Moon, and that he might have been worthy of admiration "if he had made as good use of his riches as other men made of their poverty." [ 1 ] Herder and Wieland on the other hand fully appreciated his work and supported him. Although he always kept his distance from the classicists, who wanted to "absolutize" art, and although his theoretical approach (most notably in his Introduction to Aesthetics ) was considerably influenced by Romanticism, it would be misleading to call him a Romantic without qualification. Here too he kept his distance: with all his subjectivism he didn't absolutize the subject of the author as the Romantics often did. Jean Paul had what had become rare amidst classical severity and romantic irony: humour. He also was one of the first who approached humour from a theoretical standpoint.

He thought that both the Enlightenment and metaphysics had failed, though they still held importance for his worldview. He arrived at a philosophy without illusions, and a state of humorous resignation. Correspondingly he was one of the first defenders of Schopenhauer 's philosophy. He didn't try to indoctrinate but to portray human happiness, even (and especially) in an increasingly alienated environment — the rococo castles and bleak villages of Upper Franconia. Jean Paul was not only the first to use and name the literary motif of the Doppelgänger , he also utilised it in countless variations (e.g. Siebenkäs and Leibgeber, Liane and Idoine, Roquairol and Albano). In his novel Siebenkäs he defines the Doppelgänger as the "people who see themselves." Jean Paul was a lifelong defender of freedom of the press and his campaigns against censorship went beyond many of his contemporaries. In his Freiheitsbüchlein (1805), he maintains that books belong to humanity and should have the chance to have an impact on all times, not just the present moment, and therefore preventing a book from being published renders the censor a judge not just for contemporary society but for all future societies.

[ 7 ] Censorship is not feasible because it would be impossible to find a person able to fulfill the true requirements of the office.

[ 7 ] After the great achievements of the eighteenth century, the prospect of complete freedom of opinion, speech, and printing was real.

[ 7 ] Even under the tightened conditions of the Napoleonic occupation, Jean Paul continued to speak out in favor of reason, as in his Friedens-Predigt an Deutschland (1808).

[ 7 ] The last section of his Politische Fastenpredigten (1816) contains a warning to rulers that minds cannot be controlled, and that police action will only cause them to eventually explode like a champagne bottle.

[ 7 ] Other [ edit ] Rudolf Steiner edited a multi-volume collection of the works of Jean Paul.

[ 8 ] In published lectures, Steiner often mentioned the realization by the 7-year-old Jean Paul that he was an individual "Ego", expressed in Paul's surprise at understanding that "I am an I".

Quotations [ edit ] The long sleep of death closes our scars, and the short sleep of life our wounds. ( Der lange Schlaf des Todes schliesst unsere Narben zu, und der kurze des Lebens unsere Wunden , Hesperus , XX).

Works [ edit ] Titan. 1 Abelard und Heloise 1781 Grönländische Prozesse 1783–1784 Auswahl aus des Teufels Papieren 1789 Leben des vergnügten Schulmeisterlein Maria Wutz in Auenthal. Eine Art Idylle 1790 Die unsichtbare Loge 1793 Hesperus 1795 Biographische Belustigungen 1796 Leben des Quintus Fixlein 1796 Siebenkäs 1796 Der Jubelsenior 1797 Das Kampaner Tal 1797 Konjekturalbiographie 1798 Des Luftschiffers Giannozzo Seebuch 1801 Titan 1800–03 Vorschule der Aesthetik 1804 Flegeljahre (unfinished) 1804–05 Freiheitsbüchlein 1805 Levana oder Erziehlehre 1807 Dr. Katzenbergers Badereise 1809 Des Feldpredigers Schmelzle Reise nach Flätz 1809 Leben Fibels 1812 Bemerkungen über uns närrische Menschen Clavis Fichtiana (see also Johann Gottlieb Fichte ) Das heimliche Klaglied der jetzigen Männer Der Komet 1820–1822 Der Maschinenmann Die wunderbare Gesellschaft in der Neujahrsnacht Freiheits-Büchlein Selberlebenbeschreibung posthum 1826 Selina posthum 1827 English translations [ edit ] Most of Richter's long novels were translated into English during the mid-nineteenth century. Several editions of translated passages from various works were also published. In the twenty-first century, Sublunary Editions of Seattle began publishing more English translations of his works (see final entries below).

The Invisible Lodge , trans. Charles T. Brooks, New York: Holt 1883 | Project Gutenberg Maria Wutz (various editions) Maria Wuz , trans.  Francis and Rose Storr, Maria Wuz and Lorenz Stark , London: Longmans, Green, & Co, 1881 Maria Wutz , trans. John D. Grayson, 19th Century German Tales , ed. Angel Flores, 1959, reissued 1966 Maria Wutz , trans. Erika Casey, The Jean Paul Reader , Johns Hopkins U, 1990 Maria Wutz , trans. Francis and Rose Storr and Ruth Martin, Sublunary Editions, 2021 [ 9 ] Hesperus , trans. Charles Brooks, 1864 | At Project Gutenberg: Vol. 1 ; Vol. 2 Siebenkäs Flower, Fruit, and Thorn Pieces , trans. Edward Henry Noel, Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1863 Flower, Fruit, and Thorn Pieces , trans.

Alexander Ewing , 1877 | Project Gutenberg The Campaner Thal: or, Discourses on the Immortality of the Soul , trans. Juliette Bauer, 1848 | Project Gutenberg Life of Quintus Fixlein and Army Chaplain Schmelzle's Journey to Flaetz , trans.

Thomas Carlyle , 1827 | Project Gutenberg Titan , trans. Charles Brooks (London, 1863; Boston, 1864) | At Project Gutenberg: Vol. 1 ; Vol. 2 Horn of Oberon: Jean Paul Richter's School for Aesthetics , trans. Margaret R Hale, Wayne State UP, 1973 Walt and Vult [ Flegeljahre ] trans.

Eliza Lee , 1846 Levana; or, the Doctrine of Education , trans. "A. H.", 1848, [ 10 ] 1863, [ 11 ] 1884, [ 12 ] 1886, [ 13 ] 1890 [ 14 ] The Death of an Angel & Other Pieces , 1839 Reminiscences of the Best Hours of Life for the Hour of Death , trans. Joseph Dowe, 1841 Prefaces, various translators. Sublunary Editions, 2022.

Biographical Recreations from the Cranium of a Giantess , trans. Genese Grill & anonymous, Sublunary Editions, 2023 [ 15 ] Two Stories, trans. Alexander Booth and Matthew Spencer. Sublunary Editions, 2023 ("The Wondrous New Year's Eve Company" and "The Night Thoughts of Obstetrician Walther Vierneissel on His Lost Fetus-Ideal" Musical reception (selection) [ edit ] Robert Schumann : Papillons pour le pianoforte seul , 1832.

Johann Friedrich Kittl: Wär' ich ein Stern , 1838.

Robert Schumann: Blumenstück , 1839.

Carl Grünbaum: Lied (Es zieht in schöner Nacht der Sternenhimmel), 1840.

Ernst Friedrich Kauffmann: Ständchen nach Jean Paul , 1848.

Carl Reinecke : O wär' ich ein Stern (from: Flegeljahre), 1850.

Stephen Heller : Blumen-, Frucht- und Dornenstücke (Nuits blanches), 1850.

Marta von Sabinin: O wär ich ein Stern , 1855.

Ernst Methfessel: An Wina , 1866.

Gustav Mahler : Symphony No. 1 "Titan" , 1889.

Ferdinand Heinrich Thieriot: Leben und Sterben des vergnügten Schulmeisterlein Wuz , 1900.

Hugo Leichtentritt: Grabschrift des Zephyrs , 1910.

Henri Sauguet : Polymetres , 1936.

Eduard Künnecke: Flegeljahre , 1937.

Karl Kraft: Fünf kleine Gesänge auf Verse des Jean Paul für Singstimme und Klavier , 1960.

Walter Zimmermann: Glockenspiel für einen Schlagzeuger , 1983.

Wolfgang Rihm : Andere Schatten (from: Siebenkäs), 1985.

Oskar Sala : Rede des toten Christus vom Weltgebäude herab, dass kein Gott sei , 1990.

Iván Erőd : Blumenstück für Viola solo , 1995.

Thomas Beimel : Idyllen , 1998/99.

Christoph Weinhart: Albanos Traum , 2006.

Georg Friedrich Haas : Blumenstück (from: Siebenkäs), 2009.

Ludger Stühlmeyer : Zum Engel der letzten Stunde (from: Das Leben des Quintus Fixlein), 2013.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Chisholm 1911 , p. 313.

^ Chamberlain, Alexander (1896).

The Child and Childhood in Folk Thought: (The Child in Primitive Culture), p. 389 . MacMillan.

ISBN 9781421987484 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Americana staff 1920 .

^ Hindley, Meredith (2009). "The Voracious Pen of Thomas Carlyle".

Humanities .

30 : 228– 230.

^ Fife, Robert Herndon (1907).

"Jean Paul Friedrich Richter and E. T. A. Hoffmann" .

PMLA .

22 (1): 1– 32.

doi : 10.2307/456660 .

ISSN 0030-8129 .

JSTOR 456660 .

^ Jensen, Eric Frederick (1998).

"Explicating Jean Paul: Robert Schumann's Program for "Papillons," Op. 2" .

19th-Century Music .

22 (2): 127– 143.

doi : 10.2307/746854 .

ISSN 0148-2076 .

JSTOR 746854 .

^ a b c d e Ohe, Werner von der; McCarthy, John A. (2013).

Zensur und Kultur: Zwischen Weimarer Klassik und Weimarer Republik mit einem Ausblick bis heute . Walter de Gruyter. pp.

99– 109.

^ Selg, Peter (1 August 2015).

Rudolf Steiner, Life and Work Volume 2 (1890-1900) . SteinerBooks.

ISBN 9781621480877 .

^ "Maria Wutz" .

^ RICHTER, Jean Paul Friedrich (1848).

Levana; or, the Doctrine of Education. Translated from the German [by A. H.] . Longman & Company.

^ RICHTER, Jean Paul Friedrich (1863).

Levana ... Translated from the German . Ticknor & Fields.

^ Richter, Jean Paul F. (1880).

Levana; or, The doctrine of education, tr. [by A.H.]. Preceded by a short biogr. of the author [condensed from that of E. Förster] and his autobiography, a fragment .

^ Paul, Jean (1886).

Levana, Or, The Doctrine of Education . G. Bell.

^ Paul, Jean (1890).

Levana, Or, The Doctrine of Education . D.C. Heath.

^ Richter, Jean Paul (2023).

Biographical Recreations from the Cranium of a Giantess . Seattle, WA: Sublunary Editions.

ISBN 9781955190695 .

References [ edit ] Americana staff (1920).

"Richter, Johann Paul Friedrich" . In Rines, George Edwin (ed.).

Encyclopedia Americana .

Attribution: This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Richter, Johann Paul Friedrich ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

313– 314.

Further reading [ edit ] Fleming, Paul.

The Pleasures of Abandonment: Jean Paul and the Life of Humor . Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann, 2006.

Nineteenth-century works on Jean Paul [ edit ] Richter's Sämtliche Werke ( Complete Works ) appeared in 1826–1828 in 60 volumes, to which were added 5 volumes of Literarischer Nachlass (literary bequest) in 1836–1838; a second edition was published in 1840–1842 (33 volumes); a third in 1860–1862 (24 volumes). The last complete edition is that edited by R. Gottschall (60 parts, 1879).

[ 1 ] Editions of selected works appeared in 16 volumes (1865), in Kürschner's Deutsche Nationalliteratur (edited by P. Nerrlich, 6 volumes, pp. 388–487), &c. The chief collections of Richter's correspondence are: [ 1 ] Jean Pauls Briefe an F. H. Jacobi (1828) Briefwechsel Jean Pauls mit seinem Freunde C. Otto (1829–33) Briefwechsel zwischen H. Voss und Jean Paul (1833) Briefe an eine Jugendfreundin (1858) P. Nerrlich, Jean Pauls Briefwechsel mit seiner Frau und seinem Freunde Otto (1902).

See further: [ 2 ] The continuation of Richter's autobiography by C. Otto and E. Fürster (1826–33) H. Dring, J. P. F. Richter's Leben und Charakteristik (1830–32) Richard Otto Spazier , JPF Richter: ein biographischer Commentar zu dessen Werken (5 volumes, 1833) E. Förster, Denkwürdigkeiten aus dem Leben von J. P. F. Richter (1863) Paul Nerrlich, Jean Paul und seine Zeitgenossen (1876) J. Firmery, Étude sur la vie et les œuvres de J. P. F. Richter (1886) P. Nerrlich, Jean Paul, sein Leben und seine Werke (1889) Ferdinand Josef Schneider , Jean Pauls Altersdichtung (1901); and Jean Pauls Jugend und erstes Auftreten in der Literatur (1906).

Thomas Carlyle's two essays on Richter.

Carlyle, Thomas (1827).

"Jean Paul Friedrich Richter" .

Critical and Miscellaneous Essays: Volume I . The Works of Thomas Carlyle in Thirty Volumes. Vol. XXVI. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons (published 1904). pp.

1– 25.

Carlyle, Thomas (1830).

"Jean Paul Friedrich Richter Again" .

Critical and Miscellaneous Essays : Volume II . The Works of Thomas Carlyle in Thirty Volumes. Vol. XXVII. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons (published 1904). pp.

96– 159.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Jean Paul .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jean Paul .

Wikisource has the text of the Nuttall Encyclopædia article Richter, Jean Paul Friedrich .

Works by Jean Paul at Project Gutenberg Works by Jean Paul at Faded Page (Canada) Works by or about Jean Paul at the Internet Archive Works by Jean Paul at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by Jean Paul at Open Library "Works by Jean Paul" .

Zeno.org (in German).

Jean Paul's works at Projekt Gutenberg-DE (in German) Jean Paul.

Titan. 2 . Leipzig und Wien: Bibliographisches Institut.

Jean Paul.

Titan. 1 . Leipzig und Wien: Bibliographisches Institut.

Jean Paul.

Jean Pauls Werke. 3 . Leipzig und Wien: Bibliographisches Institut.

Jean Paul.

Jean Pauls Werke. 4 . Leipzig und Wien: Bibliographisches Institut.

Jean Paul.

Jean Pauls Werke / herausgegeben von Rudolf Wustmann. 4 . Leipzig und Wien: Bibliographisches Institut.

v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category v t e German-language literature Related articles German language History of Germany History of Austria History of Switzerland History of Liechtenstein Old High German literature Middle High German literature Early New High German literature Sturm und Drang Weimar Classicism Romanticism Literary realism Weimar culture Exilliteratur Pop literature Austrian literature Swiss literature German studies Related categories Austrian writers German writers Liechtenstein writers Swiss writers in German Category:Translators of William Shakespeare Reformation era literature Medieval Minnesang Courtly romance Der von Kürenberg Dietmar von Aist Reinmar von Hagenau Hartmann von Aue Walther von der Vogelweide Wolfram von Eschenbach Albrecht von Johansdorf Heinrich von Morungen Gottfried von Strassburg Dietrich von Bern Nibelungenlied Early modern Simon Dach Paul Fleming Hans Folz Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen Andreas Gryphius Christian Hoffmann von Hoffmannswaldau Johann Michael Moscherosch Martin Opitz Hans Sachs Angelus Silesius Anthony Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick Georg Wickram 18th century Barthold Heinrich Brockes Christian Gellert Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Johann Christoph Gottsched Johann Christian Günther Friedrich Hölderlin Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock Meta Klopstock Jakob Michael Reinhold Lenz Gotthold Ephraim Lessing Magnus Gottfried Lichtwer Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg) Jean Paul Friedrich Schiller Johann Gottfried Schnabel Christoph Martin Wieland 19th century Bettina von Arnim Achim von Arnim Clemens Brentano Georg Büchner Adelbert von Chamisso Annette von Droste-Hülshoff Marie von Ebner-Eschenbach Joseph von Eichendorff Theodor Fontane Gustav Freytag Jeremias Gotthelf Franz Grillparzer Jacob Grimm Wilhelm Grimm Gerhart Hauptmann Christian Friedrich Hebbel Johann Peter Hebel Heinrich Heine Georg Herwegh Paul Heyse E. T. A. Hoffmann Friedrich Hölderlin Gottfried Keller Heinrich von Kleist Nikolaus Lenau Karl May Conrad Ferdinand Meyer Eduard Mörike Johann Nestroy Wilhelm Raabe Adalbert Stifter Theodor Storm Ludwig Tieck Ludwig Uhland 20th century Ilse Aichinger May Ayim Ingeborg Bachmann Hermann Bahr Vicki Baum Johannes R. Becher Gottfried Benn Thomas Bernhard Hugo Bettauer Heinrich Böll Thomas Brasch Volker Braun Bertolt Brecht Rolf Dieter Brinkmann Hermann Broch Arnolt Bronnen Hermann Burger Elias Canetti Paul Celan Alfred Döblin Heimito von Doderer Friedrich Dürrenmatt Lion Feuchtwanger Marieluise Fleißer Erich Fried Max Frisch Stefan George Günter Grass Peter Handke Marlen Haushofer Hermann Hesse Georg Heym Wolfgang Hilbig Hugo von Hofmannsthal Ödön von Horváth Ricarda Huch Peter Huchel Ernst Jandl Uwe Johnson Ernst Jünger Franz Kafka Marie Luise Kaschnitz Erich Kästner Bernhard Kellermann Hermann Kesten Irmgard Keun Sarah Kirsch Egon Erwin Kisch Siegfried Kracauer Karl Kraus Else Lasker-Schüler Kurd Laßwitz Gert Ledig Siegfried Lenz Heinrich Mann Klaus Mann Thomas Mann Friederike Mayröcker Christian Morgenstern Erich Mühsam Heiner Müller Adolf Muschg Robert Musil Erich Maria Remarque Rainer Maria Rilke Joseph Roth Nelly Sachs Ernst von Salomon Paul Scheerbart Arthur Schnitzler Helga Schubert Kurt Schwitters W. G. Sebald Anna Seghers Bertha von Suttner Ernst Toller Georg Trakl Kurt Tucholsky Robert Walser Josef Weinheber Peter Weiss Franz Werfel Christa Wolf Stefan Zweig Contemporary writers Zsuzsa Bánk Thomas Brussig Dietmar Dath Jenny Erpenbeck Rainald Goetz Durs Grünbein Peter Handke Judith Hermann Elfriede Jelinek Reinhard Jirgl Wladimir Kaminer Daniel Kehlmann Esther Kinsky Alexander Kluge Barbara Köhler Christian Kracht Monika Maron Clemens Meyer Terézia Mora Herta Müller Sharon Dodua Otoo Emine Sevgi Özdamar Teresa Präauer Julya Rabinowich Rafik Schami Ingo Schulze Lutz Seiler Clemens J. Setz Botho Strauss Yoko Tawada Uwe Timm Ilija Trojanow Jan Wagner Martin Walser Peter Wawerzinek Wolf Wondratschek Feridun Zaimoğlu Juli Zeh German-language Nobel laureates Theodor Mommsen Rudolf Christoph Eucken Paul Heyse Gerhart Hauptmann Carl Spitteler Thomas Mann Hermann Hesse Nelly Sachs Heinrich Böll Elias Canetti Günter Grass Elfriede Jelinek Herta Müller Peter Handke German-language literary awards Ingeborg Bachmann Prize Georg Büchner Prize Sigmund Freud Prize Adelbert von Chamisso Prize Hans Fallada Prize Goethe Prize Heinrich Heine Prize Kleist Prize Leipzig Book Fair Prize Nelly Sachs Prize Kurd Laßwitz Award Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic 2 3 Spain Portugal Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz FID People BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX ^ a b Chisholm 1911 , p. 313.

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 313–324.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jean_Paul&oldid=1298563391 " Categories : 1763 births 1825 deaths People from Wunsiedel People from the Principality of Bayreuth 18th-century German novelists 19th-century German novelists German male novelists Writers from Bavaria 19th-century German male writers German blind writers German humorists Deaths from edema 18th-century German male writers Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2014 Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Open Library links CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 07:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jean Paul 41 languages Add topic

