Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Movements Toggle Movements subsection 1.1 Sonata for Microtonal Piano 1.2 Grindlemusic 2 References 3 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Sonata for Microtonal Piano (Ben Johnston) 1 language Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sonata for Microtonal Piano is a sonata for specifically microtonally tuned piano by Ben Johnston written in 1964 (see also just intonation ). When the movements are played in an alternate order the piece is titled Grindlemusic .

The piece uses, "chains of just tuned (untempered) triadic intervals over the whole piano range," with very few, only seven, piano keys having octave equivalents, thus providing eighty-one different pitches (there are eighty-eight white and black keys total).

[ 1 ] "Effectively, for the listener, there are three main gradations of consonance/dissonance: (1) smooth untempered [ major and minor] thirds and fifths , which have the least amount of harshness caused by acoustical beats ; (2) compounds of these...; and (3) chromatic or enharmonic intervals...which sound 'out of tune.'" [ 1 ] [note the difference between 'keyboard distance' in this tuning and pitch or interval distance: for example a fifteenth, two keys with fifteen notes between them, on a normally tuned keyboard is a double octave , while in this tuning a fifteenth is slightly sharper than that [ 1 ] ] "This suggested...the possibility of two opposite systems for the deployment of pitches: one that synchronized pitch choices with the layout  of consonant and dissonant intervals on the keyboard [see: tonality ], and a violently contrasting one in which the system for choosing pitches, a twelve- tone-row procedure derived largely from certain practices of Berg and late Schoenberg [see: twelve-tone technique ], either ignores or flaunts the consonance/dissonance keyboard layout [see: atonality ]. There are two contrasting movements of each of these types." [ 1 ] "This makes possible a Janus[two]-faced work, in which, with only the third movement similarly located in both versions, permutations of the placement of the other three movements creates an alter-ego relationship between the two versions, called respectively Sonata for Microtonal Piano and Grindlemusic . In the Sonata version, the movements correspond to the classical sonata scheme: the 'sonata-allegro,' the 'scherzo,' the songlike 'slow movement,' and the 'finale,' which is in this case a meditative adagio. All movements, however are cast in the common ballad mold, AABA, as is each of the two entire versions, the Sonata and Grindlemusic ." [ 1 ] In the words of the composer: "The Sonata , whether presented as beauty or as the beast, is a monstrous parody-enigma, allusive, referential, sometimes derisive, distorted, a tissue of familiarity in radically strange garb....Whatever the closing mood brings to mind, it is overlaid with irony and derision. The Sonata sequence poses the challenge: fast, faster, slow, slower. When, in the Sonata' s finale, the knots are finally untied, will it be clear from what Houdini has escaped?" [ 2 ] [ 3 ] "All tempos , all phrase and section lengths, and in certain parts of the 'finale' (which opens Grindlemusic , the sequence closing with the 'scherzo'), even note-to-note timings conform to a proportional scheme derived from a single pattern of changes in AABA form . This pattern is associated with two distinct motivic groups at different points in the work." [ 3 ] The piece has been recorded and released on: Microtonal Piano by Ben Johnston (1997).

Phillip Bush , piano. Koch International Classics 3-7369-2.

"Though the piece was recorded as the Sonata , and though Johnston and I both agree that a live performance of Grindlemusic would contain subtle alterations, the metric modulations between movements are nevertheless worked out to arrive at identical tempos in each version. Therefore I feel that a passable sense of Grindlemusic can be experienced by simply reprogramming the tracks on your compact disc player. To program the tracks for Grindlemusic , select the track order 9, 6, 8, 7." [ 4 ] The Sonata being track order 6, 7, 8, 9. 8, being B, stays in the same place.

Movements [ edit ] Sonata for Microtonal Piano [ edit ] Sonata-allegro Scherzo Slow movement Finale Grindlemusic [ edit ] Premises Questions Soul Music Mood Music Sonata-allegro = Questions, Scherzo = Mood Music, Slow movement = Soul Music, Finale = Premises.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Johnston, Ben and Gilmore, Bob (2006).

"Maximum Clarity" and Other Writings on Music , p.185.

ISBN 978-0-252-03098-7 .

^ Liner notes for SOUND FORMS FOR PIANO , New World Records 80203, fetched from "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-05-17 . Retrieved 2007-11-13 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ a b Johnston and Gilmore (2006), p.186.

^ Microtonal Piano by Ben Johnston (1997).

Phillip Bush , piano. Koch International Classics 3-7369-2. Liner notes.

Further reading [ edit ] Gibbens, John Jeffrey. "Design in Ben Johnston's Sonata for Microtonal Piano ".

Interface , Vol. 18 (1989), pp. 161–194.

v t e Microtonal music Composers Richard Barrett Béla Bartók Easley Blackwood Jr.

Heinz Bohlen Julián Carrillo Franklin Cox Mildred Couper John Eaton Brian Ferneyhough Michael Finnissy Bjørn Fongaard Alois Hába Christiaan Huygens Charles Ives Ben Johnston György Ligeti Stu Mackenzie Claus-Steffen Mahnkopf Joel Mandelbaum Joe Maneri Roger Redgate John Schneider Sevish Ezra Sims Nicola Vicentino Claude Vivier Elaine Walker Ivan Wyschnegradsky La Monte Young Inventors Glenn Branca Wendy Carlos Ivor Darreg Adriaan Fokker Lou Harrison Yuri Landman Harry Partch Tui St. George Tucker Nicola Vicentino Tunings and scales Non-octave- repeating scales Alpha scale Beta scale Gamma scale Delta scale Lambda scale (Bohlen–Pierce scale) Equal temperament 15 17 19 22 23 24 31 34 41 53 58 72 96 Just intonation Harry Partch's 43-tone scale Double diatonic Concepts and techniques Limit Otonality and Utonality Semitone Sonido 13 Xenharmonicity Tonality diamond Groups and publications Boston Microtonal Society Genesis of a Music Huygens-Fokker Foundation Compositions Beauty in the Beast quarter tone pieces just pieces Mother Sonata for Microtonal Piano Suite for Microtonal Piano Twelve Microtonal Etudes for Electronic Music Media Flying Microtonal Banana K.G.

L.W.

Other topics Enharmonic keyboard Generalized keyboard Modernism (music) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sonata_for_Microtonal_Piano_(Ben_Johnston)&oldid=1246666762 " Categories : Compositions by Ben Johnston Compositions in just intonation Piano sonatas 1964 compositions 5-limit tuning and intervals Hidden category: CS1 maint: archived copy as title This page was last edited on 20 September 2024, at 10:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sonata for Microtonal Piano (Ben Johnston) 1 language Add topic

