Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 LEPP 2 CHESS 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-based Sciences and Education Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°26′41.92″N 76°28′22.93″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.4449778°N 76.4730361°W ﻿ / 42.4449778; -76.4730361 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research institute at Cornell University in Ithaca, NY Wilson Laboratory, Campus Road entrance The Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-based ScienceS and Education ( CLASSE ) is a particle accelerator facility located in Wilson Laboratory on the Cornell University campus in Ithaca, New York . CLASSE was formed by merging the Cornell High-Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) and the Laboratory for Elementary-Particle Physics (LEPP) in July 2006.

[ 1 ] Nigel Lockyer is the Director of CLASSE in spring of 2023.

The Wilson Synchrotron Lab, which houses both the Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR) and CHESS, is named after Robert R. Wilson , known for his work as a group leader in the Manhattan Project , for being the first director of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory , and for contributing to the design of CESR.

[ 2 ] LEPP [ edit ] The Laboratory for Elementary-Particle Physics (LEPP) is a high-energy physics laboratory studying fundamental particles and their interactions.

The 768-meter Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR) is in operation below the campus athletic fields.

CESR is an electron - positron collider operating at a center-of-mass energy in the range of 3.5–12 GeV . Completed in 1979, CESR stores beams accelerated by the Cornell Synchrotron .

[ 3 ] Adding to a long history of significant developments, such as superconducting radio frequency cavities and pretzel orbits, the accelerator group is now developing an entirely new type of superconducting linear accelerator called the Energy Recovery Linear accelerator (ERL).  The group is also involved in the design of damping rings , tracking simulations, RF cavities , and accelerator operation for the International Linear Collider (ILC).

Cornell University has the largest graduate program in accelerator physics in the US.

CHESS [ edit ] Inside the Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR) Tunnel The Cornell High-Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) is a high-intensity, high-energy X-ray light source. The lab provides synchrotron radiation facilities for multidisciplinary scientific research, with a particular focus on protein crystallographic studies under the auspices of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).

CHESS was built between 1978 and 1980 as a synchrotron x-ray facility tied to the Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR) High-Energy Physics program (sometimes referred to, and better known as, particle physics ), which produces an electron energy of 5.5 GeV .

[ 4 ] The original laboratory, CHESS West, included three instrumented beamlines [with] six independent experimental stations. The CHESS East laboratory was constructed during 1988–1989, adding two beam lines and four instrumented experimental stations. CHESS East contains a biohazard level BL3 facility (built with funds from the NIH).

[ 3 ] Construction began in 1999 for an addition to the facility called the "G-line" to provide a new beam line and three additional experimental stations. This station, commissioned in 2002, was "constructed with extensive toxic gas handling capabilities advancing the prospects for in-situ crystal growth experiments." [ 5 ] Work performed at CHESS and at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) at Brookhaven National Laboratory led to the 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, awarded to Dr.

Roderick MacKinnon , M.D "for structural and mechanistic studies of ion channels".

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Physics labs consolidate to build a new accelerator" . Retrieved 2007-07-17 .

^ Hu, Sophia (30 Oct 2013).

"A History of Science: Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source" . Cornell Daily Sun. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013 . Retrieved 6 April 2014 .

^ a b "Cornell Electron Storage Ring" . Retrieved 2014-04-04 .

^ "Synchrotron radiation sources" . Retrieved 2006-06-05 .

^ "CHESS Facility Description" . Archived from the original on 2006-05-02 . Retrieved 2006-06-05 .

^ "2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry Awarded to Researcher Roderick MacKinnon" . Retrieved 2006-06-05 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wilson Synchrotron Lab .

CHESS Home Page LEPP Home Page Lightsources.org v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category v t e Synchrotron radiation facilities Africa African Light Source (AfLS) Americas North Advanced Light Source (ALS) Advanced Photon Source (APS) Canadian Light Source (CLS) Cornell High-Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS-II) Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) South Sirius Asia East Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF) High Energy Photon Source (HEPS) NanoTerasu Taiwan Light Source Taiwan Photon Source Pohang Light Source-II (PLS-II) Photon Factory (PF) Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) SPring-8 South Indus 2 Southeast Singapore Synchrotron Light Source (SSLS) Synchrotron Light Research Institute (SLRI) West SESAME Europe ALBA Diamond Light Source ELETTRA European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) MAX IV PETRA III Solaris SOLEIL Swiss Light Source (SLS) Oceania Australian Synchrotron 42°26′41.92″N 76°28′22.93″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.4449778°N 76.4730361°W ﻿ / 42.4449778; -76.4730361 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornell_Laboratory_for_Accelerator-based_Sciences_and_Education&oldid=1303688319 " Categories : Cornell University Cornell University buildings Synchrotron radiation facilities Research institutes in New York (state) 2006 establishments in New York (state) Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 13:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-based Sciences and Education Add languages Add topic

