Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 20th century 1.2 21st century 2 Schlesinger Library 3 Radcliffe Institute Fellowship Program 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Radcliffe Institute 6 languages العربية Español Esperanto فارسی Français Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′33″N 71°07′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37581°N 71.12233°W ﻿ / 42.37581; -71.12233 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Division of Harvard University This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Radcliffe Yard on the campus of Harvard University The Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard University , also known as the Harvard Radcliffe Institute , is an institute of Harvard University that fosters interdisciplinary research across the humanities , sciences , social sciences , arts, and professions.

[ 1 ] It came into being in 1999 as the successor institution to the former Radcliffe College , originally a women's college connected with Harvard.

The institute comprises three programs: The Radcliffe Institute Fellowship Program is a highly selective fellowship that supports the work of 50 artists and scholars each year.

The Academic Ventures program is for collaborative research projects and hosts lectures and conferences.

The Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America documents the lives of American women of the past and present for the future.

The Radcliffe Institute often hosts public events, many of which can be watched online. It is a member of the Some Institutes for Advanced Study consortium. Prof.

Tomiko Brown-Nagin is the institute's current dean.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] 20th century [ edit ] The Radcliffe Institute for Independent Study was founded in 1961 by the then-president of Radcliffe College, Mary Bunting , who sought to stem the exodus of highly trained and educated women from promising careers. The institute provided stipends as well as access to all of the resources of Harvard University to take up their chosen creative intellectual studies.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The initial funding for the institute came from the Carnegie and Rockefeller Foundations.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The institute was renamed the Bunting Institute in 1978; its grants expanded to support women wishing to pursue advanced degrees on a part-time basis.

The current institute came into being by the agreement of October 1, 1999, under which Radcliffe College merged with Harvard University.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Long before this date, the focus of Radcliffe had already begun to shift: undergraduate women had attended classes with Harvard men since 1943, received Harvard degrees signed by both Harvard and Radcliffe presidents since 1963, and lived in integrated dormitories with Harvard men since 1971.

21st century [ edit ] In 2001, the first professorship at the institute was established with the Carol K. Pforzheimer Professorship at Radcliffe. The professorship was endowed by the Pforzheimer family, who also endowed the Carl and Lily Pforzheimer Foundation Directorship and the Carol K. Pforzheimer Student Fellowships at the institute's Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America, which, with the Radcliffe Institute Fellowship Program, both of which date back to Radcliffe College days, are among the institute's best-known features.

[ 5 ] As the college became an institute, Mary Maples Dunn served as acting president of Radcliffe College and acting dean of the Radcliffe Institute. On January 1, 2001, Drew Gilpin Faust became the institute's first permanent dean; she stepped down in July 2007 to become president of Harvard University .

Barbara J. Grosz , Higgins Professor of Natural Sciences at the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , served as interim dean after Faust's departure and was named dean on April 28, 2008; [ 7 ] she stepped down in June 2011. After serving as interim dean from 2011 to 2012, Lizabeth Cohen became dean. A historian, Cohen stepped down on June 30, 2018, to return to research, writing, and teaching.

[ 8 ] Schlesinger Library [ edit ] Main article: Schlesinger Library The Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America exists to document women's lives and endeavors. Its wealth of resources reveals the wide range of women's activities at home in the United States and abroad from the early 19th century to the present day. The library's holdings include manuscripts; books and periodicals; and photographic and audiovisual material.

There are more than 2,500 unique manuscript collections from individuals, families, and organizations. Women's rights movements past and present, feminism, health and sexuality, social reform, and the education of women and girls are manuscript holdings. Ordinary lives of women and families and the struggles and triumphs of women of accomplishment are richly documented in diaries and other personal records. Many collections, such as the papers of Charlotte Perkins Gilman , Pauli Murray , and the records of the National Organization for Women , feature political, organizational, and economic questions. In addition to these collections, the library also houses the personal papers of Susan B. Anthony , Amelia Earhart , Betty Friedan , Adrienne Rich , and many others.

Books and Periodicals: More than 80,000 printed volumes include scholarly monographs as well as popular works. These cover topics including women's rights; women and work; women's health; women of color; comparative material about women in other cultures; works on women in the arts and in music; women and family; feminist and anti-feminist theory; and lesbian writings. Hundreds of periodical titles, including popular magazines such as Ladies' Home Journal , Ebony , and Seventeen , highlight domestic concerns, leisure pursuits, etiquette, fashion, and food.

Photographic and Audiovisual Material: More than 90,000 photographs, ranging from casual snapshots to the works of professional photographers, create an unparalleled visual record of private and public life. Audiotapes, videotapes and oral history tapes, and transcripts add the soundtrack to the story of women's lives.

The library has two distinguished special collections. A culinary collection of more than 15,000 books—spanning five centuries and global cuisines —is one of the world's most significant. This collection also includes the papers of several famous chefs and food writers, such as M. F. K. Fisher , Julia Child , and Elizabeth David . The Radcliffe College Archives, 1879–1999—including papers of college officers, students, and alumnae—record the history of women in higher education.

While its focus for collecting is American women , the library has an abundance of print and manuscript materials bearing on issues around the globe as a result of American women's extensive travel and foreign residence. Some examples are letters of early missionaries in China, activists' accounts of the Women's Encampment for a Future of Peace and Justice , and the speeches and writings of Shirley Graham Du Bois .

Detailed records for the library's manuscript collections as well as books and periodicals can be found in HOLLIS. The catalog record gives a description of the item or collection and provides other important information such as offsite location or access restrictions.

Radcliffe Institute Fellowship Program [ edit ] Byerly Hall in Radcliffe Yard Radcliffe Institute fellowships are designed to support scholars, scientists, artists, and writers of exceptional promise and demonstrated accomplishments who wish to pursue work in academic and professional fields and in the creative arts.

[ 9 ] The Radcliffe Institute Fellowship Program was founded at Radcliffe College in 1961 as the Radcliffe Institute for Independent Study. In 1978, the institute was renamed the Mary Ingraham Bunting Institute to honor Radcliffe College President Mary Bunting , whose initiative it was to create a postgraduate study center for female scholars and artists. Concerned about the prevailing "climate of unexpectation" for women at that time, Bunting deliberately sought to reverse that negative attitude by establishing the essential gifts of an Institute fellowship: time, financial support, a room of one's own, membership in a vital community of women, and access to all Radcliffe and Harvard resources.

Once Bunting's idea was made public and the announcement appeared on the front page of The New York Times in the fall of 1960, more than 2,000 women inquired about the "experiment". The outpouring of interest confirmed President Bunting's hunch—that a growing number of educated women were ready to resume intellectual or artistic work after raising families.

From 1960 to 2000, more than 1,300 scholars, scientists, artists, writers, and musicians have been named fellows.

The Boston Globe Magazine called the Bunting Institute "America's Think Tank for Women", and the Chronicle of Higher Education described the institute as a place where "lives get turned around, books get written, and discoveries are made, all the result of time spent among intellectual peers." Including the 2017–2018 academic year, the Radcliffe Institute Fellowship Program has hosted around 900 women and men of exceptional promise working on projects across the arts, humanities, sciences, and social sciences. For the 2017–2018 fellowship class, the acceptance rate was only 4 percent.

[ 10 ] Research clusters at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study use the Radcliffe Fellowship Program to draw together scholars to focus on particular themes. Previous cluster topics include unconscious prejudice and the law, immigration, randomness and computation, and cosmology and theoretical astrophysics.

The program is currently run out of Byerly Hall, one of the historic buildings in Radcliffe Yard.

References [ edit ] ^ "About Us" .

Radcliffe Institute of Advanced Study . Harvard University . Retrieved 25 January 2020 .

^ "TOMIKO BROWN-NAGIN" .

Harvard Law School . Harvard University . Retrieved 25 January 2020 .

^ a b Arenson, Karen W. (13 December 1998).

"Mary Bunting-Smith, Ex-President of Radcliffe, Dies at 87" .

The New York Times .

^ a b Yaffe, Elaine (2005).

Mary Ingraham Bunting: Her Two Lives . Savannah, Georgia: Frederic C. Beil. p. 365.

ISBN 1-929490-26-7 .

^ a b Radcliffe Institute: "Reading Room Named in Honor of Carol K. Pforzheimer '31" Archived 2011-05-20 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Radcliffe Packing Up and Going to Harvard" .

The New York Times . 21 April 1999.

^ "Barbara Grosz named dean of Radcliffe Institute" . 24 April 2008.

^ "Cohen to step down as Radcliffe Institute dean in June" . 3 October 2017.

^ "FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM" .

Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study . Harvard University . Retrieved 25 January 2020 .

^ "Announcing 2017–2018 Radcliffe Institute Fellows – Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard University" .

www.radcliffe.harvard.edu .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons v t e Some Institutes for Advanced Study Western Hemisphere Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences ( Stanford, California ) Institute for Advanced Study ( Princeton, New Jersey ) National Humanities Center ( Research Triangle Park , North Carolina ) Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study ( Cambridge, Massachusetts ) Eastern Hemisphere Berlin Institute for Advanced Study ( Berlin , Germany ) Israel Institute for Advanced Studies ( Jerusalem , Israel ) Nantes Institute for Advanced Study Foundation ( Nantes , France ) Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study ( Amsterdam , The Netherlands ) Swedish Collegium for Advanced Study ( Uppsala , Sweden ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Israel Catalonia Other Yale LUX 42°22′33″N 71°07′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37581°N 71.12233°W ﻿ / 42.37581; -71.12233 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Radcliffe_Institute&oldid=1296376717 " Categories : Radcliffe College and Institute 1999 establishments in Massachusetts Harvard University research institutes Institute for Advanced Study Research institutes established in 1999 Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with a promotional tone from February 2021 All articles with a promotional tone Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 16:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Radcliffe Institute 6 languages Add topic

