Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Mathematics 3 Architecture 4 Editions of On Burning-Glasses 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Anthemius of Tralles 40 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Italiano Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Occitan Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Byzantine architect and mathematician (c. 474 – 533–558) For persons of a similar name, see Anthemius (disambiguation) .

Fragment of a Greek work by Anthemius on Paradoxes of mechanics ( Fragment d'un ouvrage grec d'Anthèmius sur des Paradoxes de mècanique ), 1777 Anthemius of Tralles ( Ancient Greek : Ἀνθέμιος ὁ Τραλλιανός , Medieval Greek : [anˈθemios o traliaˈnos] , Anthémios o Trallianós ; c.

474 – 533 x 558) [ 1 ] was a Byzantine Greek from Tralles [ 2 ] who worked as a geometer and architect in Constantinople , the capital of the Byzantine Empire . With Isidore of Miletus , he designed the Hagia Sophia for Justinian I .

Life [ edit ] Anthemius was one of the five sons of Stephanus of Tralles, a physician. His brothers were Dioscorus, Alexander, Olympius, and Metrodorus. Dioscorus followed his father's profession in Tralles; Alexander did so in Rome and became one of the most celebrated medical men of his time; Olympius became a noted lawyer ; and Metrodorus worked as a grammarian in Constantinople.

[ 3 ] Anthemius was said to have annoyed his neighbor Zeno in two ways: first, by engineering a miniature earthquake by sending steam through leather tubes he had fixed among the joists and flooring of Zeno's parlor while he was entertaining friends [ 4 ] and, second, by simulating thunder and lightning and flashing intolerable light into Zeno's eyes from a slightly hollowed mirror.

[ 3 ] In addition to his familiarity with steam, some dubious authorities credited Anthemius with a knowledge of gunpowder or other explosive compound.

[ 3 ] Mathematics [ edit ] Anthemius was a capable mathematician . In the course of his treatise On Burning Mirrors , he intended to facilitate the construction of surfaces to reflect light to a single point, he described the string construction of the ellipse [ 1 ] and assumed a property of ellipses not found in Apollonius of Perga 's Conics : the equality of the angles subtended at a focus by two tangents drawn from a point. His work also includes the first practical use of the directrix : having given the focus and a double ordinate, he used the focus and directrix to obtain any number of points on a parabola .

[ 3 ] This work was later known to Arab mathematicians such as Alhazen .

Eutocius of Ascalon 's commentary on Apollonius's Conics was dedicated to Anthemius.

[ 1 ] Architecture [ edit ] Exterior of the Hagia Sophia , 2013 As an architect, Anthemius is best known for his work designing the Hagia Sophia .

[ 3 ] He was commissioned with Isidore of Miletus by Justinian I shortly after the earlier church on the site burned down in 532 but died early on in the project. He is also said to have repaired the flood defenses at Daras .

[ 5 ] Editions of On Burning-Glasses [ edit ] Dupuy, L. (1777), Περί παραδόξων μηχανημάτων [ Perí Paradóxōn Mēkhanēmátōn; Concerning Wondrous Machines ] (in Greek) Histoire de l'Academie des Instrumentistes (in French), vol. XLII Westermann, A. (1839), Παραδοξογράφοι [ Paradoxográphoi; Marvel-Writers ] (in Greek) Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Boyer, Carl Benjamin (1991), A History of Mathematics (2nd ed.), John Wiley & Sons, p. 193, ISBN 0-471-54397-7 .

^ Heath 1911 , p. 98: "ANTHEMIUS, Greek mathematician and architect, who produced, under the patronage of Justinian (A.D.

532), the original and daring plans for the church of St Sophia in Constantinople, ... He was one of five brothers—the sons of Stephanus, a physician of Tralles—who were all more or less eminent in their respective departments.

..." ^ a b c d e Heath 1911 , p. 98.

^ Agathias (2 May 2011).

"Section 5.7.2-5" .

The Histories . Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-11-082694-4 .

^ O'Connor & Robertson 1999 .

References [ edit ] Heath, Thomas Little (1911), "Anthemius" , in Chisholm, Hugh (ed.), Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 2 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, p. 93 Huxley, G. L. (1959), Anthemius of Tralles: A Study in Later Greek Geometry , Cambridge, MA, pp.

8– 9, LCCN 59-14700 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Huxley, G. L. (1970), "Anthemius of Tralles" , in Gillispie, Charles Coulston (ed.), Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. 1 (Abailard–Berg), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, pp.

169– 170 .

Knorr, Wilbur (1983). "The Geometry of Burning-Mirrors in Antiquity".

Isis .

74 (1): 53– 73.

doi : 10.1086/353176 .

JSTOR 232280 .

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

(1999), "Anthemius of Tralles" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Vatican Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN People Structurae Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anthemius_of_Tralles&oldid=1286725273 " Categories : 470s births 6th-century deaths Byzantine architects 5th-century mathematicians 6th-century mathematicians Greek Christians People from Tralles Justinian I 5th-century Byzantine writers 5th-century Byzantine scientists 6th-century Byzantine scientists 6th-century Byzantine writers 6th-century architects Hagia Sophia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Greek IPA CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 16:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anthemius of Tralles 40 languages Add topic

