Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early career 1.2 Envoy of the Republic 1.3 Consulate and Empire 1.4 End of the Empire, exile, and return 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano 21 languages العربية Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français Italiano Lietuvių مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French statesman and diplomat Hugues-Bernard Maret Duke of Bassano Portrait by Robert Lefèvre , 1807 Minister of Foreign Affairs In office 17 April 1811 – 19 November 1813 [ 1 ] Monarch Napoleon Preceded by Jean-Baptiste de Nompère de Champagny Succeeded by Armand de Caulaincourt Prime Minister of France In office 10 November 1834 – 18 November 1834 [ 2 ] Monarch Louis Philippe I Preceded by Étienne Maurice Gérard Succeeded by Édouard Mortier Personal details Born ( 1763-05-01 ) 1 May 1763 Dijon Died 13 May 1839 (1839-05-13) (aged 76) Paris Resting place Père Lachaise Cemetery Awards Grand Eagle of the Legion of Honour Grand Cross of the House Order of Fidelity Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Hubert Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown of Saxony Order of the Lion and the Sun [ 1 ] Signature Hugues-Bernard Maret ( French: [yɡ bɛʁnaʁ maʁɛ] ; 1 May 1763 – 13 May 1839), 1st Duke of Bassano ( Duc de Bassano ), was a French statesman, diplomat and journalist.

Biography [ edit ] Early career [ edit ] Maret was born in Dijon , in the province of Burgundy , as the second son of a physician and scholar at the Academy of Dijon . Destined for a medical career by his father, he instead decided to study law, [ 3 ] and after receiving a solid education Maret entered the legal profession, becoming a lawyer at the King's Council in Paris. The ideas of the French Revolution profoundly influenced him, wholly altering his career.

[ 4 ] The interest aroused by the debates of the first National Assembly suggested to him the idea of publishing them in the Bulletin de l'Assemblée . The journalist Charles-Joseph Panckoucke (1736–1798), owner of the Mercure de France and publisher of the famous Encyclopédie (1785), persuaded him to merge this in a larger paper, Le Moniteur Universel , which gained a wide repute for correctness and impartiality.

[ 4 ] He was a member of the moderate club, the Feuillants , but, with the overthrow of the monarchy and the insurrection of 10 August 1792 he accepted a post in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , where he sometimes exercised a steadying influence. On the withdrawal of the British legation , Citizen Maret (as he was then known) went on a mission to London, where he had a favourable interview with William Pitt the Younger on 22 December 1792 – all hope of an accommodation was, however, in vain. After the execution of Bourbon King Louis XVI (21 January 1793), the chief French diplomatic agent, Bernard-François de Chauvelin , was ordered to leave Britain, while the National Convention declared war (1 February 1793 – see Campaigns of 1793 in the French Revolutionary Wars ). These events limited the impact of Maret's second mission to London in January 1794.

[ 4 ] Envoy of the Republic [ edit ] After a space in which he held no diplomatic post, he became Ambassador of the French Republic to the Kingdom of Naples ; but, while negotiating with Charles de Sémonville he was captured by the Austrian Empire and was kept for some thirty months, until, at the close of 1795, the two were set free in return for the liberation of Princess Marie-Thérèse-Charlotte , the daughter of ex-King Louis XVI.

For a time Maret returned to journalism, but he played a useful part in the negotiations for a peace with Britain which went on at Lille during the summer of 1797, until the victory of the Jacobin Club in Paris in the coup d'état of 18 Fructidor (September 1797) frustrated the hopes of Pitt for peace and inflicted on Maret another reverse of fortune.

[ 4 ] On Napoleon 's return from Egypt in 1799, Maret joined the general's party which came to power with the 18 Brumaire coup (9 November–10).

[ 4 ] Consulate and Empire [ edit ] Heraldic achievement of Hugues-Bernard Maret, Duke of Bassano Maret now became one of Napoleon's secretaries and shortly afterwards Secretary of State. An experienced politician, he rendered services of major value to the French Consulate and First French Empire .

The Moniteur , which became the official State Journal in 1800, was placed under his control. He sometimes succeeded in toning down the hard, abrupt language of Napoleon's communications, and in every way proved a useful intermediary. It is known that he had a share in the drawing up of the new constitutions for the Batavian and Italian Republics .

[ 4 ] In 1804, he became Minister; in 1807, he was created Count ; and in 1809, he was granted the title of Duc de Bassano , one of the titles with the status of duché grand-fief in Napoleon's Kingdom of Italy . This was a rare hereditary honor (extinct in 1906), which gives an insight into how well respected his work was by the Emperor.

He was extremely devoted to Napoleon, as shown by his work to pass into law the artifices adopted by the latter in April–May 1808 in order to make himself master of the destinies of Spain ( see Peninsular War ). Maret also assisted in drawing up the Spanish Constitution of 1808 , which was rejected by almost all Spanish subjects. He accompanied Napoleon through most of his campaigns, including that of 1809 against the Fifth Coalition , and he expressed himself in favour of the marriage alliance with the Archduchess Marie-Louise of Austria , which took place in 1810.

[ 4 ] In the spring of 1811, the Duc de Bassano replaced Jean-Baptiste de Champagny , as Minister of Foreign Affairs . In this capacity he showed his usual ability and devotion, concluding the treaties between France and Austria and between France and Prussia , which preceded the French invasion of Russia in 1812. 
He was with Napoleon through the greater part of that campaign, and after the major defeat, helped to prepare the new forces with which Napoleon waged the equally unsuccessful campaign of 1813 against the Sixth Coalition .

[ 4 ] End of the Empire, exile, and return [ edit ] Maret's tomb in Paris In November 1813 Napoleon replaced Maret with Armand, Marquis of Caulaincourt , who was known to be devoted to the cause of peace and had a personal connection to Tsar Alexander I of Russia . Maret, however, as private secretary of Napoleon, remained with him through the campaign of 1814 , as well as during that of 1815 and the Hundred Days .

[ 4 ] After the restoration of the Bourbons , Maret was exiled.  He retired to Graz , where he occupied himself with literary work. In 1820 he was allowed to return to France. After the July Revolution of 1830, the new king Louis Philippe elevated him as a Peer of France . In November 1834 Maret served a short time as Prime Minister of France.

[ 4 ] The Duc de Bassano died at Paris in 1839.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] List of Ambassadors of France to the United Kingdom References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hugues-Bernard Maret .

^ a b Paris, Louis (1869).

Dictionnaire des anoblissements (in French). Vol. 1. Paris: Bachelin-Deflorenne. p. 63.

^ a b Roberts, Andrew (27 May 2016).

Napoleon the Great . Penguin Books Limited. p. 898.

ISBN 978-0-241-29466-6 .

the Duc de Bassano, was made a peer by Louis Philippe and became prime minister of France for eight days in November 1834; he died in Paris in 1839.

^ Ernouf, Alfred-Auguste (1884).

Maret, duc de Bassano (in French) (2 ed.). Paris: Éditions Perrin.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Rose 1911 .

Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Rose, John Holland (1911). " Maret, Hugues-Bernard ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 17 (11th ed.). p. 700.

Political offices Preceded by Comte Gérard Prime Minister of France 1834 Succeeded by Duc de Treviso French nobility Preceded by New creation Duke of Bassano 1809–1839 Succeeded by Napoléon Hugues Maret de Bassano v t e Académie française seat 10 Antoine Godeau (1634) Esprit Fléchier (1672) Henri de Nesmond (1710) Jean-Jacques Amelot de Chaillou (1727) Charles Louis Auguste Fouquet, duc de Belle-Isle (1749) Nicolas-Charles-Joseph Trublet (1761) Jean François de Saint-Lambert (1770) Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano (1803) Joseph Lainé (1816) Emmanuel Dupaty (1836) Alfred de Musset (1852) Victor de Laprade (1858) François Coppée (1884) Jean Aicard (1909) Camille Jullian (1924) Léon Bérard (1934) Jean Guitton (1961) Florence Delay (2000) v t e Heads of government of France Restoration Talleyrand Richelieu Dessolles Decazes Richelieu Villèle Martignac Polignac July Monarchy V. de Broglie Laffitte Perier Soult Gérard Maret Mortier V. de Broglie Thiers Molé Soult Thiers Soult Guizot Molé Second Republic Dupont de l'Eure Arago Cavaignac Barrot Hautpoul Faucher Second Empire Ollivier Cousin-Montauban Government of National Defense Trochu Third Republic Dufaure A. de Broglie Cissey Buffet Dufaure Simon A. de Broglie Rochebouët Dufaure Waddington Freycinet Ferry Gambetta Freycinet Duclerc Fallières Ferry Brisson Freycinet Goblet Rouvier Floquet Tirard Freycinet Loubet Ribot Dupuy Casimir-Perier Dupuy Ribot Bourgeois Méline Brisson Dupuy Waldeck-Rousseau Combes Rouvier Sarrien Clemenceau Briand Monis Caillaux Poincaré Briand Barthou Doumergue Ribot Viviani Briand Ribot Painlevé Clemenceau Millerand Leygues Briand Poincaré François-Marsal Herriot Painlevé Briand Herriot Poincaré Briand Tardieu Chautemps Tardieu Steeg Laval Tardieu Herriot Paul-Boncour Daladier Sarraut Chautemps Daladier Doumergue Flandin Bouisson Laval Sarraut Blum Chautemps Blum Daladier Reynaud Pétain Vichy France Pétain Laval Flandin Darlan Laval Provisional Government De Gaulle Gouin Bidault Blum Fourth Republic Ramadier Schuman Marie Schuman Queuille Bidault Queuille Pleven Queuille Pleven Faure Pinay Mayer Laniel Mendès France Faure Mollet Bourgès-Maunoury Gaillard Pflimlin De Gaulle Fifth Republic De Gaulle Debré Pompidou Couve de Murville Chaban-Delmas Messmer Chirac Barre Mauroy Fabius Chirac Rocard Cresson Bérégovoy Balladur Juppé Jospin Raffarin Villepin Fillon Ayrault Valls Cazeneuve Philippe Castex Borne Attal Barnier Bayrou Related Chief minister of France (pre-Revolution) Deputy Prime Minister (defunct) v t e French Consulate (10 November 1799 – 18 May 1804) Provisional consuls Napoleon Bonaparte Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Roger Ducos Bonaparte First Consul Consuls Napoleon Bonaparte Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès Charles-François Lebrun, duc de Plaisance Ministers Foreign Affairs Charles-Frédéric Reinhard Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Justice Jean-Jacques-Régis de Cambacérès André Joseph Abrial Claude Ambroise Régnier War Louis-Alexandre Berthier Lazare Carnot Louis-Alexandre Berthier Finance Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin Police Joseph Fouché Interior Pierre-Simon Laplace Lucien Bonaparte Jean-Antoine Chaptal Navy and Colonies Marc-Antoine Bourdon de Vatry Pierre-Alexandre-Laurent Forfait Denis Decrès Secretary of State Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano Treasury François Barbé-Marbois War Administration Jean François Aimé Dejean Preceded by French Directory Followed by First Cabinet of Napoleon I v t e First cabinet of Napoleon (18 May 1804 to 1 April 1814) Head of state: Napoleon Secretary of State Hugues-Bernard Maret Pierre Daru Hugues-Bernard Maret Napoleon Foreign Affairs Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Jean-Baptiste de Nompère de Champagny Hugues-Bernard Maret Armand Augustin Louis de Caulaincourt Interior Jean-Antoine Chaptal Jean-Baptiste de Nompère de Champagny Emmanuel Crétet Joseph Fouché Jean-Pierre de Montalivet Justice Claude Ambroise Régnier Louis-Mathieu Molé War Louis-Alexandre Berthier Henri Jacques Guillaume Clarke War Administration Jean François Aimé Dejean Jean-Girard Lacuée Pierre Daru Finance Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin Treasury François Barbé-Marbois Nicolas François, Count Mollien Navy and Colonies Denis Decrès Police Joseph Fouché Anne Jean Marie René Savary Religious affairs Jean-Étienne-Marie Portalis Félix-Julien-Jean Bigot de Préameneu Manufacturing and Commerce Jean-Baptiste Collin de Sussy Preceded by French Consulate • Followed by French provisional government of 1814 v t e French government of the Hundred Days (20 March 1815 to 22 June 1815) Head of state: Napoleon Foreign Affairs Armand Augustin Louis de Caulaincourt Napoleon Finance Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin Treasury Nicolas François, Count Mollien Interior Lazare Carnot Police Joseph Fouché Justice Jean-Jacques-Régis de Cambacérès Navy and Colonies Denis Decrès War Louis-Nicolas Davout Secretary of State Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano Preceded by Government of the first Bourbon restoration • Followed by French Provisional Government of 1815 v t e Cabinet of Hugues-Bernard Maret (10 November 1834 to 18 November 1834) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Hugues-Bernard Maret Hugues-Bernard Maret Interior Hugues-Bernard Maret Justice and Religious Affairs Jean-Charles Persil Foreign Affairs Charles-Joseph Bresson War Simon Bernard Finance Hippolyte Passy Navy and Colonies Charles Dupin Public Education Jean-Baptiste Teste Commerce Jean-Baptiste Teste v t e Foreign ministers of France Ancien Régime Revol Villeroy A. J. Richelieu Sillery R. Phélypeaux Bouthillier Chavigny Brienne Lionne Pomponne Croissy Torcy Huxelles Dubois Morville Chauvelin Chaillou Noailles Argenson Puisieulx Saint-Contest Rouillé Bernis É. Choiseul C. Choiseul É. Choiseul L. Phélypeaux Aiguillon Bertin Vergennes Montmorin Vauguyon Montmorin Lessart Dumouriez Naillac Chambonas Dubouchage Sainte-Croix First Republic Lebrun-Tondu Deforgues Goujon Herman Delacroix Talleyrand Reinhard Talleyrand First Empire Talleyrand Champagny Bassano Caulaincourt First Restoration Laforest Talleyrand Hundred Days Caulaincourt Bignon Second Restoration Talleyrand A. E. Richelieu Dessolles Pasquier M. Montmorency Chateaubriand Damas La Ferronays Montmorency-Laval Portalis Polignac Mortemart July Monarchy Bignon Jourdan Molé Maison Sébastiani V. Broglie Rigny Bresson Rigny V. Broglie Thiers Molé Montebello Soult Thiers Guizot Second Republic Lamartine Bastide Bedeau Bastide Drouyn de Lhuys Tocqueville Rayneval La Hitte Drouyn de Lhuys Brénier Baroche Turgot Drouyn de Lhuys Second Empire Drouyn de Lhuys Walewski Baroche Thouvenel Drouyn de Lhuys La Valette Moustier La Valette La Tour Auvergne Daru Ollivier Gramont La Tour d'Auvergne Third Republic Favre Rémusat A. Broglie Decazes Banneville Waddington Freycinet Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire Gambetta Freycinet Duclerc Fallières Challemel-Lacour Ferry Freycinet Flourens Goblet Spuller Ribot Develle Casimir-Perier Hanotaux Berthelot Bourgeois Hanotaux Delcassé Rouvier Bourgeois Pichon Cruppi Selves Poincaré Jonnart Pichon Doumergue Bourgeois Viviani Doumergue Delcassé Viviani Briand Ribot Barthou Pichon Millerand Leygues Briand Poincaré Lefebvre Herriot Briand Herriot Briand Laval Tardieu Herriot Paul-Boncour Daladier Barthou Laval Flandin Delbos Paul-Boncour Bonnet Daladier Reynaud Daladier Reynaud Baudouin Vichy France Baudouin Laval Flandin Darlan Laval Provisional Government Bidault Blum Fourth Republic Bidault Schuman Bidault Mendès France Faure Pinay Pineau Pleven Couve de Murville Fifth Republic Couve de Murville Debré Schumann Bettencourt Jobert Sauvagnargues Guiringaud François-Poncet Cheysson Dumas Raimond Dumas Juppé Charette Védrine Villepin Barnier Douste-Blazy Kouchner Alliot-Marie Juppé Fabius Ayrault Le Drian Colonna Séjourné Barrot Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Poland Vatican People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hugues-Bernard_Maret,_duc_de_Bassano&oldid=1262067161 " Categories : 1763 births 1839 deaths Writers from Dijon Counts of the First French Empire Dukes de Bassano Politicians from Bourgogne-Franche-Comté Prime ministers of France Foreign ministers of France French interior ministers Members of the Chamber of Peers of the Hundred Days Members of the Chamber of Peers of the July Monarchy Ambassadors of France to Great Britain 18th-century French lawyers 18th-century French diplomats 19th-century French diplomats French male writers French male essayists 18th-century French essayists Newspaper editors of the French Revolution Members of the Académie des sciences morales et politiques Members of the Académie Française Expelled members of the Académie Française Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Politicians from Dijon Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Pages with French IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica S-bef: 'before' parameter begins with the word 'new' This page was last edited on 9 December 2024, at 12:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano 21 languages Add topic

