Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synonyms 2 Marketing 3 Political 4 LGBTQ+ 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Purplewashing 13 languages Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français Galego Italiano Nederlands Occitan Português Română Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Use of the aesthetic feminism to promote organisations This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Purplewashing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section contains information that is not included elsewhere in the article .

If this information is appropriate for the lead, it should also be included in the article's body. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e The feminist symbol including a fist inside of the female sign, enclosed in the color purple, the color of feminism Purplewashing is a term used to describe the practice of using feminist or LGBTQ+ issues to mask discriminatory or harmful practices. It involves selectively promoting certain aspects of feminism or LGBTQ+ rights to improve a company's or organization's image, while often neglecting or undermining these same issues in other contexts.

[ 1 ] In the context of feminism, it is used to describe a variety of political and marketing strategies aimed at promoting countries, people, companies and other organizations through an appeal to gender equality .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This marketing tactic has also been called femvertising , which was most discussed in Gillette Razor's # MeToo commercial aimed towards toxic masculinity .

[ 4 ] In the context of LGBTQ+ issues, purplewashing is also a term used to refer to a phenomenon where organizations or individuals selectively represent bisexual people and issues to appear inclusive, often for marketing or public relations purposes.

Synonyms [ edit ] Pinkwashing [ 5 ] is another term used similarly to purplewashing, as it can mean the same thing and is used interchangeably with purplewashing as sometimes pink is labeled as the color of feminism instead of purple . The term pinkwashing is also used for LGBTQ concerns.

Femvertising is a combination of "feminism" and "advertising," and it refers to a marketing strategy that uses feminist themes or messages to appeal to women consumers.

[ citation needed ] Marketing [ edit ] Through marketing and political strategies that reinforce a commitment to gender equality, western countries use this as a method of image-cleaning.

[ 6 ] This marketing tactic has also been called, "Femvertising", which was most discussed in Gillette Razor's #MeToo commercial aimed towards toxic masculinity. In advertisement, women are often portrayed through gender stereotypes, the objectification of the female body and the little representation of women. The term "femvertising" gained popularity in 2014 after the iBlog magazine SheKnows defined it as advertising that uses female-centric talent, messaging, and visuals to uplift and inspire women and girls, specifically due to its ability to question traditional gender stereotypes tied to women in advertising. Through "femvertising" marketers are able to reach female consumers as they use female empowerment to advertise.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] One of the most well known examples today is the Dove Campaign for Real Beauty (2004), which aimed to help young women and children gain confidence. By bringing up the idea of physical traits and other stereotypical traits associated to females whether it was personality, role, or occupation, it made sure to raise awareness that everyone was beautiful. Therefore, Dove is known for being positive advocates for women when it comes to social standards as they have used feminism in their advertising. This strategy is now used by many other brands and companies to attract female consumers.

Social media is a way in which companies can further market to females. Social media platforms such as Instagram portray the usage of "femvertising". Ads on social media apps provide a means for brands to bolster products and will strategize the marketable content that the users interacts with. These advertisements are generated based on the users' activity, increasing interest and therefore the probability of purchases and interaction.

[ 9 ] Social media feed that relates to females will drive the trends within these apps. Feminism is a popular way social media apps use female topics, such as campaigns for feminism or highlighting social issues involving females. The clothing company H&M designed a campaign titled "She's A Lady" in 2016 that was used on social media platforms. Campaigns as such online display the influence "femvertising" to invest in the interest of females.

[ 10 ] Political [ edit ] Many politicians have said controversial statements regarding women, yet continue to introduce schemes and policies meant for women's development.

[ 11 ] A well-known Chief Minister [ which?

] —who has introduced many reforms and policies for women empowerment campaigns—has said, "Just like unbridled energy can be destructive and can go haywire, so too if the spirit of women is not controlled then it can prove dangerous." [ 12 ] [ 11 ] Within the Spanish Army , there have been many legislative and formal changes to fight sexism. However, it has not altered the relationship between the patriarchy and militarism that remains today within the Spanish Army. The report of Centre Delas d'Estudis per la Pau analyzes the women in the Armed Force and how they are far from actually reaching the feminist milestone for equality in the areas of power. Through certain strategies, the Army has engaged in purplewashing and therefore instrumentalized women in order to create a false reality of equality and modernity in the Armed Forces.

[ 13 ] LGBTQ+ [ edit ] Surface level inclusivity is a concern that the term purplewashing addresses. When it comes to pride events or awareness campaigns, companies may promote LGBTQ+ inclusivity by showcasing bisexuality as part of their broader representation of the queer community. This inclusion is often superficial, focusing on bisexuality as a marketing tool instead of meaningfully addressing the needs or challenges that bisexual individuals face, both within the LGBTQ+ community and society at large.

[ 14 ] Bisexuality is sometimes tokenized in corporate pride campaigns—used to appear inclusive, without an actual commitment to advocating for bisexual individuals' rights. This can be part of a larger trend of rainbow capitalism where companies display rainbow flags or market pride merchandise, but do little to support the community beyond that. The article suggests that this can be especially problematic for bisexual individuals, whose experiences are often invalidated or ignored, even within queer spaces.

[ 14 ] Bisexuality is often erased or misunderstood both in mainstream culture and within the LGBTQ+ movement itself. Even when companies claim to support LGBTQ+ rights, their promotional materials may fail to address the unique challenges faced by bisexual people—such as discrimination from both straight and gay communities, or the invisibility of bisexual identities. Purplewashing, in this context, is seen as further contributing to the marginalization of bisexuality by using it for profit without addressing or engaging with its complexities.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Feminism portal Aestheticization of politics Astroturfing Brigitte Vasallo Commodity feminism Ethnocentrism Feminationalism Greenwashing Homonationalism Intersectionality Islamic feminism Pastel QAnon Pinkwashing Redwashing Postcolonialism Purple capitalism References [ edit ] ^ Moscoso, Melania; Platero, R. Lucas (16 February 2017). "Cripwashing: the abortion debates at the crossroads of gender and disability in the Spanish media".

Continuum .

31 (3): 470– 481.

doi : 10.1080/10304312.2016.1275158 .

hdl : 10261/187602 .

S2CID 151949284 .

^ "Del pornoburka al purplewashing, los trucos más sucios contra el feminismo" .

El Confidencial (in Spanish).

^ "Gender and Military Culture" (PDF) .

Centre Delás .

^ Hinman, Pip (2019-01-23).

"Gillette, gender and the struggle" .

Green Left . Retrieved 2020-03-16 .

^ "The Poisoning Reality of Purplewashing and Pinkwashing" .

leed . Retrieved 2024-11-19 .

^ "Purplewashing" .

Women and feminism . 2021-03-16 . Retrieved 2021-03-16 .

^ Becker-Herby, Elisa. "The Rise of Femvertising:Authentically Reaching Female Consumers".

School of Journalism and Mass Communication .

^ Åkestam, Nina; Rosengren, Sara; Dahlen, Micael (2017).

"Advertising "like a girl": Toward a better understanding of "femvertising" and its effects" .

Psychology & Marketing .

34 (8): 795– 806.

doi : 10.1002/mar.21023 .

ISSN 1520-6793 .

^ Descouens, Margot, and Valentine Gerbault. " Generation Y's Attitude towards Femvertising in Cosmetics: Women Empowerment or Purplewashing?

" UMEÅ University , 2021.

^ Davis, Darrell (February 13, 2020).

"Power of Femvertising a New Weapon for Social Media Marketing" .

The Daily Design .

^ a b Aggarwal, Ishika (February 4, 2021).

"What is purple washing? How does it show the double standards of the perpetrator?" .

One World News . Retrieved March 8, 2021 .

^ "UP govt to launch 6-month long women empowerment programme 'Mission Shakti' to raise awareness" .

News On AIR . October 17, 2020 . Retrieved March 8, 2021 .

^ "Report 41: Acculturation & purplewashing in the Spanish Army. A study of token women" .

Delas . Retrieved 2021-03-16 .

^ a b c "The Paradox of Purple Washing" .

Queer Majority . 2020-01-01 . Retrieved 2024-11-19 .

External links [ edit ] Look up purplewashing in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Purplewashing&oldid=1306462767 " Category : Feminist economics Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2020 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia introduction cleanup from June 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from June 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2025 Pages using div col with small parameter Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 22:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Purplewashing 13 languages Add topic

