Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Botanical career 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents August Carl Joseph Corda 13 languages Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Czech physician and mycologist August Carl Joseph Corda Born ( 1809-11-15 ) November 15, 1809 Liberec , Austrian Empire Died 1849 (1849-00-00) (aged 39–40) Occupation(s) Physician, botanist, mycologist August Carl Joseph Corda (15 November 1809 – 1849) was a physician, botanist, and mycologist from Bohemia . This botanist is denoted by the author abbreviation Corda when citing a botanical name .

[ 1 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Corda was born in Reichenberg (now Liberec ), Bohemia on November 15, 1809.

[ 2 ] Corda's father was a textile seller. Both of Corda's parents died suddenly only a few weeks following his birth, and Corda was raised by his grandmother, attending the Normale School in Reichenberg.

[ 2 ] Corda's grandmother died in 1819 and Corda was sent to live with an "unacquainted family" for two years during which time he did not receive schooling.

[ 2 ] Two years later, Corda was transferred to the care of an uncle in Prague where he attended the "Lyceum of New Prague".

[ 2 ] As a result of family difficulties, Corda left the Lyceum in 1824 to attend polytechnical school . There, he studied physics under Franz Ignatz Cassian Hallaschka , chemistry under Josef Johann Steinmann , mineralogy under Franz Xaver Zippe , and botany under Ignaz Friedrich Tausch . Corda remained at the Polytechnic only 3 years, long enough to become proficient in chemistry.

[ 2 ] After leaving the Polytechnic in 1827, Corda took a job in a chemical factory in Prague for a brief time before returning to study surgery at the University of Prague. Shortly thereafter during an outbreak of Vibrio cholerae , Corda served as an assistant surgeon at the General Hospital in Prague.  He continued as a cholera doctor in Rokitzan , Reichstadt , Niemes and Zwickau .

[ 3 ] Late in 1832, dispirited by his seemingly endless struggle against cholera , Corda quit the practice of medicine.

[ 2 ] Botanical career [ edit ] For six weeks, Corda retreated to Berlin to enjoy the company of his close friend Kurt Sprengel and his many associates in the literati, Alexander von Humboldt , Carl Sigismund Kunth , Johann Horkel and Martin Lichtenstein . Following his return to Reichenberg, Corda was inspired to the study of botany following the receipt of a letter from the Berlin Academy proposing a study of the growth of palms and related plants with a travel grant for a return trip to Berlin. Corda enthusiastically responded by writing De incremento stipitis plantarum with nearly 100 accompanying illustrations which he completed in 1834 along with a monograph on the "Anatomy of the Rhyzosperms". During his return to Prague, Corda collected at the Karlovy Vary Hot Springs where he studied aquatic zooplankton and visited Nees von Esenbeck .

[ 2 ] Once back in Prague, Corda was invited to take up a position of Curator of the Division of Zoology at the Czech National Museum by the museum's founder and president, the influential Kaspar Maria von Sternberg , whom Corda had met during his time at Karlovy Vary and also at a botanical congress in Vratislavia . Corda's primary interest quickly drifted to the mycological collections which became the primary focus of his work. Corda is best known for his monumental 6 volume Icones fungorum hucusque cognitorum , published from 1837 to 1842 and finally in 1854, and his Prachtflora europäischer Schimmelbildungen published in 1839.

[ 4 ] : 273 Corda was one of the first mycologists to document the sizes of spores of the fungi he described.

[ 4 ] : 61 In 1848, Corda was suspected of political agitation during the Prague Barricades and narrowly escaped assassination.

[ 5 ] Corda remains well known to mycologists, having described many important fungal genera, including Stachybotrys .

[ 6 ] He perished at sea in 1849 while returning home from a collecting trip in Texas.

[ 4 ] : 228, [ 5 ] In 1851, he was honoured by the naming of Cordana , a genus of ascomycetous fungi.

[ 7 ] Illustrations from Icones fungorum.

References [ edit ] ^ Brummitt, R. K.; C. E. Powell (1992).

Authors of Plant Names .

Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew .

ISBN 1-84246-085-4 .

^ a b c d e f g Corda, A. J. (n.d.). Hennebert, G. (ed.). "Autobiographical sketch".

MUCL Archive (in German).

^ Geschichte der Botanik in Böhmen by Vincenz Maiwald ^ a b c Ainsworth, G. C. (1976).

Introduction to the history of mycology . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-21013-5 .

^ a b Berkeley, M. J. (25 May 1850).

"A. J. Corda–Obituary" .

The Gardeners' Chronicle .

21 : 323– 324.

^ MycoBank.

"Stachybotrys Corda" . Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures, Utrecht: The Netherlands . Retrieved 15 September 2013 .

^ Burkhardt, Lotte (2022).

Eine Enzyklopädie zu eponymischen Pflanzennamen [ Encyclopedia of eponymic plant names ] (pdf) (in German). Berlin: Botanic Garden and Botanical Museum, Freie Universität Berlin.

doi : 10.3372/epolist2022 .

ISBN 978-3-946292-41-8 .

S2CID 246307410 . Retrieved January 27, 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to August Corda at Wikimedia Commons Works by or about August Carl Joseph Corda at Wikisource Data related to August Carl Joseph Corda at Wikispecies Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Academics International Plant Names Index Leopoldina Artists Scientific illustrators People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=August_Carl_Joseph_Corda&oldid=1294830995 " Categories : 1809 births 1849 deaths Physicians from the Austrian Empire Mycologists Deaths due to shipwreck at sea Scientists from Liberec Scientists from Bohemia Biologists from the Austrian Empire Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 02:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents August Carl Joseph Corda 13 languages Add topic

