Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Virtual retinal display 9 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Español 한국어 Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the Apple-branded display screen, see Retina display .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Virtual retinal display" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Display technology A diagram showing the workings of the virtual retinal display A virtual retinal display ( VRD ), also known as a retinal scan display ( RSD ) or retinal projector ( RP ), is a display technology that draws a raster display (like a television ) directly onto the retina of the eye.

History [ edit ] In the past similar systems have been made by projecting a defocused image directly in front of the user's eye on a small "screen", normally in the form of large glasses. The user focused their eyes on the background, where the screen appeared to be floating. The disadvantage of these systems was the limited area covered by the "screen", the high weight of the small televisions used to project the display, and the fact that the image would appear focused only if the user was focusing at a particular "depth". Limited brightness made them useful only in indoor settings as well.

[ citation needed ] Only recently a number of developments have made a true VRD system practical. In particular the development of high-brightness LEDs have made the displays bright enough to be used during the day, and adaptive optics have allowed systems to dynamically correct for irregularities in the eye (although this is not always needed). The result is a high-resolution screenless display with excellent color gamut and brightness, far better than the best television technologies.

The VRD was invented by Kazuo Yoshinaka of Nippon Electric Co. in 1986.

[ 1 ] Later work at the University of Washington in the Human Interface Technology Lab resulted in a similar system in 1991.

[ 2 ] Most of the research into VRDs to date has been in combination with various virtual reality systems. In this role VRDs have the potential advantage of being much smaller than existing television-based systems. They share some of the same disadvantages however, requiring some sort of optics to send the image into the eye, typically similar to the sunglasses system used with previous technologies. It also can be used as part of a wearable computer system.

[ 3 ] A Washington-based startup, MicroVision, Inc., has sought to commercialize VRD. Founded in 1993, MicroVision's early development work was financed by US government defense contracts and resulted in the prototype head-mounted display called Nomad.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In 2018, Intel announced Vaunt, a set of smart glasses that are designed to appear like conventional glasses, which use retinal projection via a vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser and holographic grating .

[ 6 ] Intel gave up on this project, [ 7 ] and sold the technology to North.

[ 8 ] In the same year, QD Laser, a Japanese laser maker spun off from Fujitsu , developed the first commercialized true VRD RETISSA Display. In the following year, the firm started to sell the successor VRD RETISSA Display II, which featured a higher resolution equivalent to 720p.

[ 9 ] In 2023 Sony produced a compact camera with an integrated Retissa Neoviewer retinal projection device, for release in the US. The resolution of the retinal display only (not the camera) is claimed by the manufacturers to be nominally equivalent to 720P.

[ 10 ] Although "not a medical device" it is hoped that the retinal projection viewer may be of particular value to some visually impaired users, and the adaptation was heavily subsidised by Sony. Because of the novel user experience, and limited availability, potential buyers were strongly encouraged to participate in  "touch-and-try" events to see if the technology is useful to their particular circumstances before committing to a purchase.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Augmented reality Bionic contact lens Google Glass Head-up display List of emerging technologies Magic Leap Optical head-mounted display Physics of the Future Smartglasses Visual prosthetic References [ edit ] ^ DISPLAY DEVICE published 1986-09-03 (Japanese publication number JP61198892) ^ Viirre E, Pryor H, Nagata S, Furness TA 3rd (1998). "The virtual retinal display: a new technology for virtual reality and augmented vision in medicine".

Stud Health Technol Inform . Studies in Health Technology and Informatics.

50 (Medicine Meets Virtual Reality): 252– 257.

doi : 10.3233/978-1-60750-894-6-252 .

PMID 10180549 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Virtual Retinal Display (VRD) Group ^ DQC BUREAU (June 16, 2004).

"VIRTUAL RETINAL DISPLAY: Your Eye Is The Screen" .

^ "Microvision Ships Nomad Personal Display Systems" .

Photonics Media .

^ "Intel is making smart glasses that actually look good" . 5 February 2018.

^ Bohn, Dieter (2018-04-18).

"Intel is giving up on its smart glasses" .

The Verge . Retrieved 2019-07-16 .

^ Bohn, Dieter (2018-12-17).

"North has acquired the patents and tech behind Intel's Vaunt AR glasses" .

The Verge . Retrieved 2019-07-16 .

^ "網膜に直接映像を照射！新しいカタチのARグラス「RETISSA(R) Display II」登場" .

VRInside (in Japanese). 2020-03-12 . Retrieved 2020-04-02 .

^ See: QD Laser Product page for RETISSA NEOVIEWER and also SONY's HX99 RNV Retina Projection Camera kit product page .

^ Chris George (2023-07-25).

"Sony's new compact camera brings photography to the visually impaired" .

digitalcameraworld . Retrieved 2024-01-04 .

External links [ edit ] Animations of how a VRD works Lewis, John R. (May 2004).

"In the Eye of the Beholder" .

IEEE Spectrum .

v t e Extended reality (XR) From least to most virtual: Augmented reality (AR) Mixed reality (MR) Virtual reality (VR) Virtuality Concepts Main Cinematic virtual reality Computer-mediated reality Immersion Metaverse Avatar Projection augmented model " Room-scale " Six degrees of freedom (6DoF) Spatial computing Telepresence Virtual reality applications Virtual reality sickness Virtual world Other Camera filter Quantified self Screen-door effect Simulation hypothesis Transhumanism Vergence-accommodation conflict VTuber Technologies Display EyeTap Head-mounted display optical Head-up display Pancake lens Smartglasses Virtual reality headset list Virtual retinal display 3D interaction Brain–computer interface Eye tracking Facial motion capture Finger/hand tracking Pose tracking Simultaneous localization and mapping Software Asynchronous reprojection Foveated rendering Image-based modeling and rendering Spatial audio Photography 360-degree video Free viewpoint television Omnidirectional (360-degree) camera VR photography Other Haptic suit Omnidirectional treadmill Wearable computer Peripherals Cyberith Virtualizer Leap Motion Oculus Touch PlayStation Move Razer Hydra Virtuix Omni Wired glove Wizdish ROVR Companies Apple Inc.

Brilliant Labs ByteDance Collabora Google HTC Khronos Group Liquid Image Magic Leap Meta Platforms Reality Labs Microsoft Niantic, Inc.

Pimax Rokoko Samsung Electronics Valve Corporation Varjo Vuzix Devices Current Apple Vision Pro Bigscreen Beyond Golden-i headsets HTC Vive Magic Leap Meta Quest 3 3S Open Source Virtual Reality PICO 4 Ultra Pimax PlayStation VR2 Valve Index Vuzix Former AntVR castAR EyePhone Google Cardboard Google Daydream Google Glass Meta Quest Pro Microsoft HoloLens 2 Oculus Go Oculus Quest Oculus/Meta Quest 2 Oculus Rift CV1 S PICO 4 PlayStation VR Samsung Gear VR Sensorama SixthSense The Sword of Damocles VFX1 Headgear Virtual Boy Virtual fixture Virtuality VR-1 Unreleased Project Iris Sega VR Software General Interactive art Virtual graffiti Metaverse Pervasive game Software related to augmented reality Virtual reality game Operating systems and desktop environments Android XR Meta Horizon OS version history visionOS Windows Mixed Reality Development tools and game engines A-Frame ARCore ARKit ARToolKit Godot Engine Jetpack Compose XR Meta Spatial SDK OpenVR OpenXR RealityKit S&box TabletopKit Unity Universal Scene Description Unreal Engine Vuforia Augmented Reality SDK WebXR Games List of HTC Vive games List of Meta Quest games List of Oculus Rift games List of PlayStation VR games VR2 Communities and social networks AltspaceVR FaceTime for visionOS Horizon Worlds NeosVR Rec Room Resonite Sansar Sensorium Sinespace VRChat VTime XR People Philippe Bekaert Maurice Benayoun Simon Birrell Mark Bolas Brendan Bradley Fred Brooks Boštjan Burger John Carmack Tim Cook Carolina Cruz-Neira Ela Darling Char Davies Thomas A. DeFanti Steven K. Feiner Scott Fisher Jerome Foster II Henry Fuchs Thomas A. Furness III Morton Heilig Eric Howlett Brendan Iribe Myron W. Krueger Jaron Lanier R. Bowen Loftin Palmer Luckey Mark Stephen Meadows Michelle and Uri Kranot Tony Parisi Nonny de la Peña Elia Petridis Warren Robinett Lawrence J. Rosenblum Daniel J. Sandin Dieter Schmalstieg Bob Sproull Nicole Stenger Ivan Sutherland Susumu Tachi Gunpei Yokoi Mark Zuckerberg In fiction Attack of the Killer App (Futurama Episode) Holodeck ( Star Trek ) Netrunner Neuromancer Ready Player One film Ready Player Two Snow Crash Superhot Sword Art Online The Matrix Portals Technology Category Augmented reality Mixed reality Virtual reality Metaverse Spatial computing Commons Augmented reality Mixed reality Virtual reality Metaverse v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications v t e Emerging technologies Fields Displays Next generation FED FLCD iMoD Laser LPD MicroLED OLET QD-LED SED TDEL TMOS TPD Screenless Bionic contact lens Head-mounted display Head-up display Optical head-mounted display Virtual retinal display Other Autostereoscopy Flexible display Holographic display Computer-generated Multi-primary color display Ultra HD Volumetric display List Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Virtual_retinal_display&oldid=1303024135 " Categories : Display technology Multimodal interaction Virtual reality Mixed reality Japanese inventions Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles needing additional references from August 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 18:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Virtual retinal display 9 languages Add topic

