Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development of text 2 Major points Toggle Major points subsection 2.1 Antagonistic contradiction 3 Impact 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Antagonistic contradiction ) 1957 essay by Mao Zedong This article is part of a series about Mao Zedong Personal Early life Former Residence Death and state funeral Memorial Hall Ideology Maoism Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Leadership Tenure Revolution Land Reform Movement Proclamation Korean War Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Bandung Conference Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Canton Fair Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Two Bombs, One Satellite Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Socialist Education Movement Third Front Cultural Revolution Abolition of the presidency UN representation Richard Nixon visit Works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship On the Ten Major Relationships Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Legacy Cult of personality Chairman Mao en route to Anyuan Portraits overlooking Tiananmen 1989 vandalism incident Statues Young Fuzhou Chengdu Long Live the Victory North Park Commune inspection v t e On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People ( Chinese : 关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题 ) is a 1957 essay by the Chinese Communist revolutionary Mao Zedong published during the Eleventh Session of the Supreme State Conference.

[ 1 ] It explores the concepts developed by Mao in the 1937 publication On Contradiction concerning dialectical reasoning, and sets out to establish a social philosophy based on these concepts.

Development of text [ edit ] The essay originated in a speech to the Communist Party on February 27, 1957.

[ 2 ] : 102 After incorporating ideas from Liu Shaoqi and Zhou Enlai , [ 3 ] : 168 it which was revised and printed in the Peoples Daily on June 19, 1957.

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] : 102 Thus, it was delivered during the Hundred Flowers Campaign and published during the Anti-Rightist Campaign .

[ 5 ] : 206 The text was a political intervention by Mao to address the question of who "the people" are in a socialist system and how national politics within a socialist system should be handled.

[ 6 ] : 95 Major points [ edit ] In On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People , Mao discusses the contradictions still existing in socialist society. According to Mao: [ 3 ] : 168 In socialist society, the basic contradiction is still the contradiction between productive relations and productivity and between the superstructure and the economic foundation. However, these contradictions in socialist society are fundamentally different in nature and circumstances between those in the productive relations and productive forces of the old society and between the superstructure and the economic base.

Mao describes the contradictions in the old society as ones which could not be satisfied by capitalism itself and which required socialist revolution.

[ 3 ] : 168 In contrast, contradictions within the socialist society could be handled by the people within the socialist system on a continuous basis.

[ 3 ] : 168–169 The main point of On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People was to make a distinction between contradictions among the people and contradictions between the people and the enemy and that these contradictions should be treated differently.

[ 3 ] : 169 The text emphasized that correctly handling contradictions should be the major theme of national political life.

[ 3 ] : 139 Contradictions among the people were not antagonistic.

[ 6 ] : 95 To resolve contradictions among the people, it was necessary to use democratic methods, educational methods, and "unity-criticism-unity" methods.

[ 3 ] : 169 Contradictions among the people should be addressed to prevent them from intensifying or becoming contradictions between the Party and the enemy.

[ 3 ] : 169 Based on the experience of the United Front , On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People explains that contradictions between the working class and the national bourgeoise of China generally fall within this category.

[ 3 ] : 170 Mao also stated that intellectuals should be considered part of "the people" and should help give their concerns a voice.

[ 6 ] : 95 On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People also demonstrates a view of class struggle in which class became less a matter of economic relations and increasingly a matter of revolutionary consciousness.

[ 5 ] : 207 Contradictions between the people and the enemy were antagonistic contradictions.

[ 3 ] : 169 The slogan serve the people appears in On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People , where Mao writes that "state organs must rely on the people, and the staff of state organs must serve the people." [ 2 ] : 115 Mao also discussed frugality and productivity in the economic development of China, writing, "It is a great contradiction for all cadres and all people to always think of our country as a big socialist country, but also a poor country with economic backwardness. To make our country prosperous and strong, it will take decades of frugal accumulation, including the implementation of hard work and thrift in economic construction." [ 2 ] : 102 Mao also wrote that the question of "which will win," socialism or capitalism, "has not been really resolved yet." [ 7 ] Antagonistic contradiction [ edit ] This section includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this section by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous revolution theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Deng Xiaoping Theory Naxalism People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Salim Rubaya Ali Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill George Jackson İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965—1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black Power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Maoist Communist Party of China Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National Democracy Movement Naxalite Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Antagonistic contradiction ( Chinese language : 矛盾) is the notion that compromise between different social classes is impossible, and their relations must be of class struggle . The term is most often applied in Maoist theory, which holds that differences between the two primary classes, the working class / proletariat and the bourgeoisie are so great that there is no way to bring about a reconciliation of their views. Because the groups involved have diametrically opposed concerns, their objectives are so dissimilar and contradictory that no mutually acceptable resolution can be found. Nonantagonistic contradictions may be resolved through mere debate, but antagonistic contradictions can only be resolved through struggle.

The term is usually attributed to Vladimir Lenin , although he may never have actually used the term in any of his written works.

In Maoism , the antagonistic contradiction was usually that between the peasantry and the landowning class .

Mao Zedong expressed his views on the policy in his famous February 1957 speech "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People." The Chinese term derives from the Han Feizi : "There was once a man in the state of Chu , who was selling shields and lances. He was praising them saying: 'My shields are so firm, that there is nothing that can pierce them.' He praised his lances saying: 'My lances are so sharp, that there is nothing that they cannot pierce.' Someone asked: 'What if you used your lances to pierce your shields?' The man could not answer. A shield that cannot be pierced and a lance that can pierce everything cannot exist in the same world." ( Irresistible force paradox ) Impact [ edit ] On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People , along with Ten Major Relationships , was an important part of the theoretical efforts to incorporate Marxism into the Chinese context and China's efforts to develop socialism.

[ 3 ] : 7 On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People was a major milestone in the localization of Marxism within China and an important aspect of Mao Zedong Thought .

[ 3 ] : 170 An immediate consequence of the text's dissemination was that people were inspired to speak out in the gradually opening social spaces of critique.

[ 6 ] : 96 This helped lead to the Hundred Flowers Campaign .

[ 6 ] : 96 See also [ edit ] On Contradiction One Divides Into Two References [ edit ] ^ Mao Zedong. (1962). Freemantle, Anne (ed.).

Mao Tse-Tung: An Anthology of His Writings . New York: Mentor Books. p. 264.

^ a b c d Marquis, Christopher ; Qiao, Kunyuan (2022).

Mao and Markets: The Communist Roots of Chinese Enterprise . Kunyuan Qiao. New Haven: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-26883-6 .

OCLC 1348572572 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Huang, Yibing (2020).

An Ideological History of the Communist Party of China . Vol. 2. Qian Zheng, Guoyou Wu, Xuemei Ding, Li Sun, Shelly Bryant. Montreal, Quebec.

ISBN 978-1-4878-0425-1 .

OCLC 1165409653 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People" . Retrieved December 10, 2021 .

^ a b Qian, Ying (2024).

Revolutionary Becomings: Documentary Media in Twentieth-Century China . New York, NY: Columbia University Press .

ISBN 9780231204477 .

^ a b c d e Karl, Rebecca E. (2010).

Mao Zedong and China in the Twentieth-Century World: A Concise History . Durham [NC]: Duke University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8223-4780-4 .

OCLC 503828045 .

^ Russo, Alessandro (2020).

Cultural Revolution and Revolutionary Culture . Durham: Duke University Press . p. 95.

ISBN 978-1-4780-1218-4 .

OCLC 1156439609 .

Kim, Samuel S. (1979).

China, the United Nations, and World Order . Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP.

Meisner, Maurice (1986).

Mao's China and After (Rev. ed.). New York: Free Press.

ISBN 0-02-920870-X .

Short, Philip (1999).

Mao: A Life . New York: Henry Holt.

External links [ edit ] Look up 矛盾 in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Mao Zedong: On Contradiction on the Marxists Internet Archive Mao Zedong: On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the People on the Marxists Internet Archive Marxist Philosophy: Antagonistic Contradictions Chinese Communist Party: Theory of "Combine Two into One" is a Reactionary Philosophy v t e Mao Zedong Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party (1943–1976) Chairman of the Central Military Commission (1954–1976) History and politics Overviews Early life Rule as Chinese leader Cult of personality Death and state funeral Chairman Mao Memorial Hall Chronology Chinese Civil War Long March Chinese Soviet Republic Second Sino-Japanese War Second United Front Yan'an Rectification Movement Yan'an Forum 7th National Congress of the Communist Party Chinese Communist Revolution Proclamation of the People's Republic of China Annexation of Tibet by the People's Republic of China Land Reform Movement Korean War People's Volunteer Army Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan First Taiwan Strait Crisis 1954 Constitution Bandung Conference 8th National Congress of the Communist Party Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Two Bombs, One Satellite Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Lushan Conference Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Sino-Soviet split Socialist Education Movement Vietnam War Cultural Revolution Cleansing the Class Ranks Chairman Mao badge Four Olds Gang of Four Red August Red Guards 9th National Congress of the Communist Party Abolition of the presidency Lin Biao incident 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China 10th National Congress of the Communist Party Concepts Maoism Capitalist roader Continuous Revolution Theory Mass line New Democracy Newborn socialist things One Divides into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Three Worlds Theory Works Political works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Ten Major Relationships Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Family Mao Zemin (brother) Mao Zetan (brother) Mao Zejian (cousin) Luo Yixiu (first wife) Yang Kaihui (second wife) Mao Anying (son) Mao Anqing (son) Mao Anlong (son) Yang Yuehua (daughter) Li Min (daughter) Jiang Qing (fourth wife) Li Na (daughter) Mao Xinyu (grandson) Kong Dongmei (granddaughter) Mao Yuanxin (nephew) Category v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐chdq5
Cached time: 20250815232550
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.593 seconds
Real time usage: 0.693 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8621/1000000
Revision size: 10567/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 156171/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10060/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 85437/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.300/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9491654/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  559.189      1 -total
 19.25%  107.650      1 Template:Mao_Zedong_series
 19.01%  106.293      1 Template:Sidebar_person
 18.64%  104.259      1 Template:Reflist
 18.10%  101.231     23 Template:Rp
 16.92%   94.615     23 Template:R/superscript
 15.38%   86.002      6 Template:Cite_book
 10.00%   55.914      4 Template:Navbox
  9.25%   51.745      1 Template:Short_description
  8.90%   49.791      1 Template:Mao_Zedong Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:61414519:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815232550 and revision id 1305581526. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=On_the_Correct_Handling_of_Contradictions_Among_the_People&oldid=1305581526#Antagonistic_contradiction " Categories : Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Maoism Marxism Maoist terminology Works by Mao Zedong Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 22:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People 1 language Add topic

