Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General information 2 Animal kingdom Toggle Animal kingdom subsection 2.1 Mammals 2.2 Fish 2.3 Avifauna 2.4 Molluscs 2.5 Other 3 Reserves 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Azerbaijan 14 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Español Հայերեն हिन्दी Italiano ქართული Occitan Português Русский Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Native animals of Azerbaijan This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fauna of Azerbaijan" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on the Wildlife of Azerbaijan Biodiversity Flora Fauna Lists Birds Butterflies Mammals Non-marine molluscs Conservation Protected areas State Reserves Basut-Chay Eldar Pine Gara-Yaz Gizil-Agach Gobustan Ilisu Ismailli Pirgulu Shahbuz Shirvan Shuhsa Turian-Chay Qaragol Zagatala National Parks Zangezur Ag-Gel Shirvan Hirkan Altyaghach Absheron Shahdag Göygöl Samur-Yalama Organisations Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources Related topics Baku Zoo Botanical Garden of Baku [ az ] Tourism Environmental issues Karabakh horse Ecoregions Azerbaijan shrub desert and steppe Eastern Anatolian montane steppe Forests Hyrcanian forests Caucasus mixed forests Azerbaijan portal v t e Fauna of Azerbaijan or animal kingdom of Azerbaijan refers to the diversity of various types of animals, which inhabit and populate a defined ground or water area in Azerbaijan .

The first reports on the richness and diversity of animal life in Azerbaijan can be found in travel notes of Eastern travelers. Animal carvings on architectural monuments, ancient rocks and stones survived up to the present times. The first information on the animal kingdom of Azerbaijan was collected during the visits of naturalists to Azerbaijan in the 17th century. Unlike fauna, the concept of animal kingdom covers not only the types of animals, but also the number of individual species.

Main article: Karabakh The symbol of Fauna in Azerbaijan is the Karabakh horse ( Azeri : Qarabağ atı) which is a mountain-steppe racing and riding horse which can only be found in Azerbaijan. The Karabakh horse has a reputation for its good temper, speed, elegance and intelligence. It is one of the oldest breeds, with ancestry dating to the ancient world. The horse was originally developed in the Azerbaijani Karabakh region in the 5th century and is named after it.

[ 1 ] General information [ edit ] The Caucasian goat can be found at the mountains of Caucasus.

Animal resources are mainly used for food (meat, egg, butter canned food), as raw materials in industry (feather, leather, horns and technical oil). People use animals as working power in agriculture. At the same time drugs , perfumes , fertilizers and fodder are produced from animals` products.

Some animals in Azerbaijan are endangered because of threats from changing environments or predators. These animals are entered into the Red Book of Azerbaijan . Presently the Red Book includes 108 species of animals (14 species of mammals, 36 species of birds, 13 species of reptiles and amphibians, 5 species of birds and 40 species of insects).

[ 2 ] The natural habitat of various types of animals is very different within the country. Some species populate special restricted areas (lakes, parts of mountainous areas) while others are spread throughout the country. For example, passerine birds can be found anywhere in the territory of Azerbaijan.

Protozoa parasites are also registered in all areas of the country, depending on natural habitat of carrier animals (cattle, poultry, etc.). Among mammals, jeyran gazelles populate plain areas, Caucasian goats inhabits the major Caucasus areas, most species of birds can be found in forests, some in water basins. Pest insects occupy different agricultural fields, while others populate defined biotopes only.

A number of natural preserves have been created and the hunting rules were brought into effect for protection of fur and hoofed animals in Azerbaijan.

Animal kingdom [ edit ] The animal kingdom of Azerbaijan is very rich, partly due to diversity of its natural complexes. There are 106 species of mammals, 357 species of birds, 67 species of reptiles and amphibians, 97 species of fish, and over 15 thousand species of invertebrates in Azerbaijan.

[ 3 ] Mammals [ edit ] Main article: List of Azerbaijani mammals This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Some 107 species of mammals have been recorded in Azerbaijan, three of which are unique species. Popular species are Caucasus goats and west- Caucasus moufflons ; which inhabit Nakhchivan and western slopes of the major Caucasus in Balakan , Qabala , Zaqatala and Ismayilly regions.

Jeyran gazelles are among the rarest and fastest species in Caucasus they can only be found in Shirvan natural preserve , Bendovan and Korchay regions of Azerbaijan. In 2014, 150 gazelles were returned to their historical territories as part of the four-year "Reintroduction of gazelles to their historical habitat areas in Caucasus" project.

[ 4 ] Caucasus goat is generally found in high altitudes of the Caucasus where the air is very thin and predators are rarely found. Comparing with domestic goats Caucasus goat's fur is very thick, and thanks to it the animal is well adapted to low temperature of the mountains.

The Caucasus mouflon , a wild type of sheep, is bigger and muscular than domestic sheep. The mouflons prefer the plains where they can graze the whole year. These agile rock climbers have long and muscular legs. Thanks to this feature they can run very fast.

The Caucasian leopard ( Panthera pardus tulliana ), one of the rarest animals in the world, inhabits the southern Caucasus Mountains , Zangezur Range and the Talish Mountains in Azerbaijan. Caucasian leopards are endangered because of illegally hunt, human disturbance, etc. The World Wildlife Fund has stated that these animals are one of the most critically endangered species in the Caucasus Mountains.

The Caspian tiger , also called Hyrcanian tiger was found in Azerbaijan until the late 1950s. But it became extinct over 40 years ago.  Scientific investigation in this field proved that the Caspian Tiger and the Siberian Tiger are distinguished by only one genetic code letter. The last Caspian tigers were seen in foothills of Talysh Mountains and the Lenkoran river basin which are situated in south of Azerbaijan in 1964.

The fauna of Greater Caucasus which is natural boundary in the north of Azerbaijan is very rich include mammals such as lynx , Caucasian brown bear , Asiatic wildcat , European badger , stone marten , red and roe deer , chamois , East Caucasian ibex , Caucasian squirrel , field mice , Daghestan pine vole .

Ismayilli Nature Reserve near Gebele district of Azerbaijan is one of the places where you can see wild goats. Asiatic wildcat, jungle cat , and wild boar inhabit the Samur Forest, located at the Caspian coast near the Russian border.

Absheron National Park , which is located in the Absheron Peninsula , is famous for its gazelles and Caspian seal haulouts . Five-toed jerboas , social vole , grey dwarf hamster are common in the territory of Baku , the capital of Azerbaijan.

The natural inhabitants of Gobustan , Kyzylagach and Shirvan national parks are jackals, wolves, foxes, marbled polecats, hares, giant ditch frogs, huge flocks of migratory birds, jungle cat, golden jackal , boar, Eurasian water vole, etc. Gobustan is also famous for rock art.

Talysh Mountains of Azerbaijan are covered with dense forests, where Caspian shrew, Schelkovikov’s pine vole, and Hyrcanian field mouse, southern white-breasted hedgehog, Levantine mole, western barbastelle, steppe and Black Sea field mice, and Indian crested porcupine are common. Hirkan National Park is located here.

Nakhchevan Autonomous Republic of Azerbaijan have some rare mammals and reptiles. More common species such as Macedonian mouse, Vinogradov’s and Persian jirds, social vole, and Transcaucasian mole vole.

Pallas’s cat is the rarest animal in the area.

[ 5 ] Fish [ edit ] In the early history of Azerbaijan, sturgeon used to be mistaken for a sea monster .

The country's fresh water basins and the Caspian Sea account for 97 species of fish of which eight introduced and seven of these have become widespread and over 15 thousand species of invertebrates in Azerbaijan. Most can be found in the Kura River , surrounding lakes, as well as in the Mingechevir reservoir. Most of fish are anadromous or semi-anadromous (the young grow up in salt water and migrate to fresh water to breed after they reach maturity). The most valuable of anadromous fish are salmon , sturgeon , stellate sturgeon and beluga .

Aspius , Chalcalburnus and eel are also anadromous fish. Sturgeon meat and caviar are highly valuable. Beside, the water basins of Azerbaijan contain such valuable fish species as bream, sazan, rutilus kutum and others. Such fish species as herring are fished in the Caspian Sea. Due to the construction of a number of hydrotechnical plants on the Kura river after 1959, the regulation of the river water flow, as well as the Caspian water pollution led to the significant reduction in the number of valuable fish species. Three hatcheries (Kuragzi, Alibayramli and Kur experimental sturgeon hatchery) for melioration and fish-farming purposes were launched to restore the fish reserves and to increase the number of fish in species. Azerbaijan's fish-farming establishments and hatcheries account for breeding of 20 million sturgeons, 600 thousand salmons, over 800 thousand. A new hatchery with the capacity of 20 million sturgeons was put in commission in Khyly in 2000.

Two new fish species (Stone moroko ( Pseudorasbora parva ) and Korean sharpbelly ( Hemiculter leucisculus )) have been discovered in Azerbaijan in 1970s. Stone morocco lives in all inland waters of Azerbaijan.

Korean sharpbelly also is river fish living in Kura and Araz rivers, in the rivers of Lankaran region, Mingachevir water reservoir. Both of them can be found in the Azerbaijani sector of the Caspian Sea from Absheron peninsula to Astara region. The oldest specimen of Korean sharpbelly found in the rivers is five years old with a length of 150 mm and weighs 25.4 grams.

Avifauna [ edit ] Azerbaijan is incredibly rich in avifauna . There are 363 species of birds recorded from about 60 families, ranges from the large birds such as vultures, eagles, flamingos, pelicans, cranes to different kinds of colorful little birds such as bee-eaters, Hoopoe, woodcock, little stint, as well as water fowls including ducks, geese and swans. Around 40% of the species are staying all year in Azerbaijan, 27% overwinter there, and 10% pass through on migration. One of the most inspiring bird species is the golden eagle which inhabits mainly mountainous areas such as Nakhchivan . The golden eagle has been printed on dozens of stamps and cards in Azerbaijan.

The winter in Azerbaijan is not cold, relatively mild. Therefore many birds from north migrate here in winter.  Water birds such as swans, geese, ducks, flamingos, and waders like Black-tailed Godwit, curlews, and snipes usually collect in the wetlands, coastal and inland areas of Azerbaijan. Common and Great Black-headed Gulls may be found along the coast.

In winter some small birds from north also chose Azerbaijan for wintering. Most birds of the alpine zone, like Guldenstadt's Redstart and Great rosefinch move to river valleys to winter.

In February waterfowl and shorebirds move north. Hoopoe and Barn Swallow arrive early from the south.

Molluscs [ edit ] Main article: List of non-marine molluscs of Azerbaijan Other [ edit ] Ten species of amphibians from five families are recorded in Azerbaijan. There are 52 species of reptiles found in Azerbaijan. Most of these species are found in semi-desert areas in Shamakhi and Nakhchivan . Few are found in other lowlands or mountainous areas. In 1937, members of the Opilio lepidus species of harvestman were sited in the country.

[ 6 ] Reserves [ edit ] Main article: State Reserves of Azerbaijan Several reserves have been established in Azerbaijan to preserve the fauna , flora and their ecosystems: Goy-Gol State Reserve Gyzylaghadj State Reserve Zagatala State Reserve Zakatala State Reserve Turyanchay State Reserve Pirgulu State Reserve Shirvan State Reserve Besitchay State Reserve Qarayazy State Reserve Ismayilly State Reserve Qaragol State Reserve Ilisu State Reserve Shahbuz State Reserve Eldar pine-tree State Reserve See also [ edit ] Nature of Azerbaijan Karabakh Horse National Parks of Azerbaijan State Reserves of Azerbaijan References [ edit ] ^ "paralumun.com Karabakh Horse" .

Paralumun.com . Archived from the original on October 20, 2002 . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ "Azerbaijan - Fauna" .

Azerbaijan.az . Archived from the original on 11 December 2018 . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ "Azerbaijan - Fauna" .

azerbaijan.az . Archived from the original on 11 November 2017 . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ Nazarli, Amina.

"Population of gazelles increasing in Azerbaijan" .

Azernews.az . Retrieved 4 November 2014 .

^ "Azerbaijan Nature: brief description of flora and fauna of the country" .

Advantour.com . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ Nataly Y. Snegovaya (2007).

"Two New Harvestman Species from Lenkoran, Azerbaijan (Arachnida: Opiliones: Phalangiidae)" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the British Arachnological Society .

14 (2): 88– 92. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-09-30 . Retrieved 2010-12-19 .

v t e Azerbaijan articles History Early Stone Age Bronze and Iron age Kura–Araxes culture Nakhchivan culture Khojaly–Gadabay culture Shulaveri–Shomu culture Mughan culture Jar-Burial Culture Leyla-Tepe culture Achaemenid Empire Caucasian Albania Parthian Empire Arran (Caucasus) Sasanian Empire Shirvan Middle Ages Sajid dynasty Sallarid dynasty Shaddadids Shirvanshahs Eldiguzids Ilkhanate Kara Koyunlu Aq Qoyunlu Safavid Iran Afsharid Iran Khanates of the Caucasus Zand dynasty Qajar Iran Russo-Persian War (1804–13) Treaty of Gulistan Russo-Persian War (1826–1828) Treaty of Turkmenchay Modern Armenian–Tatar massacres March Days Armenian–Azerbaijani war (1918–1920) Azerbaijan Democratic Republic Soviet Azerbaijan First Nagorno-Karabakh War Black January Independent Azerbaijan Second Nagorno-Karabakh War By topic History of the name Azerbaijan Azerbaijan national awakening The Land of Fire Geography Bodies of water Caspian Sea Climate Climate change Earthquakes Environment issues Extreme points Fauna Flora Geology Caves Mountains Lakes National parks Orography Protected areas State reserves Wildlife Subdivisions Administrative divisions Borders Cities World Heritage Sites Politics Government Cabinet Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Children's rights Law enforcement Military National Assembly Political parties Politics President Prime Minister Migration Economy Agriculture Central Bank Companies Energy Manat (currency) Metallurgy Mineral industry Natural resources Petroleum industry Radio Telecommunications Television Tourism Transport Culture Animation Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine ( wine ) Customs Dances Dress Folklore Holidays National identity Language Literature Media Music Mythology Novruz (New Year) Public holidays Religion Rug Sport Tea culture Theatre Wedding Demographics Education Ethnic minorities Gender equality Health Healthcare Languages LGBT rights People list Women Symbols Flag National anthem National emblem Outline Index Bibliography Category Portal v t e Fauna of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Fauna of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2fg6s
Cached time: 20250817212142
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.734 seconds
Real time usage: 0.942 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25860/1000000
Revision size: 14661/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 156813/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 28173/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 76227/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.329/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8498837/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  811.608      1 -total
 25.51%  207.015    105 Template:Iso2country
 17.85%  144.907      1 Template:Asia_topic
 17.58%  142.713      2 Template:Navbox
 15.88%  128.877      1 Template:Reflist
 15.49%  125.729      1 Template:WildlifeofAzerbaijan
 15.44%  125.294      1 Template:Azerbaijan_topics
 15.15%  122.943      1 Template:Country_topics
 14.86%  120.638      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.03%  113.899      1 Template:Fauna_of_Europe Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5731277:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817212142 and revision id 1258479674. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fauna_of_Azerbaijan&oldid=1258479674 " Category : Fauna of Azerbaijan Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from June 2019 This page was last edited on 19 November 2024, at 23:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Azerbaijan 14 languages Add topic

