Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Planning and zoning commission Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metro authorized authority A planning and zoning commission is a local elected or appointed government board charged with recommending to the local town or city council the boundaries of the various original zoning districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein and any proposed amendments thereto.  In addition, the Planning and Zoning Commission collects data and keeps itself informed as to the best practices generally in effect in the matter city planning and zoning.  It may be qualified to act on measures affecting the present and future movement of traffic, the segregation of residential and business districts and the convenience and safety of persons and property in any way dependent on city planning and zoning.

Some jurisdictions also have a separate planning board and a separate zoning board, with each respective board performing the specified function (amending the comprehensive plan versus rezoning) as opposed to a unified planning and zoning board that deals with both.

The chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission (or a staff member) is responsible for publishing public hearings in the newspaper about certain matters that come before the commission.  Most municipal or county Planning and Zoning Commissions consist of five to seven members.  This number does not include alternates. In some states, planning and zoning commissions are regional or county.

Some communities elect planning and zoning commission members.  In other jurisdictions , the Planning and Zoning Commissioners are appointed by the Mayor or First Selectman of the city or town and approved by the city's legislative body, i.e.

city council , board of aldermen , etc. Some planning commissioners are appointed by the City Commission as a whole. Some larger local jurisdictions refer to the single head of the planning department as a planning commissioner, but that is not to be confused with planning commissioners who make up the planning commission.

Planning and zoning commissions may also be approving agencies for development permits and specific variances to the zoning code for development. Other jurisdictions may have separate zoning board of adjustments and appeals that perform the function instead of the planning and zoning commission doing it. In fact, some of those jurisdictions have featured court appointed boards of adjustment and appeals due to the quasi-judicial functions.

v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons This United States government–related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e This article about an organization in the United States is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e This law -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐759fc646c5‐6n9wk
Cached time: 20250812165746
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.164 seconds
Real time usage: 0.236 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 626/1000000
Revision size: 2727/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 59117/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 435/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 21027/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.096/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2694748/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  172.375      1 -total
 54.22%   93.457      5 Template:Navbox
 51.96%   89.558      1 Template:Urban_Planning
 31.87%   54.928      1 Template:Short_description
 16.71%   28.805      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.13%   17.462      2 Template:Main_other
  9.77%   16.833      1 Template:US-gov-stub
  9.24%   15.932      1 Template:SDcat
  8.48%   14.624      1 Template:Article_stub_box
  5.41%    9.332      1 Template:Portal-inline Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:16618624:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812165746 and revision id 1159612998. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Planning_and_zoning_commission&oldid=1159612998 " Categories : Real estate in the United States Zoning in the United States Politics of the United States United States government stubs United States organization stubs Law stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 11 June 2023, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Planning and zoning commission Add languages Add topic

