Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Works 3 Personal life 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Jed Buchwald 5 languages العربية Deutsch Français مصرى Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American historian This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Jed Z. Buchwald J. Buchwald in 2009.

Alma mater Princeton University ( BA ) Harvard University ( MA ) Harvard University ( PhD ) Spouse Diana L. Kormos-Buchwald Scientific career Fields History of science , philosophy of science Institutions California Institute of Technology Thesis Matter, the Medium, and the Electrical Current: A History of Electricity and Magnetism from 1842 to 1895 (1974) Doctoral advisor Erwin Hiebert [ fr ] Jed Zachary Buchwald is Doris and Henry Dreyfuss Professor of History at Caltech . He was previously director of the Dibner Institute for the History of Science and Technology at MIT . He won a MacArthur Fellowship in 1995 and was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2011.

[ 1 ] Education [ edit ] Buchwald graduated from Harvard University with a Ph.D. in 1974, under supervision of Erwin Hiebert [ fr ] .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] His dissertation was entitled Matter, the Medium, and the Electrical Current: A History of Electricity and Magnetism from 1842 to 1895 .

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] Buchwald's publications include several full books and edited history-of-science essay collections: 1985 – From Maxwell to Microphysics: Aspects of Electromagnetic Theory in the Last Quarter of the Nineteenth Century 1989 – The Rise of the Wave Theory of Light: Optical Theory and Experiment in the Early Nineteenth Century 1993 – Einstein Papers Project Vol. 3 (one of nine contributing editors) 1994 – The Creation of Scientific Effects: Heinrich Hertz and electric waves 1995 – Scientific Practice: Theories and Stories of Doing Physics (editor) 1996 – Scientific Credibility and Technical Standards in 19th and Early 20th Century Germany and Britain (editor) 2000 – Isaac Newton's Natural Philosophy (editor, with I. Bernard Cohen ) 2001 – Histories of the Electron: The Birth of Microphysics (editor, with Andrew Warwick) 2005 – Wrong for the Right Reasons (editor, with Allan Franklin ) 2010 – The Zodiac of Paris: How an Improbable Controversy Over an Ancient Egyptian Artifact Provoked a Modern Debate Over Religion and Science (with Diane Greco Josefowicz ) 2012 – Newton and the Origin of Civilization (with Mordechai Feingold ) 2020 – The Riddle of the Rosetta: How an English Polymath and a French Polyglot Discovered the Meaning of Egyptian Hieroglyphs (with Diane Greco Josefowicz) Buchwald is also the general editor of the book series Dibner Institute Studies in the History of Science and Technology and of the book series Archimedes: New Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science and Technology , as well as managing editor of the book series Sources and Studies in the History of Mathematics and the Physical Sciences . Buchwald, together with Jeremy Gray , serves as editor-in-chief of the Springer journal Archive for History of Exact Sciences .

Personal life [ edit ] Buchwald's wife Diana L. Kormos-Buchwald is the Robert M. Abbey Professor of History and the director of the Einstein Papers Project at Caltech.

References [ edit ] ^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved March 31, 2021 .

^ mathshistory .st-andrews .ac .uk /Extras /Hiebert _doctoral _students ^ www .aip .org /history-programs /niels-bohr-library /oral-histories /46513 ^ Buchwald, Jed (1974).

Matter, the medium, and the electrical current: a history of electricity and magnetism from 1842 to 1895 (Ph.D.).

Harvard University .

OCLC 12779717 .

External links [ edit ] Buchwald's home page at Caltech's Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences Oral history interview transcript for Jed Buchwald on 29 July 2020, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library & Archives Newton's Dark Secrets , NOVA show on which Buchwald is one of the historians discussing Newton's life and work Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Other IdRef Yale LUX This biographical article about an American historian of science is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jed_Buchwald&oldid=1303213791 " Categories : American historians of science Harvard University alumni Massachusetts Institute of Technology faculty Living people California Institute of Technology faculty MacArthur Fellows 21st-century American historians 21st-century American male writers American male non-fiction writers Members of the American Philosophical Society American science historian stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2025 Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards Year of birth missing (living people) Place of birth missing (living people) All stub articles This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 18:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jed Buchwald 5 languages Add topic

