Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Personal life 4 Awards and honours 5 Books and publications 6 References Toggle the table of contents N. Vittal Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian civil servant (1938–2023) This biographical article is written like a résumé .

Please help improve it by revising it to be neutral and encyclopedic .

( June 2021 ) Nagarajan Vittal (31 January 1938 – 4 August 2023) was an Indian civil servant who held a number of senior positions in the Government of India , most prominently that of central vigilance commissioner .

For over 35 years, he held a number of positions at the state government and central government level, primarily in the fields of industrial administration, science and technology, and security, as well as posts within public-private sector joint enterprises . He was awarded the Padma Bhushan , India's third highest civilian award, in 2012.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Early life and education [ edit ] A Maharashtrian Deshastha Madhwa Brahmin , [ 4 ] Vittal was born in Thiruvananthapuram , the capital of Kerala , and was educated in Tiruchirapalli and Madras (now Chennai ), graduating with a BSc (Hons.) in Chemistry from Loyola College in 1958. After a short time as a lecturer in Jamal Mohamed College , Tiruchirapalli, he joined the Indian Administrative Service on 16 May 1960, and was allotted to the Gujarat Cadre.

Career [ edit ] Vittal was part of the Indian Administrative Service 's 1960 intake.

[ 5 ] He worked as development commissioner, tasked with reviving the Port of Kandla Special Economic Zone for the Indian government's Department of Commerce. He served as Industries commissioner for the Gujarat state government, in which he was responsible for Gujarat reaching full coverage with District Industries Centres; [ clarification needed ] setting up the single window service for the industry promotion bureau (IndexTB), later adopted by other states; and setting up the Entrepreneurship Development Centre. He later served as Food and Civil Supplies secretary, setting up the Gujarat State Civil Supplies Corporation; chairman of the Gujarat State Civil Supplies Corporation; and Health and Family Welfare secretary. He then served as managing director of Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilisers Company (GNFC), before returning to the Gujarat state government to serve as additional chief secretary , where he initiated proposals for setting up the Gujarat Police Housing Corporation.

From there he switched to positions working for the Government of India , serving as additional secretary at the Department of Atomic Energy , then secretary at the Department of Electronics, where he initiated policies for boosting software, setting up software technology parks and special economic zones , and strategic cooperation with industry, including Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) from IBM, Motorola, and others.

[ 5 ] He then became chair of the Telecoms Commission, where he worked on liberalisation of the telecom sector and was involved in the National Telecom Policy of 1994, [ 5 ] and secretary at the Department of Telecommunications . He followed this with a stint as chair of the Public Enterprises Selection Board, heading the Committee on Guidelines for the Public Sector (1997), under the auspices of the Ministry of Industry, Department of Public Enterprises, which removed 696 regulations hampering the autonomy of PSEs. His final post was central vigilance commissioner .

Over the course of his career he chaired a number of committees, expert groups and task forces, including: Expert Group on IT in Government, Department of Personnel, Government of India Task Force on Technology Exports, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research , Government of India Task Force on Telecom and Information Technology, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry Expert Committee on Tamil Nadu Institute of Information Technology, Government of Tamil Nadu.

Vittal attended the 1989 Fall Senior Executives Programme at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the United States.

Personal life [ edit ] Vittal was married and had a son and a daughter.

Vittal was actively interested in management and cultural activities and had membership in the following social, cultural, and professional associations: President (1994–1997) Loyola Alumni Association (North India Chapter), New Delhi President (1991–1997) Shri Shanmukhananda Sangeetha Sabha, New Delhi Member (1991–1998) Board of Governors, Academy of Human Resource Development, Ahmedabad Vittal died on 4 August 2023, at the age of 85.

[ 6 ] Awards and honours [ edit ] Vittal received the Padma Bhushan in 2012. Among other honours, he received the following: Honorary Fellow, Computer Society of India (1992) Honorary Fellow of the IETE [ 5 ] Citation of gratitude from Electronic Component Industry Association (ELCINA), New Delhi Dataquest IT Man of the Year 1993 Honorary Fellow, Asia Electronics Union (1995) Honorary Fellow, Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers (1997) The hidden talent of India award by the Organisation for Industrial, Spiritual and Cultural Advancement (OISCA) International, a UN Status Category I NGO The Great Son of the Soil Award 1998 by All India Conference of Intellectuals For the Sake of Honour, Rotary's highest Award (April 1999) Honorary Member, Indian Institute of Industrial Engineering (December 1999) Honour of "Desa Seva Ratnam", conferred by Jagadguru Sri Sankaracharya of Kanchi Kamakoti Peetam (April 2001) H H Sri Paramacharya Man of the Year Award (2000), awarded by the Centenarian Trust, Chennai. (April 2001) V Krishnamurthy Award For Excellence (June 2001) – by the Centre for Organisation Development, Hyderabad Giants International Award for public administration (September 2001) Great Maratha Award for Lifetime achievement by The Maharashtra Association, Chennai (2005) Tamil Nadu Governor Late Dr M Chenna Reddy Award (March 2002) for outstanding service by Federation of Doctors, Hospitals & Health Care Industry (FEDDHI) Included in the list of "Fifty men and women who shaped the economy" in the fifty years after India’s independence by the Business Today magazine (August 1997) [ 5 ] Books and publications [ edit ] Vittal wrote more than 400 articles on various subjects relating to management, public relations, human resources development, management of technology, and public sector management in many journals and magazines. These include Economic and Political Weekly , The Financial Express , The Times of India , Business India , and the Journals of the IIMA , LBS National Academy of Administration, HCPS, RIPA, and IIFT . He was a regular columnist for The Economic Times and the Web magazine "Rediff on the Net." [ 5 ] His bibliography includes: India Incorporated: Reflections on the Indian Electronics Industry (1994) [ 5 ] The Vicious Cycle of Vittal's Law (1994) [ 5 ] The Red Tape Guerrilla (1995) [ 5 ] Fighting Corruption and Restructuring Government (2000) [ 5 ] Public Sector Management & Governance (2001) – with S. Mahalingam Information Technology: India's Tomorrow (2001) [ 5 ] Ideas for Action (2002) Vittal’s Vital Management Mantra (2004) Maharastrians in Tamil Nadu (2004) Musings on Governance, Governing and Corruption (2004) Technology and a Vision for the future (2004) More musings on Governance, Governing and Corruption (2005) Roots of Effective Governance (2007) Corruption in India: The Road block for national prosperity (2002) Roots of effective governance (2007) Vittal also edited Export Processing Zones in Asia: Some Dimensions , published by the Asian Productivity Organization in 1977.

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Padma awards announced" . Press Information Bureau - Government of India. 25 January 2012 . Retrieved 28 December 2016 .

^ Subramanian, K. (8 October 2012).

"Old ideas in bold letters" .

The Hindu .

^ "N Vittal writes book for managment [ sic ] students" .

Business Standard India . 27 April 2006.

^ "Three surveyors who contributed to our knowledge of India" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 17 December 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "Profile of Shri N. Vital" (PDF) .

isical.ac.in . Archived from the original on 13 April 2013 . Retrieved 28 December 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "N Vittal, architect of India's IT sector, no more" . The Hindu Business Line. 4 August 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) 2010 Satya Paul Agarwal Mohammad Amin Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyay M. S. Banga Anil Bordia Bipan Chandra B. K. Chaturvedi Sant Singh Chatwal G. P. Chopra Tan Chung Madhusudan Dhaky P. R. Dubhashi Puttaraj Gawai Belle Monappa Hegde Ilaiyaraaja Jagdish Chandra Kapur Shrinivas Khale Aamir Khan Sultan Khan Ram Kumar Kumudini Lakhia Kuzhur Narayana Marar Chhannulal Mishra Eledath Thaikkattu Narayanan Mooss C. P. Krishnan Nair S. P. Oswal Akbar Padamsee Ramakanta Panda Balasaheb Vikhe Patil Arogyaswami Paulraj A. R. Rahman Moosa Raza Mallika Sarabhai Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Abhijit Sen Satya Vrat Shastri Noshir M. Shroff Kushal Pal Singh Bikash Sinha Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Narayanan Vaghul P. K. Warrier Fareed Zakaria 2011 S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Rajashree Birla M. N. Buch C. V. Chandrasekhar Ajai Chowdhry Yogesh Chander Deveshwar Satyadev Dubey T. J. S. George Shankha Ghosh Kris Gopalakrishnan Keki Byramjee Grant Shashi Kapoor Krishen Khanna Khayyam Chanda Kochhar Dwijen Mukhopadhyay Madavoor Vasudevan Nair Ramdas Pai Dashrath Patel Rajendra Singh Pawar Suryanarayanan Ramachandran Shobhana Ranade Gunupati Venkata Krishna Reddy Kallam Anji Reddy Waheeda Rehman Shyam Saran Analjit Singh Arpita Singh Surendra Singh R. K. Srikantan Raghavan Thirumulpad 2012 Suresh H. Advani Shabana Azmi Homi K. Bhabha Shashikumar Chitre Khaled Choudhury Jatin Das Vidya Dehejia Dharmendra S. N. Goenka M. S. Gopalakrishnan T. V. Gopalakrishnan Buddhadev Das Gupta Sunil Janah Anish Kapoor S. B. Mujumdar B. Muthuraman Mira Nair Arvind Panagariya José Pereira Mata Prasad M. S. Raghunathan P. Chandrasekhara Rao Ronen Sen Devi Shetty M. V. Subbiah N. Vittal N. H. Wadia George Yeo 2013 Satya N. Atluri Maharaj Kishan Bhan Jaspal Bhatti Rahul Dravid Adi Godrej Abdul Rashid Khan Rajesh Khanna Mary Kom Nandkishore Shamrao Laud Mangesh Padgaonkar Hemendra Singh Panwar Jogesh Pati Shivajirao Girdhar Patil A. Sivathanu Pillai D. Ramanaidu Kanak Rele V. K. Saraswat Ashoke Sen Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak B. N. Suresh Sharmila Tagore Ramamurthy Thyagarajan Saroja Vaidyanathan 2014 Anisuzzaman Mrityunjay Athreya Padmanabhan Balaram Dalveer Bhandari Ruskin Bond Anita Desai Pullela Gopichand Kamal Haasan Jyeshtharaj Joshi V. N. Kaul Neelam Kler M. Mahadevappa Leander Paes Koppillil Radhakrishnan Anumolu Ramakrishna Thirumalachari Ramasami Lloyd Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Vinod Prakash Sharma Gulam Mohammed Sheikh Parween Sultana Dhirubhai Thaker Vairamuthu J. S. Verma T. H. Vinayakram 2015 Jahnu Barua Manjul Bhargava Vijay P. Bhatkar Swapan Dasgupta David Frawley Bill Gates Melinda French Gates Swami Satyamitranand N. Gopalaswami Subhash C. Kashyap Gokulotsavji Maharaj Saichiro Misumi Ambrish Mithal Sudha Ragunathan Harish Salve Ashok Seth Rajat Sharma Satpal Singh Shivakumara Swami Khadg Singh Valdiya 2016 Ravindra Chandra Bhargava Robert D. Blackwill Hafeez Contractor Indu Jain Heisnam Kanhailal Anupam Kher Sania Mirza Pallonji Mistry Udit Narayan Saina Nehwal Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad Vinod Rai N. S. Ramanuja Tatacharya A. V. Rama Rao D. Nageshwara Reddy Dayananda Saraswati Barjinder Singh Hamdard Ram V. Sutar Tejomayananda 2017 Vishwa Mohan Bhatt Deviprasad Dwivedi Ratnasundarsuri Niranjanananda Saraswati Cho Ramaswamy Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Tehemton Erach Udwadia 2018 Pankaj Advani Philipose Mar Chrysostom Mahendra Singh Dhoni Alexander Kadakin Ramachandran Nagaswamy Laxman Pai Arvind Parikh Sharda Sinha 2019 John T. Chambers Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa Pravin Gordhan Dharampal Gulati Darshan Lal Jain Ashok Laxmanrao Kukade Kariya Munda Budhaditya Mukherjee Mohanlal Nambi Narayanan Kuldip Nayar Bachendri Pal V. K. Shunglu Hukmdev Narayan Yadav # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=N._Vittal&oldid=1216444395 " Categories : 1938 births 2023 deaths 20th-century Indian non-fiction writers Loyola College, Chennai alumni Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in civil service Indian Administrative Service officers Writers from Thiruvananthapuram University of Madras alumni Indian technology writers 21st-century Indian non-fiction writers Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with a promotional tone from June 2021 All articles with a promotional tone Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2016 This page was last edited on 31 March 2024, at 01:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents N. Vittal Add languages Add topic

