Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 As a constitutional right Toggle As a constitutional right subsection 1.1 Brazil 2 As a legal right Toggle As a legal right subsection 2.1 Europe 2.1.1 European Union 2.1.2 Individual countries 2.2 United Nations 2.3 United States 3 As an editorial policy Toggle As an editorial policy subsection 3.1 BBC 3.2 Australasian Journal of Philosophy 3.3 United States 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Right of reply 11 languages العربية Deutsch Esperanto Français 한국어 Hausa Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Right to defend against criticism The right of reply or right of correction generally means the right to defend oneself against public criticism in the same venue where it was published. In some countries, such as Brazil , [ 1 ] it is a legal right or even a constitutional right . In other countries, it is not a legal right as such, but a right which certain media outlets and publications choose to grant to people who have been severely criticised by them, as a matter of editorial policy.

As a constitutional right [ edit ] Brazil [ edit ] The Brazilian Constitution guarantees the right of reply ( direito de resposta ).

[ 2 ] In 2020, a judge ordered the Brazilian government to post a letter from an Indigenous group on official government websites for 30 days.

[ 3 ] The Waimiri-Atroari felt that the then-president of Brazil, Jair Bolsonaro , was using racist rhetoric against them in a dispute over building a transmission line through the Waimiri-Atroari Indigenous Reserve in the Amazon rainforest , and they exercised their right of reply this way.

[ 3 ] As a legal right [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] European Union [ edit ] In Europe, there have been proposals for a legally enforceable right of reply that applies to all media , including newspapers , magazines , and other print media, along with radio , television , and the internet . In 1974, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe already voted a resolution granting a right of reply to all individuals.

[ 4 ] Article 1 of a 2004 Council of Europe recommendation defined a right of reply as: "offering a possibility to react to any information in the media presenting inaccurate facts ... which affect ... personal rights." [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Individual countries [ edit ] In the federal system of Germany , the individual federal states are responsible for education, cultural affairs, and also the press and electronic media. All press laws of the 16 federal states guarantee the right to a counter presentation of factual statements which are deemed to be wrong by the individuals and organisations concerned. This is based on article 11 the national press law of 1874, and is found in all 16 laws as §11 or §10 in slightly modified versions.

Austria and Switzerland have similar laws on the books. In Austria, this is in article 9 of the national media law, in Switzerland in article 28g of the civil code.

In France , the right to a corrective reply goes back to article 13 of the Law on the freedom of the press of July 29, 1881 and is renewed and extended to broadcast and digital media via various laws and decrees.

The Belgian law on the right to reply emerged in 1831 as article 13 of the 1831 decree on the press. This was replaced 130 years later by the law on the droit de réponse or «loi du 23 juin 1961». Originally referring only to the printed press, this law was amended in 1977 by the law of «4 mars 1977 relative au droit de réponse dans l’audiovisuel» i.e. audiovisual media, published in the Moniteur Belge of March 15, 1977.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Since the federalisation of the Belgian state in 1980, the language communities are responsible for the media, and so the Flemish community has passed in 2005 a decrée dated March 4, 2005, which regulates the right to reply in articles 177 to 199, and the German language community has passed the decree of 27 June 2005, which simply refers to the law of 1961 as amended in 1977.

[ 7 ] : p.32 United Nations [ edit ] The United Nations recognises the "International Right of Correction" through the "Convention on the International Right of Correction", which entered into force on August 24, 1962.

[ 9 ] United States [ edit ] The United States has never had a comprehensive national right of reply. However, it did have FCC regulations from 1949 until 2000 on broadcast media creating similar rights, namely the fairness doctrine , the personal attack rule , and the "political editorial" rule. Some states had right to reply laws, but a Florida right of reply law (referring to print media) was overturned as unconstitutional by Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo , 418 U.S.

241 (1974). The FCC fairness doctrine (referring to broadcast media) was affirmed as constitutional in Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC , 395 U.S.

367 (1969), although the FCC decided to discontinue the rule in 1987.

[ 10 ] The FCC's personal attack rule and the "political editorial" rule remained in practice until 2000. The "personal attack" rule applied whenever a person, or small group, was subject to a personal attack during a broadcast. Stations had to notify such persons, or groups, within a week of the attack, send them transcripts of what was said and offer the opportunity to respond on-the-air. The "political editorial" rule required that when a station broadcast editorials opposing candidates for public office, the candidate be notified and allowed a reasonable opportunity to respond.

[ 11 ] The U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit ordered the FCC to justify these corollary rules in light of the decision to repeal the fairness doctrine. The FCC did not provide prompt justification, so both corollary rules were repealed in October 2000.

[ 12 ] As an editorial policy [ edit ] BBC [ edit ] A right of reply can also be part of the editorial policy of a news publication or an academic journal. The BBC 's Editorial Guidelines state: [ 13 ] When our output makes allegations of wrongdoing, iniquity or incompetence or lays out a strong and damaging critique of an individual or institution the presumption is that those criticised should be given a "right of reply", that is, given a fair opportunity to respond to the allegations.

Australasian Journal of Philosophy [ edit ] The Australasian Journal of Philosophy 's editorial policy says: [ 14 ] [A]uthors of the materials being commented on [in Discussion Notes] may be given a right of reply (subject to the usual refereeing), on the understanding that timely publication of the Note will take priority over the desirability of including both Note and Reply in the same issue of the Journal.

United States [ edit ] In the U.S., there is a journalistic standard of including denials, exemplified by the ethical code of the Society of Professional Journalists : "Diligently seek subjects of news coverage to allow them to respond to criticism or allegations of wrongdoing." [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Fairness Doctrine Audi alteram partem References [ edit ] ^ Mazotte, Natalia (2012-03-15).

"Brazilian senate approves bill guaranteeing "right of reply" for offended parties to respond to criticisms in media" .

LatAm Journalism Review by the Knight Center . Retrieved 2025-01-19 .

^ [1] (article 5, V) Retrieved November 12, 2010 ^ a b Hanbury, Shanna (2020-04-07).

"Indigenous group wins unprecedented right of reply to Bolsonaro's racist invective" .

Mongabay Environmental News . Retrieved 2025-05-15 .

^ "Resolution of the Committee of Ministers on the Right of Reply" (PDF) .

^ "Draft Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to Member States on the Right of Reply in the New Media Environment" .

^ "MediaWise submission to DCMS consultation" . Archived from the original on 2006-01-16.

^ a b Jacquemin, Hervé; Montero, Etienne; Pirlot De Corbion, Sophie (2007).

"Le droit de réponse dans les médias" (PDF) .

Revue du Droit des Technologies de l'Information (27): 31– 64 . Retrieved 8 May 2016 .

^ Observatoire des Droits de l’Internet (October 2006).

"Droit de réponse dans les médias - Avis n° 5 de l'Observatoire des Droits de l'Internet" (PDF) . Retrieved 8 May 2016 .

^ Convention on the International Right of Correction, 435 U.N.T.S. 191, entered into force August 24, 1962.

list of parties ^ The First Amendment Encyclopedia - Right to Respond and Right of Reply ^ "Information Needs of Communities: The policy and regulatory landscape" (PDF) .

FCC . June 9, 2011. pp.

277– 278 . Retrieved August 22, 2017 .

^ Leweke, Robert W. (October 1, 2001). "Rules Without a Home: FCC Enforcement of the Personal Attack and Political Editorial Rules".

Communication Law and Policy .

6 (4): 557– 576.

doi : 10.1207/S15326926CLP0604_02 .

ISSN 1081-1680 .

S2CID 143329667 .

^ "BBC - Editorial Guidelines - Guidelines - Section 6: Fairness, Contributors and Consent - Right of Reply" . BBC . Retrieved 2012-07-05 .

^ AJP: Editorial Policy Retrieved August 3, 2010 ^ “ SPJ Code of Ethics ", Society of Professional Journalists .  Retrieve 8 Nov. 2022.

External links [ edit ] Directory of press laws of the 16 German federal states Article 28g of Swiss civil code guaranteeing the right to a corrective reply (German) Right to corrective reply in article 9 of the Austrian media law Belgian law on the right to reply of 1961 RightOfReply.org is a non-profit site established to allow subjects of online criticism to respond to their critics, where requests for conspicuous right of reply has been denied within the critical publication v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_of_reply&oldid=1295102613 " Categories : Criticisms Legal reasoning Rights Freedom of expression Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 18:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right of reply 11 languages Add topic

