Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Astronomy 3 Geometry Toggle Geometry subsection 3.1 Distinction of theorems and problems 3.2 Compass and straightedge 4 Miscellaneous opinions attributed to Oenopides 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Oenopides 19 languages تۆرکجه Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th-century BCE Greek mathematician and astronomer For the lunar crater, see Oenopides (crater) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Oenopides of Chios Born c. 490 BCE Chios Died 420 BCE Oenopides of Chios ( Greek : Οἰνοπίδης ὁ Χῖος ; born c. 490 BCE) was an ancient Greek geometer , astronomer and mathematician, who lived around 450 BCE .

Biography [ edit ] Only limited information is known about the early life of Oenopides, other than that his birthplace was the island of Chios around 490 BCE.

[ 1 ] It is believed that Oenopides spent time in Athens but there is only circumstantial evidence to support this. Plato mentions him in Erastae: A Dialogue On Philosophy which places him in Athens.

[ 2 ] The English translator of the same book reveals (in footnote 3) one other aspect in Oenopides life which was his travel in Egypt in which he enriched his knowledge in the art of Astronomy and Geometry by some Egyptian priests.

[ 2 ] Astronomy [ edit ] The main accomplishment of Oenopides as an astronomer was his determination of the angle between the plane of the celestial equator, and the zodiac (the yearly path of the Sun in the sky). He found this angle to be 24°. In effect this amounted to measuring the inclination of the Earth axis. Oenopides's result remained the standard value for two centuries, until Eratosthenes measured it with greater precision.

[ 3 ] Oenopides also determined the value of the Great Year, that is, the shortest interval of time that is equal to both an integer number of years and an integer number of months . As the relative positions of the Sun and Moon repeat themselves after each Great Year, this offers a means to predict solar and lunar eclipses . In actual practice this is only approximately true, because the ratio of the length of the year and that of the month does not exactly match any simple mathematical fraction, and because in addition the lunar orbit varies continuously.

Oenopides put the Great Year at 59 years, corresponding to 730 months. This was a good approximation, but not a perfect one, since 59 (sidereal) years are equal to 21550.1 days, while 730 (synodical) months equal 21557.3 days. The difference therefore amounts to seven days. In addition there are the interfering variations in the lunar orbit. However, a 59-year period had the advantage that it corresponded quite closely to an integer number of orbital revolutions of several planets around the Sun, which meant that their relative positions also repeated each Great Year cycle. Before Oenopides a Great Year of eight solar years was in use (= 99 months). Shortly after Oenopides, in 432 BC, Meton and Euctemon discovered the better value of 18 years, equal to 223 months (the so-called Saros period).

Geometry [ edit ] Distinction of theorems and problems [ edit ] While Oenopides's innovations as an astronomer mainly concern practical issues, as a geometer he seems to have been rather a theorist and methodologist, who set himself the task to make geometry comply with higher standards of theoretical purity. Thus he introduced the distinction between 'theorems' and 'problems': though both are involved with the solution of an exercise, a theorem is meant to be a theoretical building block to be used as the fundament of further theory, while a problem is only an isolated exercise without further follow-up or importance.

Compass and straightedge [ edit ] Oenopides apparently also was the author of the rule that geometrical constructions should use no other means than compass and straightedge . In this context his name adheres to two specific elementary constructions of plane geometry: first, to draw from a given point a straight line perpendicular to a given straight line; and second, on a given straight line and at a given point on it, to construct a rectilineal angle equal to a given rectilineal angle.

Miscellaneous opinions attributed to Oenopides [ edit ] Several more opinions in various areas are attributed to Oenopides: He is said to have given an explanation of the flooding of the Nile each summer. On the basis of observations of the temperature of water in deep wells he seems erroneously to have inferred that underground water is in fact cooler in summer than in winter. In winter, when rain fell and seeped into the ground it would soon evaporate again because of the heat in the soil. However, in summer, when water in the ground was supposedly colder, there would be less evaporation. The surplus of moisture would then have to be carried off otherwise, thereby causing the Nile to overflow.

To Oenopides was attributed the opinion that formerly the Sun had moved along the Milky Way . However, when it saw how Thyestes , a mythological figure, was served his own son for dinner by his brother Atreus , the Sun was so horrified that it left its course and moved to the zodiac instead.

Oenopides was said to have regarded the universe as a living organism, God or the Divine being its soul.

He is also said to have considered air and fire as being the first principles of the universe.

Notes [ edit ] ^ "Oenopides biography" .

www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk . Retrieved 2017-08-19 .

^ a b Plato (1826).

Erastae: a dialogue on philosophy . p. 9.

^ Bodnár, István M. (2013). "Oenopides of Chios".

The Encyclopedia of Ancient History .

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

doi : 10.1002/9781444338386.wbeah21234 .

ISBN 9781444338386 .

References [ edit ] István M. Bodnár, Oenopides of Chius: A survey of the modern literature with a collection of the ancient testimonia , Berlin 2007, preprint 327 of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, accessible at http://www.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/Preprints/P327.PDF Ivor Bulmer-Thomas , 'Oenopides of Chios', in: Dictionary of Scientific Biography , Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed. (18 volumes; New York 1970-1990) volume 10 pp. 179–182.

Kurt von Fritz, 'Oinopides', in: Paulys Realencyclopädie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft , G. Wissowa, ed. (51 volumes; 1894–1980) volume 17 (1937) columns 2258-2272 (in German).

v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany Academics zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oenopides&oldid=1286429328 " Categories : 490s BC births Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Greek geometers Ancient Chians 5th-century BC Greek mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 21:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oenopides 19 languages Add topic

