Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Contributions to economics Toggle Contributions to economics subsection 2.1 Risk aversion 2.2 Henry George theorem 2.3 Information asymmetry 2.4 Monopolistic competition 2.5 Shapiro–Stiglitz efficiency wage model 2.6 Practical implications of Stiglitz's theories 3 Government Toggle Government subsection 3.1 Clinton administration 3.2 Initiative for Policy Dialogue 3.3 Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress 3.4 Commission of Experts on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System 3.5 Greek debt crisis 3.6 Scotland 3.7 Labour Party 4 Economic views Toggle Economic views subsection 4.1 Market efficiency 4.2 Support for anti-austerity movement in Spain 4.3 Criticism of rating agencies 4.4 Views on risks associated with government-sponsored enterprises 4.5 Criticism of Trans-Pacific Partnership and Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership 4.6 Regulation 4.7 Land value tax (Georgism) 4.8 Views on the eurozone 4.9 Views on free trade 4.9.1 Advice for the eurozone countries 4.9.2 Advice for the United States 4.10 Green economy 4.11 Views on taxation 4.12 Views on artificial intelligence 5 Books Toggle Books subsection 5.1 Whither Socialism?

(1994) 5.2 Globalization and Its Discontents (2002) 5.3 The Roaring Nineties (2003) 5.4 New Paradigm for Monetary Economics (2003) 5.5 Fair Trade for All (2005) 5.6 Making Globalization Work (2006) 5.7 Stability with Growth (2006) 5.8 The Three Trillion Dollar War (2008) 5.9 Freefall (2010) 5.10 The Price of Inequality (2012) 5.11 Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth, Development, and Social Progress (2014) 5.12 The Great Divide: Unequal Societies and What We Can Do About Them (2015) 5.13 The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe (2016) 5.14 People, Power and Profits: Progressive Capitalism for an Age of Discontent (2019) 5.15 Measuring What Counts: The Global Movement for Well-Being (2019) 5.16 The Road to Freedom: Economics and the Good Society (2024) 6 Papers and conferences 7 Awards and honors 8 Personal life 9 Selected bibliography Toggle Selected bibliography subsection 9.1 Books 9.2 Book chapters 9.3 Selected scholarly articles 9.4 Articles in popular press 9.5 Video and online sources 9.6 Papers 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Joseph Stiglitz 67 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Ikinyarwanda Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American economist and Nobel Laureate (born 1943) "Stiglitz" redirects here. For other uses, see Stiglitz (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Joseph Stillitz .

Joseph Stiglitz Stiglitz in 2019 Chief Economist of the World Bank In office February 1997 – February 2000 President James Wolfensohn Preceded by Michael Bruno Succeeded by Nicholas Stern 17th Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers In office June 28, 1995 – February 10, 1997 President Bill Clinton Preceded by Laura Tyson Succeeded by Janet Yellen Personal details Born Joseph Eugene Stiglitz ( 1943-02-09 ) February 9, 1943 (age 82) Gary, Indiana , U.S.

Political party Democratic Spouses Jane Hannaway ​ ​ ( m.

1978, divorced) ​ Anya Schiffrin ​ ( m.

2004) ​ Education Amherst College ( BA ) Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MA , PhD ) Academic background Thesis Studies in the theory of growth and income distribution (1967) Doctoral advisor Robert Solow [ 1 ] Influences John Maynard Keynes , Robert Solow , James Mirrlees , Henry George Academic work Discipline Macroeconomics , public economics , information economics School or tradition Neo-Keynesian economics Doctoral students Katrin Eggenberger Notable ideas Screening Taxation Unemployment Market failure Information asymmetry Economic inequality Website Information at IDEAS / RePEc Joseph Eugene Stiglitz ( / ˈ s t ɪ ɡ l ɪ t s / ; born February 9, 1943) is an American New Keynesian economist , [ 2 ] a public policy analyst , political activist, and a professor at Columbia University . He is a recipient of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences (2001) [ 3 ] and the John Bates Clark Medal (1979).

[ 4 ] He is a former senior vice president and chief economist of the World Bank . He is also a former member and chairman of the U.S.

Council of Economic Advisers .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] He is known for his support for the Georgist public finance theory [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] and for his critical view of the management of globalization , of laissez-faire economists (whom he calls " free-market fundamentalists "), and of international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank .

In 2000, Stiglitz founded the Initiative for Policy Dialogue (IPD), a think tank on international development based at Columbia University . He has been a member of the Columbia faculty since 2001 and received the university's highest academic rank ( university professor ) in 2003. He was the founding chair of the university's Committee on Global Thought. He also chairs the University of Manchester 's Brooks World Poverty Institute . He was a member of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences .  In 2009, the President of the United Nations General Assembly Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann , appointed Stiglitz as the chairman of the U.N. Commission on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System, where he oversaw suggested proposals and commissioned a report on reforming the international monetary and financial system.

[ 10 ] He served as the chair of the international Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress , appointed by the French President Sarkozy , which issued its report in 2010, Mismeasuring our Lives: Why GDP doesn't add up, [ 11 ] and currently serves as co-chair of its successor, the High Level Expert Group on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress. From 2011 to 2014, Stiglitz was the president of the International Economic Association (IEA).

[ 12 ] He presided over the organization of the IEA triennial world congress held near the Dead Sea in Jordan in June 2014.

[ 13 ] In 2011, Stiglitz was named as one of the 100 most influential people in the world [ 14 ] by Time magazine. Stiglitz's work focuses on income distribution from a Georgist perspective, asset risk management, corporate governance, and international trade. He is the author of several books, the latest being The Road to Freedom (2024); People, Power, and Profits (2019); The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe (2016); The Great Divide: Unequal Societies and What We Can Do About Them (2015); Rewriting the Rules of the American Economy: An Agenda for Growth and Shared Prosperity (2015); and Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth Development and Social Progress (2014).

[ 15 ] He is also one of the 25 leading figures on the Information and Democracy Commission launched by Reporters Without Borders .

[ 16 ] According to the Open Syllabus Project , Stiglitz is the fifth most frequently cited author on college syllabi for economics courses.

[ 17 ] Life and career [ edit ] Part of a series on Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side People François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Money portal Business portal v t e Stiglitz was born in Gary, Indiana [ 18 ] into a Jewish [ 19 ] family. His mother was Charlotte (née Fishman), a schoolteacher, and his father was Nathaniel David Stiglitz, an insurance salesman.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Stiglitz attended Amherst College , where he was a National Merit Scholar , active on the debate team, and president of the student government.

[ 22 ] During his senior year at Amherst College, he studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he later pursued graduate work.

[ 22 ] In Summer 1965, he moved to the University of Chicago to do research under Hirofumi Uzawa who had received an NSF grant.

[ 23 ] He studied for his PhD from MIT from 1966 to 1967, during which time he also held an MIT assistant professorship.

[ 24 ] Stiglitz stated that the particular style of MIT economics suited him well, describing it as "simple and concrete models, directed at answering important and relevant questions." [ 3 ] From 1966 to 1970 he was a research fellow at the University of Cambridge .

[ 24 ] Stiglitz initially arrived at Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge as a Fulbright Scholar in 1965, and he later won a Tapp Junior Research Fellowship at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge which was instrumental in shaping his understanding of Keynes and macroeconomic theory .

[ 25 ] In subsequent years, he held academic positions at Yale , Stanford , Oxford —where he was Drummond Professor of Political Economy —and Princeton .

[ 26 ] Since 2001, Stiglitz has been a professor at Columbia University , with appointments at the Business School , the Department of Economics and the School of International and Public Affairs (SIPA), and is an editor of The Economists' Voice journal with J. Bradford DeLong and Aaron Edlin .

[ 27 ] He teaches classes for a double-degree program between Sciences Po Paris and École Polytechnique in Economics and Public Policy.

[ 28 ] He has chaired the Brooks World Poverty Institute at the University of Manchester since 2005.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Stiglitz is widely considered a New-Keynesian economist, [ 31 ] [ 32 ] although at least one economics journalist says his work cannot be so clearly categorized.

[ 33 ] Stiglitz has played a number of policy roles throughout his career. He served in the Clinton administration as the chair of the President's Council of Economic Advisers (1995–1997).

[ 24 ] At the World Bank , he served as a senior vice-president and the chief economist from 1997 to 2000.

[ 34 ] He was fired by the World Bank for expressing dissent with its policies.

[ 35 ] Stiglitz has advised American president Barack Obama , but has criticized the Obama Administration 's financial-industry rescue plan.

[ 36 ] He said whoever designed the Obama administration's bank rescue plan is "either in the pocket of the banks or they're incompetent." [ 37 ] In October 2008, he was asked by the President of the United Nations General Assembly to chair a commission drafting a report on the reasons for and solutions to the 2008 financial crisis .

[ 38 ] In response, the commission produced the Stiglitz Report .

On July 25, 2011, Stiglitz participated in the "I Forro Social del 15M" organized in Madrid , expressing his support to the 15M Movement protestors.

[ 39 ] Stiglitz was the president of the International Economic Association from 2011 to 2014.

[ 40 ] On September 27, 2015, the United Kingdom Labour Party announced that Stiglitz was to sit on its Economic Advisory Committee along with five other world-leading economists.

[ 41 ] Stiglitz serves on the Executive Advisory Board of the World.Minds Foundation, contributing to global ethical discussions on science, society, and responsibility.

[ 42 ] Contributions to economics [ edit ] Stiglitz at a conference in Mexico in 2009 After the 2018 mid-term elections in the United States, he wrote a statement about the importance of economic justice to the survival of democracy worldwide.

[ 43 ] Risk aversion [ edit ] After getting his Ph.D. from M.I.T.

in 1967, Stiglitz co-authored one of his first papers with Michael Rothschild for the Journal of Economic Theory in 1970.

[ 44 ] Stiglitz and Rothschild built upon works by economists such as Robert Solow on the concept of risk aversion .

[ citation needed ] Stiglitz and Rothschild showed three plausible definitions of a variable X being 'more variable' than a variable Y were all equivalent – Y being equal to X plus noise, every risk-averse agent preferring Y to X, and Y having more weight in its tails, and that none of these were always consistent with X having a higher statistical variance than Y – a commonly used definition at the time. In a second paper, they analyzed the theoretical consequences of risk aversion in various circumstances, such as an individual's savings decisions and a firm's production decisions.

[ citation needed ] Henry George theorem [ edit ] Stiglitz made early contributions to a theory of public finance stating that an optimal supply of local public goods can be funded entirely through capture of the land rents generated by those goods (when population distributions are optimal). Stiglitz dubbed this the ' Henry George theorem ' in reference to the radical classical economist Henry George who famously advocated for land value taxation . The explanation behind Stiglitz's finding is that rivalry for public goods takes place geographically, so competition for access to any beneficial public good will increase land values by at least as much as its outlay cost. Furthermore, Stiglitz shows that a single tax on land rents is necessary to provide the optimal supply of local public investment. Stiglitz also shows how the theorem could be used to find the optimal size of a city or firm.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Information asymmetry [ edit ] Stiglitz's most famous research was on screening , a technique used by one economic agent to extract otherwise private information from another. It was for this contribution to the theory of information asymmetry that he shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics [ 3 ] with George A. Akerlof and A. Michael Spence in 2001 "for laying the foundations for the theory of markets with asymmetric information ".

Much of Stiglitz's work on information economics demonstrates situations in which incomplete information prevents markets from achieving social efficiency. His paper with Andrew Weiss showed that if banks use interest rates to infer information about borrowers' types (adverse selection effect), or to encourage their actions following borrowing (incentive effect), then credit will be rationed below the optimal level, even in a competitive market.

[ 47 ] Stiglitz and Rothschild showed that in an insurance market, firms have an incentive to undermine a 'pooling equilibrium', where all agents are offered the same full-insurance policy, by offering cheaper partial insurance that would only be attractive to the low-risk types, meaning that a competitive market can only achieve partial coverage of agents.

[ 48 ] Stiglitz and Grossman showed that trivially small information acquisition costs prevent financial markets from achieving complete informational efficiency, since agents will have an incentive to free-ride on others' information acquisition, and acquire this information indirectly by observing market prices.

[ 49 ] Monopolistic competition [ edit ] Main article: Dixit–Stiglitz model Stiglitz, together with Avinash Dixit , created a tractable model of monopolistic competition that was an alternative to traditional perfect-competition models of general equilibrium . They showed that in the presence of increasing returns to scale, the entry of firms is socially too small.

[ 50 ] The model was extended to show that when consumers have a preference for diversity, entry can be socially too large. The modeling approach was used by Paul Krugman in his analysis of the non-comparative advantage trading patterns.

[ 51 ] Shapiro–Stiglitz efficiency wage model [ edit ] Main article: Shapiro–Stiglitz theory See also: Efficiency wages In the Shapiro–Stiglitz model of efficiency wages, workers are paid at a level that dissuades shirking. This prevents wages from dropping to market clearing levels. Full employment cannot be achieved because workers would shirk if they were not threatened with the possibility of unemployment. Because of this, the curve for the no-shirking condition (labeled NSC) goes to infinity at full employment.

Stiglitz also did research on efficiency wages , and helped create what became known as the "Shapiro–Stiglitz model" to explain why there is unemployment even in equilibrium, why wages are not bid down sufficiently by job seekers (in the absence of minimum wages) so that everyone who wants a job finds one, and to question whether the neoclassical paradigm could explain involuntary unemployment .

[ 52 ] An answer to these puzzles was proposed by Shapiro and Stiglitz in 1984: "Unemployment is driven by the information structure of employment".

[ 52 ] Two basic observations undergird their analysis: Unlike other forms of capital, humans can choose their level of effort.

It is costly for firms to determine how much effort workers are exerting.

Some key implications of this model are: [ 53 ] [ 54 ] Wages do not fall enough during recessions to prevent unemployment from rising. If the demand for labor falls, this lowers wages. But because wages have fallen, the probability of 'shirking' (workers not exerting effort) has risen. If employment levels are to be maintained, through a sufficient lowering of wages, workers will be less productive than before through the shirking effect. As a consequence, in the model, wages do not fall enough to maintain employment levels at the previous state, because firms want to avoid excessive shirking by their workers. So, unemployment must rise during recessions, because wages are kept 'too high'.

Possible corollary: Wage sluggishness. Moving from one private cost of hiring (w∗) to another private cost of hiring (w∗∗) will require each firm to repeatedly re-optimize wages in response to shifting unemployment rate . Firms cannot cut wages until unemployment rises sufficiently (a coordination problem).

The outcome is never Pareto efficient .

Each firm employs too few workers, because the cost of employing too many workers would be faced by the firm alone, while the cost of unemployment is shared by the firm and its competitors, indeed it is shared by all firms that pay taxes in the country. This means that firms do not "internalize" the "external" cost of unemployment –  they do not factor how large-scale unemployment harms society when assessing their own costs.  This leads to a negative externality as marginal social cost exceeds the firm's marginal cost (MSC = Firm's Private Marginal Cost + Marginal External Cost of increased social unemployment) [ clarification needed ] There are also positive externalities : each firm increases the asset value of unemployment for all other firms when they hire during recessions.  By creating hypercompetitive labor markets, all firms (the winners when laborers compete) experience an increase in value.  However, this effect of increased valuation is very unapparent, because the first problem (the negative externality of sub-optimal hiring) clearly dominates since the 'natural rate of unemployment' is always too high.

Practical implications of Stiglitz's theories [ edit ] The practical implications of Stiglitz's work in political economy and their economic policy implications have been subject to debate.

[ 55 ] Stiglitz himself has evolved his political-economic discourse over time.

[ 56 ] Once incomplete and imperfect information is introduced, Chicago-school defenders of the market system cannot sustain descriptive claims of the Pareto efficiency of the real world. Thus, Stiglitz's use of rational-expectations equilibrium assumptions to achieve a more realistic understanding of capitalism than is usual among rational-expectations theorists leads, paradoxically, to the conclusion that capitalism deviates from the model in a way that justifies state action –  socialism –  as a remedy.

[ 57 ] The effect of Stiglitz's influence is to make economics even more presumptively interventionist than Samuelson preferred. Samuelson treated market failure as an exception to the general rule of efficient markets. But the Greenwald-Stiglitz theorem posits market failure as the norm, establishing "that government could potentially almost always improve upon the market's resource allocation." And the Sappington-Stiglitz theorem "establishes that an ideal government could do better running an enterprise itself than it could through privatization" [ 58 ] — Stiglitz 1994, p. 179.

[ 57 ] As David L. Prychitko discusses in his critique to Whither Socialism?

, he thought that Stiglitz seems generally correct, [ citation needed ] though it still leaves how the coercive institutions of the government [ neutrality is disputed ] should be constrained and what the relation is between the government and civil society.

[ 59 ] Government [ edit ] Clinton administration [ edit ] Néstor Kirchner ( right ) with Joseph Stiglitz Stiglitz joined the Clinton Administration in 1993, [ 60 ] serving first as a member during 1993–1995, and was then appointed Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers on June 28, 1995.

[ 3 ] Stiglitz always had a poor relationship with Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers .

[ 61 ] In 2000, Summers successfully petitioned for Stiglitz's removal, supposedly in exchange for World Bank President James Wolfensohn 's re-appointment – an exchange that Wolfensohn denies took place. Whether Summers ever made such a blunt demand is questionable –  Wolfensohn claims he would "have told him to *** himself".

[ 62 ] Stiglitz resigned from the World Bank in January 2000, a month before his term expired.

[ 63 ] The Bank's president , James Wolfensohn, announced Stiglitz's resignation in November 1999 and also announced that Stiglitz would stay on as Special Advisor to the President, and would chair the search committee for a successor.

Joseph E. Stiglitz said today [Nov. 24, 1999] that he would resign as the World Bank's chief economist after using the position for nearly three years to raise pointed questions about the effectiveness of conventional approaches to helping poor countries.

[ 64 ] In this role, he continued criticism of the IMF, and, by implication, the U.S. Treasury Department. In April 2000, in an article for The New Republic , he wrote: They'll say the IMF is arrogant. They'll say the IMF doesn't really listen to the developing countries it is supposed to help. They'll say the IMF is secretive and insulated from democratic accountability. They'll say the IMF's economic 'remedies' often make things worse –  turning slowdowns into recessions and recessions into depressions. And they'll have a point. I was chief economist at the World Bank from 1996 until last November, during the gravest global economic crisis in a half-century. I saw how the IMF, in tandem with the U.S. Treasury Department, responded. And I was appalled.

Stiglitz's protector-of-sorts at the World Bank, Wolfensohn, had privately empathized with Stiglitz's views, but was worried for his second term, which Summers had threatened to veto.

[ citation needed ] Stanley Fischer, deputy managing director of the IMF, called a special staff meeting and informed the gathering that Wolfensohn had agreed to fire Stiglitz. Meanwhile, the bank's External Affairs department told the press that Stiglitz had not been fired; his post had merely been abolished.

[ 65 ] In a September 19, 2008 radio interview, with Aimee Allison and Philip Maldari on Pacifica Radio 's KPFA 94.1 FM in Berkeley , United States, Stiglitz implied that President Clinton and his economic advisors would not have backed the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) had they been aware of stealth provisions, inserted by lobbyists, that they overlooked.

Initiative for Policy Dialogue [ edit ] Main article: Initiative for Policy Dialogue In July 2000, Stiglitz founded the Initiative for Policy Dialogue .

[ 3 ] Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress [ edit ] At the beginning of 2008, Stiglitz chaired the Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress , also known as the Stiglitz- Sen - Fitoussi Commission, initiated by President Sarkozy of France. The Commission held its first plenary meeting on April 22–23, 2008, in Paris. Its final report was made public on September 14, 2009.

[ 66 ] Commission of Experts on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System [ edit ] Stiglitz at the World Economic Forum annual meeting in Davos , 2009 In 2009, Stiglitz chaired the Commission of Experts on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System which was convened by the President of the United Nations General Assembly "to review the workings of the global financial system , including major bodies such as the World Bank and the IMF , and to suggest steps to be taken by Member States to secure a more sustainable and just global economic order ".

[ 67 ] Its final report was released on September 21, 2009.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Greek debt crisis [ edit ] In 2010, Stiglitz acted as an advisor to the Greek government during the Greek debt crisis . He appeared on Bloomberg TV for an interview on the risks of Greece defaulting, in which he stated that he was very confident that Greece would not default. He went on to say that Greece was under "speculative attack" and though it had "short-term liquidity problems ... and would benefit from Solidarity Bonds", the country was "on track to meet its obligations".

[ 70 ] The next day, during a BBC interview, Stiglitz stated that "there's no problem of Greece or Spain meeting their interest payments". He argued nonetheless, that it would be desirable and needed for all of Europe to make a clear statement of belief in social solidarity and that they "stand behind Greece". Confronted with the statement: "Greece's difficulty is that the magnitude of debt is far greater than the capacity of the economy to service", Stiglitz replied, "That's rather absurd".

[ citation needed ] In 2012, Stiglitz described the European austerity plans as a "suicide-pact".

[ 71 ] In 2015, he said that the programmer of austerity in Greece had been "an enormous mistake", that the International Monetary Fund, European Central Bank and the European Commission had "criminal responsibility for causing a major recession".

[ 72 ] He argued that Greek debt should be written off.

[ 72 ] Scotland [ edit ] Since March 2012, Stiglitz has been a member of the Scottish Government 's Fiscal Commission Working Group, which oversees the work to establish a fiscal and macroeconomic framework for an independent Scotland on behalf of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers . Together with Professors Andrew Hughes Hallett , Sir James Mirrlees and Frances Ruane , Stiglitz will "advise on the establishment of a credible Fiscal Commission which entrenches financial responsibility and ensures market confidence".

[ 73 ] Labour Party [ edit ] In July 2015, Stiglitz endorsed Jeremy Corbyn 's campaign in the Labour Party leadership election . He said: "I am not surprised at all that there is a demand for a strong anti-austerity movement around increased concern about inequality. The promises of New Labour in the UK and of the Clintonites in the US have been a disappointment." [ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] On September 27, 2015, it was announced that he had been appointed to the British Labour Party's Economic Advisory Committee , convened by Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell and reporting to Labour Party Leader Jeremy Corbyn, [ 77 ] although he reportedly failed to attend the first meeting.

[ 78 ] Economic views [ edit ] Market efficiency [ edit ] For Stiglitz, there is no such thing as an invisible hand , in the sense that free markets lead to efficiency as if guided by unseen forces.

[ 79 ] According to Stiglitz: [ 80 ] Whenever there are " externalities " –  where the actions of an individual have impacts on others for which they do not pay or for which they are not compensated –  markets will not work well. But recent research has shown that these externalities are pervasive, whenever there is imperfect information or imperfect risk markets –  that is always.
The real debate today is about finding the right balance between the market and government. Both are needed. They can each complement each other. This balance will differ from time to time and place to place.

In an interview in 2007, Stiglitz explained further: [ 81 ] The theories that I (and others) helped develop explained why unfettered markets often not only do not lead to social justice, but do not even produce efficient outcomes. Interestingly, there has been no intellectual challenge to the refutation of Adam Smith's invisible hand: individuals and firms, in the pursuit of their self-interest , are not necessarily, or in general, led as if by an invisible hand, to economic efficiency.

The preceding claim is based on Stiglitz's 1986 paper, "Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets ", [ 82 ] which describes a general methodology to deal with externalities and for calculating optimal corrective taxes in a general equilibrium context. In the opening remarks for his prize acceptance at Aula Magna , [ 83 ] Stiglitz said: [ 84 ] I hope to show that Information Economics represents a fundamental change in the prevailing paradigm within economics. Problems of information are central to understanding not only market economics but also political economy, and in the last section of this lecture, I explore some of the implications of information imperfections for political processes.

Support for anti-austerity movement in Spain [ edit ] On July 25, 2011, Stiglitz participated in the "I Foro Social del 15M" organized in Madrid (Spain) expressing his support for the anti-austerity movement in Spain .

[ 39 ] During an informal speech, he made a brief review of some of the problems in Europe and in the United States, the serious unemployment rate and the situation in Greece. "This is an opportunity for economic contribution social measures", argued Stiglitz, who made a speech about the way authorities are handling the political exit to the crisis. He encouraged those present to respond to the ideas with good ideas. "This does not work, you have to change it", he said.

Criticism of rating agencies [ edit ] Stiglitz has been critical of rating agencies , describing them as the "key culprit" in the 2008 financial crisis , noting "they were the party that performed the alchemy that converted the securities from F-rated to A-rated. The banks could not have done what they did without the complicity of the rating agencies." [ 85 ] Stiglitz co-authored a paper with Peter Orszag in 2002 titled "Implications of the New Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Risk-Based Capital Standard" where they stated "on the basis of historical experience, the risk to the government from a potential default on GSE debt is effectively zero." However, "the risk-based capital standard ... may fail to reflect the probability of another Great Depression-like scenario." [ 86 ] Views on risks associated with government-sponsored enterprises [ edit ] In a 2002 paper coauthored with Jonathan Orszag , and Peter R. Orszag , Stiglitz asserted "the probability of default by the GSEs [Government-Sponsored Enterprises] is extremely small".

[ 87 ] Criticism of Trans-Pacific Partnership and Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership [ edit ] See also: Trans-Pacific Partnership § Response , and Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership § activism against TTIP Stiglitz warned that the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) presented "grave risks" and it "serves the interests of the wealthiest." [ 88 ] [ 89 ] Stiglitz also opposed the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) trade deal between the European Union (EU) and the United States , and has argued that the United Kingdom should consider its withdrawal from the EU in the 2016 referendum on the matter if TTIP passes, saying that "the strictures imposed by TTIP would be sufficiently averse to the functioning of government that it would make me think over again about whether membership of the EU was a good idea".

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Regulation [ edit ] Stiglitz argues that relying solely on business self-interest as the means of achieving the well-being of society and economic efficiency is misleading, and that instead "What is needed is stronger norms, clearer understandings of what is acceptable – and what is not – and stronger laws and regulations to ensure that those that do not behave in ways that are consistent with these norms are held accountable".

[ 92 ] Land value tax (Georgism) [ edit ] Stiglitz argues that land value tax would improve the efficiency and equity of agricultural economies. Stiglitz believes that societies should rely on a generalized Henry George principle to finance public goods, protect natural resources, improve land use, and reduce the burden of rents and taxes on the poor while increasing productive capital formation. Stiglitz advocates taxing "natural resource rents at as close to 100 percent as possible" and that a corollary of this principle is that polluters should be taxed for "activities that generate negative externalities." [ 93 ] Stiglitz therefore asserts that land value taxation is even better than its famous advocate Henry George thought.

[ 94 ] Views on the eurozone [ edit ] In a September 2016 interview Stiglitz stated that "the cost of keeping the Eurozone together probably exceeds the cost of breaking it up." [ 95 ] Views on free trade [ edit ] This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Advice for the eurozone countries [ edit ] In the 1990s, he wrote that "countries in North America and Europe should eliminate all tariffs and quotas (protectionist measures)".

[ 96 ] He now advises the eurozone countries to control their trade balance with Germany by means of export/ import certificates or "trade chits" (a protectionist measure).

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] Citing Keynesian theory, he explains that trade surpluses are harmful: " John Maynard Keynes pointed out that surpluses lead to weak global aggregate demand – countries running surpluses exert a "negative externality" on trading partners. Indeed, Keynes believed it was surplus countries, far more than those in deficit, that posed a threat to global prosperity; he went so far as to advocate a tax on surplus countries".

[ 100 ] From the beginning of 1930, Keynes stopped believing in free trade, denounced the theory of comparative advantage (the basis of free trade) and adhered to protectionism.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Stiglitz writes: "Germany's surplus means that the rest of Europe is in deficit. And the fact that these countries import more than they export contributes to the weakness of their economies". He thinks that surplus countries are getting richer at the expense of deficit countries. He notes that the euro is the cause of this deficit and that as the trade deficit declines GDP would rise and unemployment would fall: "The euro system means that Germany's exchange rate cannot increase compared to other euro area members. If the exchange rate were to rise, Germany would have more difficulty exporting and its economic model, based on strong exports, would cease. At the same time, the rest of Europe would export more, GDP would rise, and unemployment would fall".

[ 100 ] He also thinks that the rest of the world should impose a carbon-adjustment tax (a protectionist measure) on American exports that do not comply with global standard.

[ 103 ] Advice for the United States [ edit ] Joseph Stiglitz Contrary to Keynesian theory and these analyses on the eurozone, he argues that the United States should not rebalance the trade account, and that the country can no longer apply protectionist measures to protect or recreate the well-paying manufacturing jobs, saying: "The very Americans who have been among the losers of globalization stand to be among the losers of a reversal of globalization. History cannot be put into reverse".

[ 104 ] On the other hand, he admits that as trade deficit declines, "GDP would rise and unemployment would fall", further stating: "...the fact that these countries are importing more than they are exporting contributes to their weak economies." [ 100 ] He also notes that trade deficit is correlated with loss of manufacturing jobs: the increase in the "value of the dollar will lead to larger trade deficits and fewer manufacturing jobs".

[ 105 ] Contrary to most economics historians who argue that tariffs played only a minor if any role in the Great Depression , [ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] Stiglitz, to convince the United States not to use protectionist policies, says that tariffs would be harmful to the United States economy today because it contributed to the Great Depression: "Following that, U.S. exports fell by some 50 percent—contributing to our Great Depression".

[ 104 ] He denounces the "trickle-down" policies of liberalism and neoliberalism ( laissez-faire ) [ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] However, he calls for lowering trade barriers and promoting free trade (policy of deregulation of foreign trade which is part of the laissez-faire economic model).

[ 112 ] According to him, it is not China (which has a large trade surplus) that makes "trade war", but the United States (which has a large trade deficit).

[ 104 ] He advises China to take sanctions against the United States [ 104 ] 'where it hurts economically and politically' if the US tries to raise tariffs to protect its industry, saying: "For example, cutbacks in purchases by China will lead to more unemployment in congressional districts that are vulnerable, influential, or both.

[ 104 ] ... China can retaliate anywhere it chooses, such as by using trade restrictions to target jobs in the congressional districts of those who support US tariffs.

[ 111 ] ... China may be more effective in targeting its retaliation to cause acute political pain. ... It's anybody's guess who can stand the pain better. Will it be the US, where ordinary citizens have already suffered for so long, or China, which, despite troubled times, has managed to generate growth in excess of 6%?

[ 113 ] " Stiglitz does not want the United States to stop free trade. According to him, if China limits globalization, it will not hurt them, but if the United States stops with the process of free trade, it will be harmful. About China, according to him, if China depends less on economic globalization , it will not be negative for the country.

[ 104 ] He writes that the decline in exports from China to the U.S. may not "hurt them more than it hurt us" because "China's government has far more control over the country's economy than our government has over ours; and it is moving from export dependence to a model of growth driven by domestic demand." Regarding the United States, he writes the opposite and advice to apply the opposite of the Keynesian theory of trade deficits seen earlier: [ 100 ] "Walking away from globalization may reduce our imports, but it will also reduce exports in tandem. And, almost surely, jobs will be destroyed faster than they will be created: there may even be fewer net manufacturing jobs". "[The] erection of barriers to trade and the movement of people and ideas more likely than not will be one in which the U.S. almost surely will lose." [ 104 ] In early 2017, he wrote that "the American middle class is indeed the loser of globalization " (the diminution of international trade regulations as well as tariffs, taxes) and "China, with its large emerging middle class, is among the big beneficiaries of globalization". "Thanks to globalization, in terms of purchasing-power parity, China actually has already become the largest economy in the world in September 2015".

[ 104 ] However, contrary to what he wrote earlier, he later argued in February 2017 that the fall in wages and the disappearance of well-paid jobs in the United States, are not due to free trade or globalization, but rather are inevitable collateral damage to the march of economic progress and technological innovation: "The United States can only push for advanced manufacturing, which requires higher skill sets and employs fewer people. Rising inequality, meanwhile, will continue ...".

[ 111 ] In addition, on December 5, 2017, contrary to what he wrote earlier, he wrote that the drop in wages in the United States is due to the actions of multinational companies rather than the globalization and the trade account imbalances between countries caused by free trade: "It was an agenda written by and for large multinational companies, at the expense of workers".

[ 105 ] In 2016, he said he believes that the economic situation of the United States is critical: "As the economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton showed in their study published in December 2015, life expectancy among middle-age white Americans is declining, as rates of suicides, drug use, and alcoholism increase. A year later, the National Center for Health Statistics reported that life expectancy for the country as a whole has declined for the first time in more than 20 years." [ 111 ] ... With the incomes of the bottom 90% having stagnated for close to a third of a century (and declining for a significant proportion), the health data simply confirmed that things were not going well for swaths of the country".

[ 113 ] In June 2024, 16 Nobel Prize in Economics laureates, including Stiglitz, signed an open letter (which Stiglitz spearheaded) arguing that Donald Trump ’s fiscal and trade policies coupled with efforts to limit the Federal Reserve 's independence would reignite inflation in the United States.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] Green economy [ edit ] Stiglitz has called for a transition to a green economy .

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] He supported the Green New Deal . In 2019, he wrote that "The Green New Deal would stimulate demand, ensuring that all available resources were used; and the transition to the green economy would likely usher in a new boom. Trump's focus on the industries of the past, like coal, is strangling the much more sensible move to wind and solar power. More jobs by far will be created in renewable energy than will be lost in coal." [ 120 ] Stiglitz described the climate crisis as humanity's World War III .

[ 120 ] Views on taxation [ edit ] Stiglitz maintained the super-rich should pay taxes up to 70% to help deal with increasing inequality.  Stiglitz stated a worldwide income tax rate of 70% on biggest earners "would clearly make sense". Stiglitz maintained society would become more egalitarian and cohesive. Stiglitz said a wealth taxes on fortunes acquired during many generations would have a larger influence. Stiglitz maintains most billionaires acquired much of their wealth through luck. He maintains Elizabeth Warren proposing a 2% tax on assets for people with assets of over $50 million and 3% on those with over $1 billion was "very reasonable" and would raise significant revenues that could improve some United States problems.

[ 121 ] Views on artificial intelligence [ edit ] Stiglitz was a signatory to a letter [ 122 ] sent to the attorneys general of California and Delaware, opposing OpenAI 's proposed transition from a not-for-profit entity to a public benefit corporation. The letter argued that the restructuring would undermine OpenAI's stated charitable purpose of developing artificial general intelligence to benefit "all of humanity." It further asserted that, if reorganized as a corporation, OpenAI would be legally obligated to prioritize the interests of its shareholders over broader goals of serving humanity as a whole.

Books [ edit ] Along with his technical economic publications (over 300 technical articles), Stiglitz is the author of books on issues from patent law to abuses in international trade.

Whither Socialism?

(1994) [ edit ] Whither Socialism?

is based on Stiglitz's Wicksell Lectures, presented at the Stockholm School of Economics in 1990 and presents a summary of information economics and the theory of markets with imperfect information and imperfect competition, as well as being a critique of both free market and market socialist approaches (see Roemer critique, op. cit.).  Stiglitz explains how the neoclassical , or Walrasian model ("Walrasian economics" refers to the result of the process which has given birth to a formal representation of Adam Smith 's notion of the "invisible hand", along the lines put forward by Léon Walras and encapsulated in the general equilibrium model of Arrow–Debreu ), may have wrongly encouraged the belief that market socialism could work. Stiglitz proposes an alternative model, based on the information economics established by the Greenwald–Stiglitz theorems.

One of the reasons Stiglitz sees for the critical failing in the standard neoclassical model , on which market socialism was built, is its failure to consider the problems that arise from lack of perfect information and from the costs of acquiring information. He also identifies problems arising from its assumptions concerning completeness.

[ 123 ] Globalization and Its Discontents (2002) [ edit ] In Globalization and Its Discontents , Stiglitz argues that what are often called "developing economies" are, in fact, not developing at all, and puts much of the blame on the IMF.

Stiglitz stresses: "Recent advances in economic theory" (in part referring to his own work) "have shown that whenever information is imperfect and markets are incomplete, which is to say always, and especially in developing countries, then the invisible hand works most imperfectly." As a result, Stiglitz continues, governments can improve the outcome by well-chosen interventions. Stiglitz argues that when families and firms seek to buy too little compared to what the economy can produce, governments can fight recessions and depressions by using expansionary monetary and fiscal policies to spur the demand for goods and services. At the microeconomic level, governments can regulate banks and other financial institutions to keep them sound. They can also use tax policy to steer investment into more productive industries and trade policies to allow new industries to mature to the point at which they can survive foreign competition. And governments can use a variety of devices, ranging from job creation to manpower training to welfare assistance, to put unemployed labor back to work and cushion human hardship.

Stiglitz argues that the IMF has done great damage through the economic policies it has prescribed that countries must follow in order to qualify for IMF loans, or for loans from banks and other private-sector lenders that look to the IMF to indicate whether a borrower is creditworthy. The organization and its officials, he argues, have ignored the implications of incomplete information, inadequate markets, and unworkable institutions – all of which are especially characteristic of newly developing countries. As a result, Stiglitz argues, the IMF has often called for policies that conform to textbook economics but do not make sense for the countries to which the IMF is recommending them. Stiglitz seeks to show that these policies have been disastrous for the countries that have followed them.

The Roaring Nineties (2003) [ edit ] The Roaring Nineties is Stiglitz's analysis of the boom and bust of the 1990s. Presented from an insider's point of view, firstly as chair of President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisors, and later as chief economist of the World Bank, it continues his argument on how misplaced faith in free-market ideology led to the global economic issues of today, with a perceptive focus on US policies.

New Paradigm for Monetary Economics (2003) [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2019 ) Fair Trade for All (2005) [ edit ] In Fair Trade for All , authors Stiglitz and Andrew Charlton argue that it is important to make the trading world more development friendly.

[ 124 ] The idea is put forth that the present regime of tariffs and agricultural subsidies is dominated by the interests of former colonial powers and needs to change.  The removal of the bias toward the developed world will be beneficial to both developing and developed nations. The developing world is in need of assistance, and this can only be achieved when developed nations abandon mercantilist-based priorities and work towards a more liberal world trade regime.

[ 125 ] Making Globalization Work (2006) [ edit ] Making Globalization Work surveys the inequities of the global economy, and the mechanisms by which developed countries exert an excessive influence over developing nations. Dr. Stiglitz argues that through tariffs, subsidies, an over-complex patent system and pollution, the world is being both economically and politically destabilized. Stiglitz argues that strong, transparent institutions are needed to address these problems. He shows how an examination of incomplete markets can make corrective government policies desirable.

Stiglitz is an exception to the general pro-globalization view of professional economists, according to economist Martin Wolf .

[ 126 ] Stiglitz argues that economic opportunities are not widely enough available, that financial crises are too costly and too frequent, and that the rich countries have done too little to address these problems.

Making Globalization Work [ 127 ] has sold more than two million copies.

Stability with Growth (2006) [ edit ] In Stability with Growth: Macroeconomics, Liberalization and Development , Stiglitz, José Antonio Ocampo (United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, until 2007), Shari Spiegel (managing director, Initiative for Policy Dialogue –  IPD), Ricardo Ffrench-Davis (Main Adviser, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean – ECLAC ) and Deepak Nayyar (Vice Chancellor, University of Delhi) discuss the current debates on macroeconomics, capital market liberalization and development, and develop a new framework within which one can assess alternative policies. They explain their belief that the Washington Consensus has advocated narrow goals for development (with a focus on price stability) and prescribed too few policy instruments (emphasizing monetary and fiscal policies), and places unwarranted faith in the role of markets.

The new framework focuses on real stability and long-term sustainable and equitable growth, offers a variety of non-standard ways to stabilize the economy and promote growth, and accepts that market imperfections necessitate government interventions. Policy-makers have pursued stabilization goals with little concern for growth consequences, while trying to increase growth through structural reforms focused on improving economic efficiency. Moreover, structural policies, such as capital market liberalization, have had major consequences for economic stability. This book challenges these policies by arguing that stabilization policy has important consequences for long-term growth and has often been implemented with adverse consequences. The first part of the book introduces the key questions and looks at the objectives of economic policy from different perspectives. The third part presents a similar analysis for capital market liberalization.

The Three Trillion Dollar War (2008) [ edit ] The Three Trillion Dollar War (co-authored with Linda Bilmes ) examines the full cost of the Iraq War, including many hidden costs. The book also discusses the extent to which these costs will be imposed for many years to come, paying special attention to the enormous expenditures that will be required to care for very large numbers of wounded veterans. Stiglitz was openly critical of George W. Bush at the time the book was released.

[ 128 ] Freefall (2010) [ edit ] Main article: Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy In Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy , Stiglitz discusses the causes of the 2008 recession/depression and goes on to propose reforms needed to avoid a repetition of a similar crisis, advocating government intervention and regulation in a number of areas. Among the policymakers he criticizes are George W. Bush, Larry Summers, and Barack Obama.

[ 129 ] The Price of Inequality (2012) [ edit ] From the jacket: As those at the top continue to enjoy the best health care, education, and benefits of wealth, they often fail to realize that, as Joseph E. Stiglitz highlights, "their fate is bound up with how the other 99 percent live ... It does not have to be this way.  In The Price of Inequality Stiglitz lays out a comprehensive agenda to create a more dynamic economy and fairer and more equal society" The book received the Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights 2013 Book Award, given annually to the book that "most faithfully and forcefully reflects Robert Kennedy's purposes –  his concern for the poor and the powerless, his struggle for honest and even-handed justice, his conviction that a decent society must assure all young people a fair chance, and his faith that a free democracy can act to remedy disparities of power and opportunity." [ 130 ] Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth, Development, and Social Progress (2014) [ edit ] Creating a Learning Society (co-authored with Bruce C. Greenwald) casts light on the significance of this insight for economic theory and policy. Taking as a starting point Kenneth J. Arrow's 1962 paper "Learning by Doing", they explain why the production of knowledge differs from that of other goods and why market economies alone typically do not produce and transmit knowledge efficiently. Closing knowledge gaps and helping laggards learn are central to growth and development. But creating a learning society is equally crucial if we are to sustain improved living standards in advanced countries.

The Great Divide: Unequal Societies and What We Can Do About Them (2015) [ edit ] From the jacket: In The Great Divide , Joseph E. Stiglitz expands on the diagnosis he offered in his best-selling book The Price of Inequality and suggests ways to counter America's growing problem. Stiglitz argues that inequality is a choice –  the cumulative result of unjust policies and misguided priorities.

The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe (2016) [ edit ] From the description: "Stiglitz dismantles the prevailing consensus around what ails Europe, demolishing the champions of austerity while offering a series of plans that can rescue the continent – and the world – from further devastation." People, Power and Profits: Progressive Capitalism for an Age of Discontent (2019) [ edit ] From the jacket: Stiglitz shows how a middle-class life can once again be attainable by all. An authorities account of the predictable dangers of free market fundamentalism and the foundations of progressive capitalism, People, Power, and Profits shows us an America in crisis, but also lights a path through this challenging time.

Daniel W. Drezner gave the book a mixed review in The New York Times .

[ 131 ] Joseph Stiglitz and Kamal Nath Measuring What Counts: The Global Movement for Well-Being (2019) [ edit ] Stiglitz and his co-authors point out that the interrelated crises of environmental degradation and human suffering of our current age demonstrate that "something is fundamentally wrong with the way we assess economic performance and social progress." They argue that using GDP as the chief measure of our economic health does not provide an accurate assessment of the economy or the state of the world and the people living in it.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] The Road to Freedom: Economics and the Good Society (2024) [ edit ] In The Road to Freedom , Stiglitz challenges the claim by its adherents that neoliberalism is morally superior to its alternatives. The title is a pointed reference to Friedrich Hayek 's famous treatise, The Road to Serfdom , and the book is a rejoinder to the economic theories of Hayek and Milton Friedman . Stiglitz proposes that his essay is based on experimental empirical research. He is concerned that free information will reduce the production of information quality and value in our economy as artificial intelligence gathers and reproduces it.

[ 134 ] Papers and conferences [ edit ] Stiglitz wrote a series of papers and held a series of conferences explaining how such information uncertainties may have influence on everything from unemployment to lending shortages. As the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers during the first term of the Clinton Administration and former chief economist at the World Bank , Stiglitz was able to put some of his views into action. For example, he was an outspoken critic of quickly opening up financial markets in developing countries. These markets rely on access to good financial data and sound bankruptcy laws, but he argued that many of these countries did not have the regulatory institutions needed to ensure that the markets would operate soundly.

In July 2020, Stiglitz alongside Hamid Rashid, the chief of Global Economic Monitoring at the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, published a report, pointing out that the quantitative easing policy implemented by the US after the 2008 financial crisis , had "basically exported a debt bubble to developing countries".

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] The economic analysis of Stiglitz and Ira Regmi on the pandemic-induced inflation of 2021-2023 concluded the causes were sector supply-side disruptions and the Ukraine war effects in food and energy sectors and not from the excessive pandemic spending in the United States.

[ 137 ] Awards and honors [ edit ] In addition to being awarded the Nobel Memorial prize, Stiglitz has over 40 honorary doctorates and at least eight honorary professorships as well as an honorary deanship.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] Stiglitz was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1983, [ 141 ] the National Academy of Sciences in 1988, [ 142 ] and the American Philosophical Society in 1997.

[ 143 ] In 2009, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member Archbishop Desmond Tutu at an awards ceremony at St. George's Cathedral in Cape Town, South Africa.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] He received the 2010 Gerald Loeb Awards for Commentary for "Capitalist Fools and Wall Street's Toxic Message".

[ 146 ] In 2011, he was named by Foreign Policy magazine on its list of top global thinkers.

[ 147 ] In February 2012, he was awarded the Legion of Honor , in the rank of Officer, by the French ambassador in the United States François Delattre .

[ 148 ] Stiglitz was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 2009 .

[ 149 ] Stiglitz was awarded the 2018 Sydney Peace Prize .

[ 150 ] Personal life [ edit ] Stiglitz married Jane Hannaway in 1978 but the couple later divorced.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] He married for the third time on October 28, 2004, to Anya Schiffrin , who works at the School of International and Public Affairs at Columbia University .

[ 153 ] He has four children and three grandchildren.

Selected bibliography [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Uzawa, Hirofumi (1969).

Readings in the modern theory of economic growth . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The M.I.T. Press.

ISBN 978-0262190558 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Atkinson, Anthony B.

(1980).

Lectures on public economics . London New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.

ISBN 978-0070841055 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Newbery, David M.G.

(1981).

The theory of commodity price stabilization: a study in the economics of risk . Oxford Oxford New York: Clarendon Press Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198284178 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1989).

The economic role of the state . Oxford, UK Cambridge, Massachusetts, US: Wiley-Blackwell .

ISBN 978-0631171355 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Boadway, Robin (1994).

Economics and the Canadian economy . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393965117 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1994).

Whither socialism?

. Cambridge, Massachusetts, US: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0262691826 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2000).

Economics of the public sector (3rd ed.). New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393966510 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Meier, Gerald M. (2001).

Frontiers of development economics: the future in perspective . Washington, D.C. Oxford New York: World Bank Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195215922 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Holzmann, Robert (2001).

New ideas about old age security: toward sustainable pension systems in the 21st century . Washington, DC: World Bank .

ISBN 978-0821348222 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Yusuf, Shahid (2001).

Rethinking the East Asia miracle . Washington, D.C.; New York: World Bank Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195216004 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2001).

Chang, Ha-Joon (ed.).

Joseph Stiglitz and the World Bank: the rebel within . London, England: Anthem Press.

ISBN 978-1898855538 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Sah, Raaj K. (1992).

Peasants versus city-dwellers: taxation and the burden of economic development . Oxford New York: Clarendon Press Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199253579 .

(Reprinted 2005.) Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2002).

Globalization and its discontents . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393051247 .

Stiglitz, Joseph; Greenwald, Bruce (2003).

Towards a new paradigm in monetary economics . The Raffaele Mattioli Lecture Series. Cambridge, UK and New York: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0521810340 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2003).

The roaring nineties: a new history of the world's most prosperous decade . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393058529 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2004).

The development round of trade negotiations in the aftermath of Cancún . London, UK: Commonwealth Secretariat .

ISBN 978-0850928013 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Charlton, Andrew (2005).

Fair trade for all: how trade can promote development . Oxford New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199290901 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Walsh, Carl E.

(2006).

Economics (4th ed.). New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393926224 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Walsh, Carl E.

(2006).

Principles of macroeconomics (4th ed.). New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393926248 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Ocampo, José Antonio ; Ffrench-Davis, Ricardo ; Nayyar, Deepak ; Spiegel, Shari (2006).

Stability with growth: macroeconomics, liberalization and development . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199288144 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2006).

Making globalization work . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393061222 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Bilmes, Linda (2008).

The three trillion dollar war: the true cost of the Iraq conflict . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393067019 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Ocampo, José Antonio ; Griffith-Jones, Stephany (2010).

Time for a visible hand: lessons from the 2008 world financial crisis . Oxford New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0199578818 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2010).

The Stiglitz report: reforming the international monetary and financial systems in the wake of the global crisis . New York, New York London: The New Press.

ISBN 978-1595585202 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Sen, Amartya ; Fitoussi, Jean-Paul (2010).

Mismeasuring our lives: why GDP doesn't add up: the report . New York: New Press : Distributed by Perseus Distribution.

ISBN 978-1595585196 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Stiglitz, Joseph (2010).

Freefall: America, free markets, and the sinking of the world economy . New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0393338959 .

Also as: Stiglitz, Joseph (2010).

Freefall: free markets and the sinking of the global economy . London: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0141045122 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012).

The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future . New York: W.W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0393088694 .

Stiglitz, Joseph; Greenwald, Bruce C.

(2014).

Creating a learning society: a new approach to growth, development, and social progress . New York: Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0231152143 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2015).

The great divide: unequal societies and what we can do about them . New York: W.W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0393248579 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Greenwald, Bruce C. (2015).

Creating a learning society: a new approach to growth, development, and social progress . Columbia: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0231175494 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016).

The Euro: And its Threat to the Future of Europe . Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-0241258156 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2019).

People, Power and Profits: Progressive Capitalism for an Age of Discontent . Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-0241399231 .

Stiglitz, Joseph; Fitoussi, Jean-Paul; Durand, Martine (2019).

Measuring What Counts; The Global Movement for Well-Being (Paper ed.). New York: The New Press.

ISBN 978-1620975695 . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2024).

The Road to Freedom: Economics and the Good Society . W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-1324074373 .

Book chapters [ edit ] Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1989), "Principal and agent", in Eatwell, John ; Milgate, Murray ; Newman, Peter K.

(eds.), The New Palgrave: allocation, information, and markets , New York: Norton, ISBN 978-0393958546 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1993), "Market socialism and neoclassical economics", in Bardhan, Pranab ; Roemer, John E.

(eds.), Market socialism: the current debate , New York: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195080490 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2009), "Regulation and failure", in Moss, David A.

; Cisternino, John A. (eds.), New perspectives on regulation , Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Tobin Project, pp.

11– 23, ISBN 978-0982478806 .

Pdf version.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2009), "Simple formulae for optional income taxation and the measurement of inequality", in Kanbur, Ravi ; Basu, Kaushik (eds.), Arguments for a better world: essays in honor of Amartya Sen | Volume I: Ethics, welfare, and measurement , Oxford New York: Oxford University Press, pp.

535– 66, ISBN 978-0199239115 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Bilmes, Linda. (2012), "Estimating the costs of war: Methodological issues, with applications to Iraq and Afghanistan", in Garfinkel, Michelle; Skaperdas, Stergios (eds.), Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Peace and Conflict , Oxford UK: Oxford University Press, pp.

275– 317, ISBN 978-0195392777 .

[1] Selected scholarly articles [ edit ] 1970–1979 Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Rothschild, Michael (September 1970). "Increasing risk: I. a definition".

Journal of Economic Theory .

2 (3). Elsevier: 225– 43.

doi : 10.1016/0022-0531(70)90038-4 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Rothschild, Michael (March 1971). "Increasing risk: II. Its economic consequences".

Journal of Economic Theory .

3 (1). Elsevier: 66– 84.

doi : 10.1016/0022-0531(71)90034-2 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (May 1974). "Alternative theories of wage determination and unemployment in LDC's: the labor turnover model".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

88 (2). Oxford Journals: 194– 227.

doi : 10.2307/1883069 .

JSTOR 1883069 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (April 1974).

"Incentives and risk sharing in sharecropping" (PDF) .

Review of Economic Studies .

41 (2). Oxford Journals: 219– 55.

doi : 10.2307/2296714 .

JSTOR 2296714 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-04-27 . Retrieved 2019-07-08 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Rothschild, Michael (November 1976). "Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: an essay on the economics of imperfect information".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

90 (4). Oxford Journals: 629– 49.

doi : 10.2307/1885326 .

JSTOR 1885326 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Dixit, Avinash K.

(June 1977). "Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity".

The American Economic Review .

67 (3). American Economic Association: 297– 308.

JSTOR 1831401 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Newbery, David M.G.

(December 1979). "The theory of commodity price stabilisation rules: welfare impacts and supply responses".

The Economic Journal .

89 (356). Royal Economic Society: 799– 817.

doi : 10.2307/2231500 .

JSTOR 2231500 .

1980–1989 Grossman, Sanford J.

; Stiglitz, Joseph E. (June 1980). "On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets".

The American Economic Review .

70 (3): 393– 408.

JSTOR 1805228 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Weiss, Andrew (June 1981).

"Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information" (PDF) .

The American Economic Review .

71 (3). American Economic Association: 393– 410.

JSTOR 1802787 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-04-10.

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Weiss, Andrew (1983).

"Incentive Effects of Terminations: Applications to the Credit and Labor Markets" .

American Economic Review .

73 (5): 912– 927.

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Newbery, David M.G.

(January 1984). "Pareto inferior trade".

Review of Economic Studies .

51 (1). Oxford Journals: 1– 12.

doi : 10.2307/2297701 .

JSTOR 2297701 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (March 1987). "The causes and consequences of the dependence of quality on price".

The American Economic Review .

25 (1). American Economic Association: 1– 48.

JSTOR 2726189 .

1990–1999 Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Greenwald, Bruce (Winter 1993).

"New and old Keynesians" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

7 (1). American Economic Association: 23– 44.

doi : 10.1257/jep.7.1.23 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (Winter 1993).

"Post Walrasian and Post Marxian economics" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

7 (1). American Economic Association: 109– 14.

doi : 10.1257/jep.7.1.109 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (August 1996). "Some lessons from the East Asian miracle".

World Bank Research Observer .

11 (2).

World Bank : 151– 77.

doi : 10.1093/wbro/11.2.151 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Uy, Marilou (August 1996).

"Financial markets, public policy, and the East Asian miracle" (PDF) .

World Bank Research Observer .

11 (2).

World Bank : 249– 76.

doi : 10.1093/wbro/11.2.249 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (September 1997). "Georgescu-Roegen versus Solow/Stiglitz".

Ecological Economics .

22 (3): 269– 70.

Bibcode : 1997EcoEc..22..269S .

doi : 10.1016/S0921-8009(97)00092-X .

See also: Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen and Robert Solow Stiglitz, Joseph E. (March 1998). "Redefining the role of the state – What should it do? How should it do it? And how should these decisions be made?".

Paper Presented at the Tenth Anniversary of MITI Research Institute, Tokyo .

Pdf version.

Also as: Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2001). "Redefining the role of the state – What should it do?

How should it do it? And how should these decisions be made?". In Chang, Ha-Joon (ed.).

Joseph Stiglitz and the World Bank: the rebel within . London: Anthem Press. pp.

94– 126.

ISBN 978-1898855538 .

2000–2009 Stiglitz, Joseph E. (Spring 1998). "Distinguished lecture on economics in government: the private uses of public interests: incentives and institutions".

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

12 (2). American Economic Association: 3– 22.

doi : 10.1257/jep.12.2.3 .

S2CID 154446858 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (May 18, 2007).

"Prizes, not patents" .

Post-Autistic Economics Review .

42 . World Economics Association: 48– 50.

2010 onwards Stiglitz, Joseph E. (May 28, 2014).

Reforming taxation to promote growth and equity (PDF) (White Paper). Roosevelt Institute. Archived from the original on 2014-06-13.

Articles in popular press [ edit ] Stiglitz, Joseph E.

"Joseph E. Stiglitz" .

Project Syndicate . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (17 April 2000).

"What I learned at the world economic crisis: the insider" (PDF) .

The New Republic .

Chris Hughes .

See also: Wade, Robert (January–February 2001).

"Showdown at the World Bank" .

New Left Review .

II (7). New Left Review: 124– 37.

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Orszag, Peter R.

; Orszag, Jonathan M. (March 2, 2002).

"Implications of the new Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac risk-based capital standard" (PDF) .

Fannie Mae Press .

I (2).

Fannie Mae : 1– 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 22, 2009.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (Fall 2003).

"Information and the change in the paradigm in economics, part 1" .

The American Economist .

47 (2).

Omicron Delta Epsilon : 6– 26.

doi : 10.1177/056943450304700202 .

JSTOR 25604277 .

S2CID 159272023 . Archived from the original on April 7, 2015.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (Spring 2004).

"Information and the change in the paradigm in economics, part 2" .

The American Economist .

48 (1).

Omicron Delta Epsilon : 17– 49.

doi : 10.1177/056943450404800103 .

JSTOR 25604291 .

S2CID 154596039 . Archived from the original on April 7, 2015.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (December 2007).

"The economic consequences of Mr. Bush" .

Vanity Fair .

Condé Nast .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Bilmes, Linda J.

(January 2009).

"Report: the $10 trillion hangover: paying the price for eight years of Bush" .

Harper's Magazine . Vol. 318, no. 1904. Harper's Magazine Foundation.

Non-subscription version.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (January 2009).

"Capitalist fools" .

Vanity Fair .

Condé Nast . Archived from the original on 2015-01-29 . Retrieved 2020-02-20 .

Stiglitz, Joseph (June 12, 2009).

"America's socialism for the rich" .

The Guardian . London.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (July 2009).

"Wall Street's toxic message" .

Vanity Fair .

Condé Nast .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (April 22, 2010).

"The Non-Existent Hand" .

London Review of Books .

32 (8): 17– 18 . Retrieved February 14, 2011 .

Review of the book: Skidelsky, Robert (2009).

Keynes: the return of the master . Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-1846142581 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (May 2011).

"Of the 1%, by the 1%, for the 1%" .

Vanity Fair .

Condé Nast .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (July 12, 2011).

"The ideological crisis of Western capitalism" .

Social Europe .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (January 2013).

"The post-crisis crises" .

CFO Insight Magazine . Euro Treasurer. Archived from the original on May 4, 2013.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (April 2013).

"The promise of abenomics" .

CFO Insight Magazine . Euro Treasurer. Archived from the original on May 4, 2013.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (January 2015).

"The Chinese Century" .

Vanity Fair . Condé Nast.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (June 29, 2015).

"Joseph Stiglitz: how I would vote in the Greek referendum" .

The Guardian .

Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Measuring What Matters: Obsession with one financial figure, GDP , has worsened people's health, happiness and the environment, and economists want to replace it", Scientific American , vol. 323, no. 2 (August 2020), pp. 24–31.

Video and online sources [ edit ] Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2007).

Committee hearing (via YouTube) (Speech). World Bank & Global Poverty, House Financial Services Committee (C-SPAN). Washington, D.C.

Archived from the original on 2021-11-07 . Retrieved October 29, 2014 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (presenter); Sarasin, Jacques (director) (May 2007). "1–5".

Where is the world going, Mr. Stiglitz?

. New York: First Run Features .

Five-part series on two DVD discs.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (presenter); Sarasin, Jacques (director) (March 2009).

Around the world with Joseph Stiglitz . Arte France / Les Productions Faire Bleu / Swan productions. Archived from the original on 2014-10-29 . Retrieved 2014-10-29 .

Original French title Le monde selon Stiglitz .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Bilmes, Linda (February 28, 2008).

The three trillion dollar war . Panel discussion regarding their new book. Columbia University.

Book details: Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Bilmes, Linda (2008).

The three trillion dollar war: the true cost of the Iraq conflict . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393067019 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (February 9, 2010).

"Bloomberg News" (Video) (YouTube). Interviewed by Andrea Catherwood . Retrieved October 29, 2014 .

Stiglitz says EU should defend Greece from speculators Stiglitz, Joseph E. (guest); Hendry, Hugh (guest) ; Casajuana, Carlos (guest) (February 9, 2010).

"Newsnight" (Video) (BBC). Interviewed by Emily Maitlis . Retrieved October 29, 2014 .

What should Europe do about Greece?

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (February 9, 2010).

"Bloomberg News" (Video) (YouTube). Interviewed by Andrea Catherwood . Retrieved October 29, 2014 .

Stiglitz says EU should defend Greece from speculators Stiglitz, Joseph E. (August 21, 2014).

Inequality, wealth, and growth: why capitalism is failing (Speech). 5th Lindau Meeting on Economic Sciences. Lake Constance, Germany: Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings . Retrieved October 29, 2014 .

Papers [ edit ] Online access to Stiglitz's papers, at his own website.

See also [ edit ] Atkinson–Stiglitz theorem List of economists List of Jewish Nobel laureates References [ edit ] ^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1966).

Studies in the Theory of Economic Growth and Income Distribution (PDF) (Ph.D.).

MIT . p. 4 . Retrieved 8 November 2016 .

^ Free, Rhona C. (2010).

21st Century Economics: A Reference Handbook . Sage Publications. p. 317.

ISBN 978-1452266312 .

^ a b c d e "Joseph E. Stiglitz, Biographical. The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2001" .

NobelPrize.org . 2002 . Retrieved 2021-05-05 .

^ "Joseph Stiglitz, Clark Medalist 1979" .

American Economic Association . 2021 . Retrieved 2021-05-05 .

^ "Former Chief Economists" .

worldbank.org . World Bank. Archived from the original on 2017-11-04 . Retrieved 2012-11-27 .

^ "Former Members of the Council" .

whitehouse.gov .

Archived from the original on 2017-01-21 – via National Archives .

^ Gochenour, Zachary, and Bryan Caplan. "An entrepreneurial critique of Georgism." The Review of Austrian Economics 26.4 (2013): 483–491.

^ Orszag, Peter (March 3, 2015).

"To Fight Inequality, Tax Land" . Bloomberg View . Retrieved 12 November 2016 .

^ Lucas, Edward.

"Land-value tax: Why Henry George had a point" .

The Economist . Retrieved 12 November 2016 .

^ "The Commission of Experts of the President of the UN General Assembly on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System" .

un.org .

United Nations .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Sen, Amartya; Fitoussi, Jean-Paul (2010).

Mismeasuring Our Lives: Why GDP Doesn't Add Up . The New Press.

ISBN 978-1595585196 .

^ "The International Economics Association" . International Economics Association. October 14, 2013.

^ "IEA World Congress 2014" . International Economics Association. October 14, 2013. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013.

^ Brown, Gordon (April 21, 2011).

"The 2011 TIME 100" .

Time . Archived from the original on April 25, 2011.

^ Taylor, Ihsan.

"Best Sellers – The New York Times" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ "Joseph E. Stiglitz" .

Information and Democracy Commission, Reporters Without Borders . 2018-09-09 . Retrieved 2021-05-05 .

^ "Open Syllabus Project" . Archived from the original on 2020-02-10 . Retrieved 2021-02-12 .

^ Kern, Jamie (18 September 2003).

"Interview with Professor Joseph Stiglitz" .

Columbia Business School . The Tamer Center for Social Enterprise. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022.

^ "Stiglitz's tweet about his heritage" .

Twitter . Retrieved 2023-03-28 .

^ Publications, Europa Europa (2008).

International Who's who of Authors and Writers . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1857434286 .

^ "Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1943– (Joseph Eugene Stiglitz)" .

encyclopedia.com .

Cengage Learning .

^ a b "Eight to receive honorary degrees" .

Harvard Gazette . 2014-05-29 . Retrieved 2020-05-31 .

^ Aoki, Masahiko (2018).

Transboundary Game of Life: Memoir of Masahiko Aoki . Springer. p. 59.

ISBN 978-9811327575 .

^ a b c Bowmaker, Simon W. (2019).

When the President Calls: Conversations with Economic Policymakers . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0262355520 .

^ "A shilling in the meter and a penny for your thoughts ... An Interview with Professor Joseph E Stiglitz" (PDF) . Optima. 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 14, 2011 . Retrieved April 27, 2011 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph.

CV (PDF) .

Columbia University . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-05-13.

^ Uchitelle, Louis (2001-07-21).

"Columbia University Hires Star Economist" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2020-05-31 .

^ Kattan, Emmanuel (3 December 2019).

"The Year of Joseph Stiglitz, From New York to Paris" .

Columbia News . Retrieved 27 June 2024 .

^ "Staff: Professor Joseph E Stiglitz" .

manchester.ac.uk .

University of Manchester . Archived from the original on 12 January 2007.

^ "Master Economics and Public Policy" .

sciences-po.fr . Edudier à Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 2009-10-15.

^ Bruce C. Greenwald & Joseph E. Stiglitz: Keynesian, New Keynesian and New Classical Economics.

Oxford Economics Papers, 39, March 1987, pp. 119–33. ( PDF; 1,62 MB ) Archived 2011-05-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bruce C. Greenwald & Joseph E. Stiglitz: Examining Alternative Macroeconomic Theories.

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1988, pp. 201–70. ( PDF; 5.50 MB ) Archived 2011-05-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Smith, Noah (13 January 2017). "Tribal warfare in economics a thing of the past".

The Australian Financial Review . Fairfax Media.

Bloomberg .

Look on the Wikipedia pages of economists Joseph Stiglitz and Greg Mankiw or any of a number of prominent economists. On the sidebar on the right, you'll see an entry for "school or tradition". Both Stiglitz and Mankiw are listed as "New Keynesian". That makes absolutely no sense whatsoever. Stiglitz and Mankiw's research is in totally different areas. Stiglitz did work on asymmetric information, efficiency wages, land taxes and a host of other microeconomic phenomena ... Nor are their policy positions even remotely similar – Stiglitz is a hero to the left, while Mankiw is a small-government conservative. In fact, Mankiw did important research on some models called "New Keynesian". Stiglitz did not.

^ "Joe Stiglitz and the IMF have warmed to each other" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 2020-05-31 .

^ Greg Palast (October 10, 2001).

"multi-day interview with Greg Palast" . Gregpalast.com . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ Kakutani, Michiko (2010-01-18).

"Skepticism for Obama's Fiscal Policy (Published 2010)" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2021-02-17 .

^ "Stiglitz Says Ties to Wall Street Doom Bank Rescue" .

Bloomberg News . April 17, 2009. Archived from the original on May 1, 2009 . Retrieved April 18, 2009 .

^ "Commission of Experts of the President of the UN General Assembly on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System" .

un.org . United Nations.

^ a b "Joseph Stiglitz apoya el movimiento 15-M" .

YouTube . Archived from the original on 2011-11-23 . Retrieved July 26, 2011 .

^ "International Economic Association (IEA)" . Iea-world.com. Archived from the original on May 18, 2013 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ "U.K. Labour Names Stiglitz, Piketty to Economic Advisory Panel" .

Bloomberg.com . 2015-09-27 . Retrieved 2021-10-04 .

^ "Team – WORLD.MINDS" . Retrieved 2025-05-15 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (6 November 2018).

"Can American Democracy Come Back? | by Joseph E. Stiglitz" .

Project Syndicate . Retrieved 9 November 2018 .

^ Rothschild, M.; Stiglitz, J.E. (1970). "Increasing risk: I. A definition".

Journal of Economic Theory .

2 (3): 225– 243.

doi : 10.1016/0022-0531(70)90038-4 .

^ Richard J. Arnott & Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1979. "Aggregate Land Rents, Expenditure on Public Goods, and Optimal City Size," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Oxford University Press, vol. 93(4), pages 471–500.

^ Stiglitz, J.E. (1977) The theory of local public goods. In: Feldstein, M.S. and R.P. Inman (eds.) The Economics of Public Services. MacMillan, London, pp. 274–333.

^ Stiglitz, Joseph; Weiss, Andrew (February 1987). Macro-Economic Equilibrium and Credit Rationing (Working Paper No. 2164) (Report). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

doi : 10.3386/w2164 .

^ Rothschild, Michael; Stiglitz, Joseph (1976), "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information", Foundations of Insurance Economics , Huebner International Series on Risk, Insurance and Economic Security, vol. 14, Springer Netherlands, pp.

355– 375, doi : 10.1007/978-94-015-7957-5_18 , ISBN 978-9048157891 ^ "On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets" (PDF) .

^ Dixit, Avinash K.; Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2001), "Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity (May 1974)", The Monopolistic Competition Revolution in Retrospect , Cambridge University Press, pp.

70– 88, doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511492273.004 , ISBN 978-0511492273 ^ Krugman, Paul.

"Increasing returns, monopolistic competition and global trade" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-01-10 . Retrieved 2019-04-06 .

^ a b Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Shapiro, Carl (June 1984). "Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline device".

The American Economic Review .

74 (3).

American Economic Association : 433– 44.

JSTOR 1804018 .

^ "Lecture 4" (PDF) .

coin.wne.uw.edu.pl . May 22, 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 15, 2011 . Retrieved March 16, 2008 .

^ "Efficiency wages, the Shapiro-Stiglitz Model" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 15, 2011 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ "Consensus, dissensus, confusion: the 'Stiglitz Debate' in perspective" . Archived from the original on 2007-04-22 . Retrieved 2007-08-03 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Friedman, Benjamin M. (August 15, 2002).

"Globalization: Stiglitz's Case" .

Nybooks.com . The New York Review of Books, Volume 49, Number 13 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ a b Boettke, Peter J.

"What Went Wrong with Economics?, Critical Review Vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 35, 58" (PDF) . Archived from the original on January 30, 2007 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ "Privatization, Information and Incentives" (PDF) . Archived from the original on 2006-05-18 . Retrieved 2007-05-15 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Whither Socialism?" . Archived from the original on 1997-06-07 . Retrieved 2007-09-26 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Brief Biography of Joseph E. Stiglitz" .

columbia.edu .

Columbia University . Archived from the original on 2011-08-29.

^ Hirsh, Michael (18 July 2009).

"Why Washington ignores an economic prophet" .

Newsweek . Newsweek LLC.

^ Mallaby, The World's Banker , p. 266.

^ Hage, Dave (October 11, 2000).

"Joseph Stiglitz: A Dangerous Man, A World Bank Insider Who Defected" .

Star Tribune . Minneapolis: Commondreams.org. Archived from the original on August 14, 2013 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ Stevenson, Richard W. (November 25, 1999).

"Outspoken chief economist leaving World Bank" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ Wade, Robert.

US hegemony and the World Bank: Stiglitz's firing and Kanbur's resignation (PDF) .

UC Berkeley . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 May 2008.

^ "Stiglitz documentation" . Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on 20 July 2015.

^ "Terms of Reference Commission of Experts of the President of the United Nations General Assembly on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System" . Retrieved May 27, 2009 .

^ The Commission of Experts of the President of the UN General Assembly on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System , UN General Assembly ^ NGLS.

"Commission of Experts on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System, official site" . Un-ngls.org. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ "Euro Likely to Survive Debt Crisis, Stiglitz Says" .

Bloomberg.com . 2010-06-01 . Retrieved 2021-02-17 .

^ Moore, Malcolm (Jan 17, 2012).

"Stiglitz says European austerity plans are a 'suicide pact' " .

Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 2022-01-12 . Retrieved April 26, 2012 .

^ a b Shuster, Simon (29 June 2015).

"Joseph Stiglitz to Greece's Creditors: Abandon Austerity Or Face Global Fallout" .

Time . Retrieved 24 April 2023 .

^ Staff writer (25 March 2012).

"Fiscal Commission Working Group" . The Scottish Government. Archived from the original on 1 February 2013.

^ Macalister, Terry (26 July 2015).

"Joseph Stiglitz: unsurprising Jeremy Corbyn is a Labour leadership contender" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 15 July 2017 .

^ Segalov, Michael (27 July 2015).

"Jeremy Corbyn is favourite for Labour leadership because party has 'wimped out', says Nobel Prize winner Joseph Stiglitz" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 2022-06-17 . Retrieved 15 July 2017 .

^ Papadopoullos, Chris (27 July 2015).

"Economist Joseph Stiglitz not shocked by Labour lurch: The rise of Jeremy Corbyn gets a big supporter" .

City A.M.

Retrieved 15 July 2017 .

^ "Labour announces new Economic Advisory Committee" . Labour Press. 27 September 2015 . Retrieved 11 March 2016 .

^ Chakelian, Anoosh (27 January 2016).

" "Labour must get real about the economy": is Corbyn's economic advisory board unravelling?" .

New Statesman . Retrieved 11 March 2016 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph (December 20, 2002).

"There is no invisible hand" .

The Guardian Comment . London . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ Altman, Daniel (October 11, 2006).

"Q & Answers with Joseph E. Stiglitz" .

Managing Globalization (blog) The International Herald Tribune . Archived from the original on 26 June 2009.

^ "Stiglitz, Joseph E.

The pact with the devil.

Beppe Grillo's Friends interview" . Beppegrillo.it. Archived from the original on January 24, 2015 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E.; Greenwald, Bruce C. (May 1986).

"Externalities in economies with imperfect information and incomplete markets" .

Quarterly Journal of Economics .

101 (2).

Oxford University Press : 229– 64.

doi : 10.2307/1891114 .

JSTOR 1891114 .

PDF; 2.96 MB Archived 2011-05-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Stiglitz, Joseph E.

Prize Lecture: Information and the Change in the Paradigm in Economics.

Joseph E. Stiglitz held his Prize Lecture December 8, 2001, at Aula Magna, Stockholm University. He was presented by Lars E.O. Svensson, Chairman of the Prize Committee" . Nobelprize.org. December 8, 2001 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ Stiglitz, Aula Magna ^ Neate, Rupert (August 22, 2011).

"Ratings agencies suffer 'conflict of interest', says former Moody's boss" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved April 21, 2012 .

^ "Implications of the New Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Risk-Based Capital Standard" (PDF) .

Fannie Mae . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 22, 2009 . Retrieved February 10, 2010 .

^ "Implications of the New Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Risk-Based Capital Standard" (PDF) .

Fannie Mae . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 22, 2009 . Retrieved February 10, 2010 .

^ "Secrecy surrounds Trans-Pacific Partnership talks" .

Sydney Morning Herald . December 9, 2013 . Retrieved December 9, 2013 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (March 15, 2014).

"On the Wrong Side of Globalization" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 17, 2014 .

^ Simons, Ned (2 March 2016).

"UK Should Consider Brexit If EU Signs TTIP, Suggests Labour Economics Adviser Joseph Stiglitz" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 14 March 2016 .

^ Sheffield, Hazel (2 March 2016).

"EU referendum: UK could be better off leaving if TTIP passes, Joseph Stiglitz says" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 2022-06-17 . Retrieved 14 March 2016 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph (24 December 2013).

"Ethiopia: Do Human Rights Make Economic Sense?" – via AllAfrica.

^ Cleveland, M.M. (2012).

"The Economics of Henry George: A Review Essay" (PDF) .

American Journal of Economics and Sociology .

71 (2): 498– 511.

doi : 10.1111/j.1536-7150.2012.00832.x .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph; Presentation at a Institute for New Economic Thinking conference on Apr 8, 2015 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fg6UwAQJUVo ^ Photiadou, Artemis; Brown, Stuart (5 September 2016).

"Interview with Joseph Stiglitz: "The cost of keeping the Eurozone together probably exceeds the cost of breaking it up" " .

blogs.lse.ac.uk .

London School of Economics .

^ "Joseph Stiglitz – A Dangerous Man, A World Bank Insider Who Defected" . 14 August 2013. Archived from the original on 14 August 2013.

^ Collier, Paul (September 30, 2016).

"Euro septic: Paul Collier on the problems with the European single currency and the unlikelihood of a solution" .

The TLS . Retrieved 2021-05-05 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016).

The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe . W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393254037 – via Google Books.

^ Bounader, Lahcen (31 December 2016).

"Lahcen Bounader's weblog: A Critical Issue Addressed to Joseph Stiglitz" .

^ a b c d Stiglitz, Joseph (5 May 2010).

"Reform the euro or bin it – Joseph Stiglitz" .

The Guardian .

^ Maurin, Max (2011).

"J.M. Keynes, le libre-échange et le protectionnisme" .

L'Actualité Économique .

86 : 109– 129.

doi : 10.7202/045556ar .

^ John Maynard Keynes (June 1933).

"National Self-Sufficiency" .

The Yale Review .

22 (4): 755– 769.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2011 . Retrieved 14 May 2021 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph (2 June 2017).

"How to respond to Trump's America – Joseph Stiglitz" .

The Guardian .

^ a b c d e f g h Stiglitz, Joseph E. (17 February 2017).

"Trump's Most Chilling Economic Lie" .

Vanity Fair .

^ a b Stiglitz, Joseph E. (5 December 2017).

"The Globalization of Our Discontent by Joseph E. Stiglitz" .

^ "The Mitt-Hawley Fallacy" . 4 March 2016.

^ Temin, Peter (1991).

Lessons from the Great Depression . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0262261197 – via Google Books.

^ Irwin, Douglas A. (2017).

Peddling Protectionism: Smoot-Hawley and the Great Depression . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1400888429 – via Google Books.

^ "Neoliberalism must be pronounced dead and buried. Where next?" .

TheGuardian.com . 30 May 2019.

^ "The end of neoliberalism and the rebirth of history" . 26 November 2019.

^ a b c d Stiglitz, Joseph E. (30 December 2016).

"Joseph Stiglitz – The age of Donald Trump" .

mint .

^ "Free Trade – Definition & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-05-05 .

^ a b Stiglitz, Joseph (9 January 2017).

"My new year forecast: Trumpian uncertainty, and lots of it" .

The Guardian .

^ Nichols, Hans (June 25, 2024).

"Scoop: 16 Nobel economists see a Trump inflation bomb" .

Axios . Cox Enterprises . Retrieved June 26, 2024 .

^ Picciotto, Rebecca (June 25, 2024).

"Sixteen Nobel Prize-winning economists warn a second Trump term would 'reignite' inflation" . CNBC.

Archived from the original on June 26, 2024 . Retrieved June 26, 2024 .

^ Picchi, Aimee (June 25, 2024).

"16 Nobel Prize-winning economists warn that Trump's economic plans could reignite inflation" .

www.cbsnews.com .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

Trump's policies could prove to be inflationary, other economists also warned, such as his proposal to create a 10% across-the-board tariff on all imports to deporting immigrants. The tariff plan would add $1,700 in annual costs for the typical U.S. household, essentially acting as an inflationary tax, according to experts at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

^ "Nobel Prize–Winning Economist Joseph Stiglitz Discusses Carbon Pricing and the Green Economy Transition in HPCA Virtual Forum" .

Harvard Kennedy School . September 8, 2020.

^ "[Joseph E. Stiglitz] Getting finance onside for climate" .

The Korea Herald . August 31, 2021.

^ "Joseph Stiglitz says it's time to rewire the U.S. economy: 'We shouldn't let a good crisis go to waste' " .

CNBC . September 3, 2021.

^ a b Joseph Stiglitz (June 5, 2019).

"The climate crisis is our third world war. It needs a bold response" .

The Guardian .

^ Joseph Stiglitz: tax high earners at 70% to tackle widening inequality The Guardian ^ Letter to CA and DE Attorneys General regarding OpenAI restructuring ^ Zapia, Carlo.

"The economics of information, market socialism and Hayek's legacy" (PDF) . Dipartimento di Economia Politica, Università di Siena. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 14, 2007 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ Blandford, David (2008). "Review of Fair Trade for All , by J.E. Stiglitz and Andrew Charlton".

American Journal of Agricultural Economics .

90 (2): 571– 572.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8276.2008.01160_1.x .

hdl : 10.1111/j.1467-8276.2008.01160_1.x .

^ Northcott, Michael S. (2006). "Review of Fair Trade For All by J.E. Stiglitz and Andrew Charlton".

Studies in World Christianity .

12 (3): 282– 284.

doi : 10.1353/swc.2006.0025 .

S2CID 144250262 .

^ Why Globalization Works (Yale University Press 2004) ISBN 978-0300102529 , p. 8. Also Wolf criticizes World Bank heavily (pp. xiii–xv).

^ see Stiglitz discuss his book on YouTube ^ Perry, Kevin (March 4, 2008).

"Joseph Stiglitz interview about The Three Trillion Dollar War " . London: The Beaver . Retrieved September 29, 2010 .

^ Krupa, Joel (June 7, 2010).

"Guiding the Invisible Hand" . Archived from the original on May 16, 2011 . Retrieved December 28, 2010 .

^ "Book Award" . RFKcenter.org. Archived from the original on 2015-06-19.

^ Drezner, Daniel W. (May 10, 2019).

"An Economist Who Believes Only Government Can Save Capitalism" .

The New York Times .

^ Queally, Jon (25 November 2019).

" 'Everything Is Not Fine': Nobel Economist Calls on Humanity to End Obsession With GDP" .

Common Dreams . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph (24 November 2019).

"It's time to retire metrics like GDP. They don't measure everything that matters" (Opinion) .

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

^ Taylor, Timothy. “Recommendations for Further Reading.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 38, no. 4, 2024, p. 235.

JSTOR website Retrieved 1 Feb. 2025.

^ "New CEPR Policy Insight – Averting Catastrophic Debt Crises in Developing Countries | Centre for Economic Policy Research" .

cepr.org . Archived from the original on 2022-05-27 . Retrieved 2022-08-01 .

^ "Hamid Rashid | VOX, CEPR Policy Portal" .

voxeu.org . Retrieved 2022-08-01 .

^ Joseph E. Stiglitz and Ira Regmi. (6 December 2022). "The Causes of and Responses to Today’s Inflation".

Roosevelt Institute website Retrieved 2 February 2025.

^ Curriculum Vitae Archived 2011-05-13 at the Wayback Machine , Joseph E. Stiglitz ^ "Durham University Business School recognises Nobel Laureate winning economist" . Durham University. September 23, 2005.

^ "CERGE-EI | Executive and Supervisory Committee | Governance Bodies | People" . Cerge-ei.cz . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ "Joseph E. Stiglitz" .

American Academy of Arts & Sciences . October 2021 . Retrieved 2021-12-10 .

^ "Joseph E. Stiglitz" .

www.nasonline.org . Retrieved 2021-12-10 .

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved 2021-12-10 .

^ "Golden Plate Awardees of the American Academy of Achievement" .

www.achievement.org .

American Academy of Achievement .

^ "2009 Summit Highlights Photo" .

Dr. Joseph E. Stiglitz, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Economics, and his wife Anya, between sessions at La Residence in the Franschhoek Valley during the 2009 International Achievement Summit in South Africa.

^ "More Loeb winners: Fortune and Detroit News" .

Talking Biz News . June 29, 2010 . Retrieved February 5, 2019 .

^ "The FP Top 100 Global Thinkers" .

Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on December 21, 2013 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ "Stephen Emerson and Joseph Stiglitz awarded the Légion d'Honneur" .

France in the United States / Embassy of France in Washington . Archived from the original on February 9, 2014 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ "Fellowship of the Royal Society 1660–2015" . Royal Society.

Archived from the original on 2015-10-15.

^ Pitt, Helen (21 April 2018).

"American economist Joseph Stiglitz wins 2018 Sydney Peace Prize" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 20 April 2018 .

^ "Dr. Jane Hannaway Bride of Joseph Stiglitz" .

The New York Times . 1978-12-24 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ Mary K. Mewborn (October 2004).

"Real Estate News" . Washingtonlife.com. Archived from the original on November 28, 2012 . Retrieved October 29, 2013 .

^ "Anya Schiffrin, Joseph Stiglitz" .

The New York Times . October 31, 2004.

External links [ edit ] Joseph Stiglitz at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Listen to this article ( 20 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 26 January 2016 ( 2016-01-26 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) Joseph Stiglitz's voice from the BBC programme Start the Week , February 8, 2010.

Problems playing this file? See media help .

Official website Joseph E. Stiglitz | Columbia Business School Directory Joseph Stiglitz on Nobelprize.org including the Prize Lecture December 8, 2001 Information and the Change in the Paradigm in Economics Profile and Papers at Research Papers in Economics /RePEc Publications at the National Bureau of Economic Research Henderson, David R.

, ed. (2008).

"Joseph E. Stiglitz (1943– )" .

The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics .

Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.).

Liberty Fund . pp.

596– 597.

ISBN 978-0865976665 .

Column archives at Project Syndicate Appearances on C-SPAN Joseph Stiglitz on Charlie Rose Joseph Stiglitz at IMDb Joseph Stiglitz collected news and commentary at The New York Times Of the 1%, by the 1%, for the 1% , Joseph E. Stiglitz, Vanity Fair , May 2011 Roberts, Russ (July 9, 2012).

"Stiglitz on Inequality" .

EconTalk .

Library of Economics and Liberty .

Three decades of neoliberal policies have decimated the middle class, our economy, and our democracy . Joseph Stiglitz for MarketWatch . May 13, 2019.

Political offices Preceded by Laura Tyson Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers 1995–1997 Succeeded by Janet Yellen Diplomatic posts Preceded by Michael Bruno Chief Economist of the World Bank 1997–2000 Succeeded by Nicholas Stern Awards Preceded by James J. Heckman Daniel L. McFadden Laureate of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics 2001 Served alongside: George A. Akerlof , A. Michael Spence Succeeded by Daniel Kahneman Vernon L. Smith Articles related to Joseph Stiglitz v t e Keynesians Founder John Maynard Keynes Neo-Keynesians Gardner Ackley William Baumol James Duesenberry Robert Eisner Trygve Haavelmo Alvin Hansen Roy Harrod Walter Heller John Hicks Lawrence Klein James Meade Lloyd Metzler Franco Modigliani Robert Mundell Arthur Melvin Okun Don Patinkin Bill Phillips William Poole Paul Samuelson Robert Solow James Tobin Post-Keynesians Victoria Chick Paul Davidson Evsey Domar James K. Galbraith John Kenneth Galbraith Wynne Godley Myron J. Gordon Geoff Harcourt Michael Hudson Richard Kahn Nicholas Kaldor Michał Kalecki Steve Keen Jan Kregel Marc Lavoie Abba P. Lerner Hyman Minsky Bill Mitchell Basil Moore Steven Pressman Joan Robinson G. L. S. Shackle Pavlina R. Tcherneva Anthony Thirlwall William Vickrey Sidney Weintraub L. Randall Wray New Keynesians George Akerlof Ben Bernanke Olivier Blanchard Alan Blinder Guillermo Calvo Richard Clarida Brad DeLong Huw Dixon Stanley Fischer Jordi Galí Mark Gertler Robert J. Gordon Stephany Griffith-Jones Nobuhiro Kiyotaki Paul Krugman Greg Mankiw Marc Melitz Maurice Obstfeld Edmund Phelps Ricardo Reis Kenneth Rogoff David Romer Julio Rotemberg Robert Shiller Andrei Shleifer Joseph Stiglitz Lawrence Summers John B. Taylor Michael Woodford Janet Yellen Related Keynesian economics v t e John Bates Clark Medal recipients Paul A. Samuelson (1947) Kenneth E. Boulding (1949) Milton Friedman (1951) No Award (1953) James Tobin (1955) Kenneth J. Arrow (1957) Lawrence R. Klein (1959) Robert M. Solow (1961) Hendrik S. Houthakker (1963) Zvi Griliches (1965) Gary S. Becker (1967) Marc Leon Nerlove (1969) Dale W. Jorgenson (1971) Franklin M. Fisher (1973) Daniel McFadden (1975) Martin S. Feldstein (1977) Joseph E. Stiglitz (1979) A. Michael Spence (1981) James J. Heckman (1983) Jerry A. Hausman (1985) Sanford J. Grossman (1987) David M. Kreps (1989) Paul R. Krugman (1991) Lawrence H. Summers (1993) David Card (1995) Kevin M. Murphy (1997) Andrei Shleifer (1999) Matthew Rabin (2001) Steven Levitt (2003) Daron Acemoglu (2005) Susan C. Athey (2007) Emmanuel Saez (2009) Esther Duflo (2010) Jonathan Levin (2011) Amy Finkelstein (2012) Raj Chetty (2013) Matthew Gentzkow (2014) Roland Fryer (2015) Yuliy Sannikov (2016) Dave Donaldson (2017) Parag Pathak (2018) Emi Nakamura (2019) Melissa Dell (2020) Isaiah Andrews (2021) Oleg Itskhoki (2022) Gabriel Zucman (2023) Philipp Strack (2024) v t e Laureates of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences 1969–1975 1969: Ragnar Frisch / Jan Tinbergen 1970: Paul A. Samuelson 1971: Simon Kuznets 1972: John R. Hicks / Kenneth J. Arrow 1973: Wassily Leontief 1974: Gunnar Myrdal / Friedrich August von Hayek 1975: Leonid Vitaliyevich Kantorovich / Tjalling C. Koopmans 1976–2000 1976: Milton Friedman 1977: Bertil Ohlin / James E. Meade 1978: Herbert A. Simon 1979: Theodore W. Schultz / Sir Arthur Lewis 1980: Lawrence R. Klein 1981: James Tobin 1982: George J. Stigler 1983: Gérard Debreu 1984: Richard Stone 1985: Franco Modigliani 1986: James M. Buchanan Jr.

1987: Robert M. Solow 1988: Maurice Allais 1989: Trygve Haavelmo 1990: Harry M. Markowitz / Merton H. Miller / William F. Sharpe 1991: Ronald H. Coase 1992: Gary S. Becker 1993: Robert W. Fogel / Douglass C. North 1994: John C. Harsanyi / John F. Nash Jr.

/ Reinhard Selten 1995: Robert E. Lucas Jr.

1996: James A. Mirrlees / William Vickrey 1997: Robert C. Merton / Myron S. Scholes 1998: Amartya Sen 1999: Robert A. Mundell 2000: James J. Heckman / Daniel L. McFadden 2001–present 2001: George A. Akerlof / A. Michael Spence / Joseph E. Stiglitz 2002: Daniel Kahneman / Vernon L. Smith 2003: Robert F. Engle III / Clive W.J. Granger 2004: Finn E. Kydland / Edward C. Prescott 2005: Robert J. Aumann / Thomas C. Schelling 2006: Edmund S. Phelps 2007: Leonid Hurwicz / Eric S. Maskin / Roger B. Myerson 2008: Paul Krugman 2009: Elinor Ostrom / Oliver E. Williamson 2010: Peter A. Diamond / Dale T. Mortensen / Christopher A. Pissarides 2011: Thomas J. Sargent / Christopher A. Sims 2012: Alvin E. Roth / Lloyd S. Shapley 2013: Eugene F. Fama / Lars Peter Hansen / Robert J. Shiller 2014: Jean Tirole 2015: Angus Deaton 2016: Oliver Hart / Bengt Holmström 2017: Richard H. Thaler 2018: William Nordhaus / Paul Romer 2019 : Abhijit Banerjee / Esther Duflo / Michael Kremer 2020 : Paul Milgrom / Robert B. Wilson 2021 : David Card / Joshua Angrist / Guido Imbens 2022 : Ben Bernanke / Douglas Diamond / Philip H. Dybvig 2023 : Claudia Goldin 2024: Daron Acemoglu / Simon Johnson / James A. Robinson v t e 2001 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry William Standish Knowles (United States) Ryōji Noyori (Japan) Karl Barry Sharpless (United States) Literature ( 2001 ) V. S. Naipaul (Trinidad & Tobago/United Kingdom) Peace United Nations Kofi Annan (Ghana) Physics Eric Allin Cornell (United States) Wolfgang Ketterle (Germany) Carl Wieman (United States) Physiology or Medicine Leland H. Hartwell (United States) Tim Hunt (United Kingdom) Paul Nurse (United Kingdom) Economic Sciences George Akerlof (United States) Michael Spence (United States) Joseph Stiglitz (United States) Nobel Prize recipients 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 v t e Chairs of the Council of Economic Advisers Nourse Keyserling Burns Saulnier Heller Ackley Okun McCracken Stein Greenspan Schultze Weidenbaum Feldstein Sprinkel Boskin Tyson Stiglitz Yellen Baily Hubbard Mankiw Rosen Bernanke Lazear Romer Goolsbee Krueger Furman Hassett Philipson * Goodspeed * Rouse Bernstein Miran * indicates acting officeholders v t e Cabinet of President Bill Clinton (1993–2001) Cabinet Vice President Al Gore ( 1993–2001 ) Secretary of State Warren Christopher (1993–1997) Madeleine Albright (1997–2001) Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen (1993–1994) Robert Rubin (1995–1999) Lawrence Summers (1999–2001) Secretary of Defense Les Aspin (1993–1994) William J. Perry (1994–1997) William Cohen (1997–2001) Attorney General Janet Reno (1993–2001) Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt (1993–2001) Secretary of Agriculture Mike Espy (1993–1994) Dan Glickman (1995–2001) Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown (1993–1996) Mickey Kantor (1996–1997) William M. Daley (1997–2000) Norman Mineta (2000–2001) Secretary of Labor Robert Reich (1993–1997) Alexis Herman (1997–2001) Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna Shalala (1993–2001) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Henry Cisneros (1993–1997) Andrew Cuomo (1997–2001) Secretary of Transportation Federico Peña (1993–1997) Rodney E. Slater (1997–2001) Secretary of Energy Hazel R. O'Leary (1993–1997) Federico Peña (1997–1998) Bill Richardson (1998–2001) Secretary of Education Richard Riley (1993–2001) Secretary of Veterans Affairs Jesse Brown (1993–1997) Togo D. West Jr.

(1998–2000) Cabinet-level Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency Carol Browner (1993–2001) Director of the Office of Management and Budget Leon Panetta (1993–1994) Alice Rivlin (1994–1996) Franklin Raines (1996–1998) Jack Lew (1998–2001) Director of Central Intelligence John M. Deutch (1995–1996) George Tenet (1996–2001) Trade Representative Mickey Kantor (1993–1996) Charlene Barshefsky (1996–2001) Ambassador to the United Nations Madeleine Albright (1993–1997) Bill Richardson (1997–1998) Richard Holbrooke (1999–2001) Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers Laura Tyson (1993–1995) Joseph Stiglitz (1995–1997) Janet Yellen (1997–1999) Martin Neil Baily (1999–2001) Administrator of the Small Business Administration Philip Lader (1994–1997) Aida Álvarez (1997–2001) Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency James Lee Witt (1993–2001)* Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy Lee P. Brown (1993–1996) Barry McCaffrey (1996–2001) White House Chief of Staff Mack McLarty (1993–1994) Leon Panetta (1994–1997) Erskine Bowles (1997–1998) John Podesta (1998–2001) * took office in 1993, raised to cabinet-rank in 1996 v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal v t e Presidents of the International Economic Association Joseph Schumpeter (1950) Gottfried Haberler (1950–1953) Howard S. Ellis (1953–1956) Erik Lindahl (1956–1959) E. A. G. Robinson (1959–1962) Giuseppe Ugo Papi (1962–1965) Paul A. Samuelson (1965–1968) Erik Lundberg (1968–1971) Fritz Machlup (1971–1974) Edmond Malinvaud (1974–1977) Shigeto Tsuru (1977–1980) Víctor L. Urquidi (1980–1983) Kenneth Arrow (1983–1986) Amartya Sen (1986–1989) Anthony B. Atkinson (1989–1992) Michael Bruno (1992–1995) Jacques Drèze (1995–1999) Robert M. Solow (1999–2002) János Kornai (2002–2005) Guillermo Calvo (2005–2008) Masahiko Aoki (2008–2011) Joseph E. Stiglitz (2011–2014) Tim Besley (2014–2017) Kaushik Basu (2017–) v t e Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 2009 Fellows Robert Ainsworth Ross J. Anderson Michael Ashfold Michael Batty Martin Buck Peter Buneman Michel Chrétien Jenny Clack Michael Duff Richard Ellis Jeff Ellis James Gimzewski David Glover Chris Goodnow Wendy Hall Nicholas Harberd John Hardy Brian Hemmings Christine Holt Christopher Hunter Graham Hutchings Peter Isaacson Jonathan Keating Dimitris Kioussis Stephen Larter David Leigh David MacKay Arthur B. McDonald Angela McLean David Owen Richard Passingham Guy Richardson Wolfram Schultz Keith Shine Henning Sirringhaus Maurice Skolnick Karen Steel Malcolm Stevens Jesper Svejstrup Jonathan Tennyson John Todd Burt Totaro John Vederas John Wood Foreign John Holdren H. Robert Horvitz Thomas Kailath Roger D. Kornberg Yakov Sinai Joseph Stiglitz Rashid Sunyaev Steven D. Tanksley Royal William, Prince of Wales v t e Sydney Peace Prize laureates Muhammad Yunus (1998) Desmond Tutu (1999) Xanana Gusmão (2000) William Deane (2001) Mary Robinson (2002) Hanan Ashrawi (2003) Arundhati Roy (2004) Olara Otunnu (2005) Irene Khan (2006) Hans Blix (2007) Pat Dodson (2008) John Pilger (2009) Vandana Shiva (2010) Noam Chomsky (2011) Sekai Holland (2012) Cynthia Maung (2013) Julian Burnside (2014) George Gittoes (2015) Naomi Klein (2016) Black Lives Matter (2017) Joseph Stiglitz (2018) #MeToo Movement (2019) Midnight Oil (2020) Uluru Statement from the Heart (2021–22) Nazanin Boniadi (2023) v t e Gerald Loeb Award winners for Columns, Commentary, and Editorials Gerald Loeb Award for Editorials (1970–1972) (1970–1972) 1970: Patricia Shontz 1971: Philip Greer 1972: Robert H. Metz Gerald Loeb Award for Columns/Editorial (1973–1976, 1978–1982) (1973–1976) 1973: Clem Morgello 1974: Henry Wallich 1975: Edwin Darby 1976: Joseph A. Livingston (1978–1979) 1978: Hobart Rowen 1979: Robert L. Bartley (1980–1982) 1980: Alan Gersten 1980 (HM): Paul Lieberman , Chester Goolrick 1980 (HM): Tom Bethell 1981: Sarai Ribicoff 1981 (HM): Stan DeCoster , Ann Baldelli 1982 (tie): George Melloan 1982 (tie): Lester C. Thurow Gerald Loeb Award for Columns (1977) (1977) Lee Mitsang Gerald Loeb Award for Editorial/Commentary (1984) (1984) Robert L. Heilbroner Gerald Loeb Award for Commentary (1985–2023) (1985–1989) 1985: Daniel Henninger 1986 (tie): Michael Kinsley 1986 (tie): Robert Samuelson 1987: Richard Doak 1988: Ron Ridenhour 1988 (HM): Gordon Crovitz 1989: David Warsh (1990–1999) 1990: L. Gordon Crovitz \ 1991: Allan Sloan 1992: Warren T. Brookes 1993: Allan Sloan 1994: Robert J. Samuelson 1995: Jane Bryant Quinn 1996: Bill Bishop 1997: Holman W. Jenkins Jr.

1998: Allan Sloan 1999: Walter S. Mossberg (2000–2009) 2000: David Ignatius 2001: Floyd Norris 2002: Gretchen Morgenson 2003: Jerry Flint 2004: Michael Hiltzik 2005: Peter Eavis 2006 (tie): Robert L. Pollock 2006 (tie): Steven Pearlstein 2007: Steve Bailey 2008: Joe Nocera 2008 (HM): Daniel Howes 2009: Brian M. Carney (2010–2019) 2010: Joseph E. Stiglitz 2011: Paul Krugman 2012: Zanny Minton Beddoes , Edward Carr , John Peet , Patrick Foulis , John O'Sullivan 2013: John Gapper 2014: Peter Goodman 2015: Jesse Eisinger 2016: James B. Stewart 2017: Adrian Wooldridge 2018: Ed Silverman 2019: Andy Kessler (2020–2023) 2020 (tie): Elisabeth Rosenthal 2020 (tie): Geoffrey A. Fowler 2021: Michelle Singletary 2022: Chad Livengood 2023: Alyssa Rosenberg Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH Google Scholar MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7f67d69dcb‐zxgcv
Cached time: 20250817043809
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.757 seconds
Real time usage: 4.159 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 26682/1000000
Revision size: 146523/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 852789/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 138852/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 41/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 826977/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.481/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16039389/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3592.444      1 -total
 31.90% 1145.888      1 Template:Reflist
 14.67%  526.929     73 Template:Cite_web
 14.49%  520.691     48 Template:Cite_book
 14.16%  508.705      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
  8.90%  319.637     40 Template:Cite_journal
  8.06%  289.549     42 Template:Cite_news
  5.49%  197.235      1 Template:Navboxes
  3.68%  132.220     18 Template:Navbox
  3.20%  114.934     17 Template:Infobox_officeholder/office Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:63092:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043809 and revision id 1305981553. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joseph_Stiglitz&oldid=1305981553 " Categories : Nobel laureates in Economics American Nobel laureates World Bank Chief Economists 20th-century American economists 21st-century American economists American development economists American public economists American economics writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers Alumni of Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge Academics of the University of Manchester American anti-globalization writers American male non-fiction writers Amherst College alumni American Ashkenazi Jews American people of Russian-Jewish descent Columbia University faculty Drummond Professors of Political Economy Academic staff of Sciences Po Fellows of All Souls College, Oxford Fellows of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge Fellows of the British Academy Fellows of the Econometric Society Foreign members of the Royal Society Foreign members of the Russian Academy of Sciences Georgist economists Gerald Loeb Award winners for Columns, Commentary, and Editorials Information economists Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change lead authors Jewish American non-fiction writers Jewish American economists Academic staff of Keio University Labour Party (UK) people MIT School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences alumni Institute for Advanced Study visiting scholars Members of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences New Keynesian economists People in international development Princeton University faculty Stanford University Department of Economics faculty Writers about globalization Writers from Gary, Indiana Yale University faculty Center for Economic and Policy Research Institute for New Economic Thinking National Bureau of Economic Research American officials of the United Nations Economists from Indiana Officers of the Legion of Honour Fellows of the American Academy of Political and Social Science Clinton administration cabinet members Jewish members of the Cabinet of the United States 20th-century American male writers 21st-century American male writers Chairs of the United States Council of Economic Advisers Members of the American Philosophical Society Jews from Indiana 1943 births Living people Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox economist as a module All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 All articles with minor POV problems Articles with minor POV problems from October 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2019 All articles with style issues Articles to be expanded from August 2019 All articles to be expanded CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Nobelprize template using Wikidata property P8024 People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 06:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Joseph Stiglitz 67 languages Add topic

