Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Objectives 3 Landing 4 Rover 5 Proposed science instrumentation 6 Sample cache 7 Technology development 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher 8 languages Čeština Eesti Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Русский Slovenčina Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cancelled NASA Mars rover concept Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher Mission type Rover Operator NASA Mission duration One Earth year (proposed) Spacecraft properties Launch mass 300 kg (660 lb) The Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher ( MAX-C ), also known as Mars 2018 mission , was a NASA concept for a Mars rover mission, proposed to be launched in 2018 together with the European ExoMars rover.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The MAX-C rover concept was cancelled in April 2011 due to budget cuts.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The rover would have been solar powered , with a maximum mass of 300 kg and based largely on the Curiosity rover components, but would have entailed a system tailored to the specific payload. The MAX-C rover would have performed an in-situ astrobiological exploration, evaluate the habitability potential of various Martian environments, and it would have collected, documented, and cached samples for potential return to Earth by a future mission.

[ 6 ] The Mars 2020 mission with its Perseverance rover had similar scientific objectives as Mars 2018 and MAX-C.

History [ edit ] The essential energy, water, and nutrient requirements to support and sustain life on Mars are currently present, and the Martian geologic record offers tantalizing clue of many ancient habitable environments.

[ 7 ] If life emerged and evolved on early Mars then it is possible, and indeed likely, that physical or chemical biosignatures are preserved in the exposed rock record. These discoveries and inferences make a compelling case for a rover mission designed to explore for evidence of past Martian life .

[ 7 ] For over a decade, the Mars Exploration Program has pursued a strategy of "follow the water". While this strategy has been highly successful in the Mars missions of 1996-2007, it is increasingly appreciated that assessing the full astrobiological potential of Martian environments requires going beyond the identification of locations where liquid water was present. Thus, in order to seek signs of past or present life on Mars, it is necessary to characterize more comprehensively the macroscopic and microscopic fabric of sedimentary materials . This type of information would be critical to select and cache of relevant samples for addressing the life question in samples intended for study in sophisticated laboratories on Earth.

[ 7 ] The possible strategy of using rovers to collect and cache geological samples for possible subsequent return to Earth has been discussed as far back as at least the mid-1990s. In 2007 it was recommended sample caching on all surface missions that follow the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover, in a way that would prepare for a relatively early return of samples to Earth. In mid-2007, NASA directed that a very simple cache be added to the Curiosity rover and, although they endorsed the potential value of sample caching, experts raised serious concerns regarding sample quality for this specific implementation. In November 2008, the cache was descoped to make room for tools to clean the rover's sample acquisition equipment, which were added due to sample handling problems encountered by the Phoenix lander.

[ 7 ] A mid-range rover concept was originally included in the planning work of the Mars Architecture Tiger Team (MATT). By the time of the MATT-3 report in 2009, the potential mission was referred to with several different working names, including both 'Mid-Range Rover' and 'Mars Prospector Rover', and the mission concept was generically envisioned as including a single Mars Exploration Rover or Mars Science Laboratory -class rover with precision landing and sampling/caching capability. To provide a name that fit the mission concept better, it was changed in August 2009 from the generic Mid-Range Rover (MRR) to Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C).

[ 7 ] Both MAX-C and the Mars 2020 Perseverance rover were envisioned to use features developed for the Curiosity rover In April 2011, because of a budgeting crisis, a proposal was announced to fly only one rover in 2018 that would be larger than either of the vehicles in the paired concept, ExoMars (ESA) and MAX-C (NASA).

[ 8 ] One suggestion was that the new vehicle be built in Europe and take on a combination of European and USA instruments. NASA proposed to provide a launch rocket and the "Sky Crane" landing system.

[ 8 ] In February 2012, NASA terminated its participation in ExoMars due to budgetary cuts, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and when Congress reinstated funding for Mars exploration after a loud outcry from planetary scientists and enthusiasts, NASA announced in December 2012 the Mars 2020 rover and, later, that it would indeed prepare a sample cache.

[ 11 ] Objectives [ edit ] This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: Redundancy.

Please help improve this section if you can.

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The main objective was at a site with high preservation potential for physical and chemical biosignatures , evaluate paleo-environmental conditions, characterize the potential for preservation of biosignatures, and access multiple sequences of geological units in a search for evidence of past life and/or prebiotic chemistry. Samples necessary to achieve the scientific objectives of the proposed future sample return mission would be collected, documented, and packaged in a manner suitable for potential return to Earth .

[ 3 ] The primary science objective was to land at a site interpreted to represent high habitability potential, and with high preservation potential for physical and chemical biosignatures: Early Noachian astrobiology — Prebiotic environmental context in which life potentially arose.

Noachian-Hesperian stratigraphy — Whether surface conditions before and after the decline in erosion, aqueous weathering, fluvial activity, and magnetic field were habitable.

Astrobiology — Test life-related hypotheses in the context of another specific kind of geologic terrain. Sample collection that could have preserved evidence of prebiotic chemistry or life on Mars ; characterize the potential for the preservation of biosignatures.

Methane emission from subsurface.

Radiometric dating Deep core drill — core samples from a depth of ~ 2m Polar layered deposits — Investigate potential record of recent global climate changes.

Mid-latitude shallow ice — Investigate the habitability of mid-latitude ice, and how does perchlorate affect the present habitability of Mars. Could mid-latitude ice provide a resource for In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU)?

A secondary science objective would have been to address the need for long-term atmospheric pressure data from the Martian surface. There were studies evaluating the possibilities for cooperative science between the MAX-C rover and the ExoMars rover if landed together at the same location.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Landing [ edit ] The proposed MAX-C mission would have arrived at Mars in January 2019 in the northern hemisphere during winter, given the favorable atmospheric pressure at this season and performance of the 'sky crane' delivery system.

[ 7 ] Due to the eccentricity of the Martian orbit, latitude access for a solar powered rover, northern latitudes are less severe on the power/thermal design than southern latitudes, allowing effective operation at sites as far north as 25°N and as far south as 15°S.

Given that scientifically interesting features often represent terrain that is too dangerous to land on, the landing ellipse is often driven to be placed right up against but not on top of features of interest. The result is that access is often a product of both ellipse size and rover traverse capability sufficient to get outside the ellipse in a reasonable amount of time relative to the mission lifetime. The entry, descent and landing system would have been of high precision with a targeting accuracy of 7 km (4.3 mi).

[ 7 ] The solar-powered rover would have needed to have a range of no less than 10 km (6.2 mi) and a lifetime of at least one Earth year.

Rover [ edit ] The MAX-C rover would have relied on significant inheritance of MSL's Curiosity rover design, flight design, test design, test and handling hardware to minimize cost and risk. This solar-powered rover required a range of no less than 20 km (12 mi) and a lifetime of at least 500 Martian days (sols).

[ 13 ] Since many of the geologically interesting terrains on Mars expose stratified layers on slopes in craters, channels, and hillsides, it would be extremely useful for the proposed MAX-C mission to be capable to navigate on slopes of up to 30 degrees, as both of the Spirit and Opportunity MERs have done.

The mass would have been about 300 kg, bigger than the MERs , comparable in mass to the ExoMars rover, but lighter than the Curiosity rover.

Proposed science instrumentation [ edit ] The rover would have carried instrumentation sufficient to scientifically select samples for caching. It was assumed that this translates to the following instruments and capabilities: [ 13 ] Must be able to remotely (i.e. with mast-mounted instruments) characterize outcrops and identify features of interest (panoramic camera, Near-IR Spectrometer ) Must be able to collect microscaleimagery of outcrops; contact instrument ( microscopic imager ) Must be able to expose unweathered rock surfaces using a surface abrasion tool (abrading bits) Must be able to measure mineralogy at micro-scales on the abraded rock surfaces; contact instrument ( Raman spectroscopy ) Must be able to measure bulk elemental chemistry on the abraded rock surfaces; contact instrument ( Alpha particle X-ray spectrometer ) Must be able to measure organic compounds on the abraded rock surfaces; contact instrument (Raman spectroscopy) Must be able to correlate composition to micro-scale structures and textures in the rocks (microscopic imager) Sample cache [ edit ] Returning samples from Mars is essential to meeting the Mars Exploration Program's highest priority scientific objectives.

[ 3 ] However, a Mars sample return mission entails high cost and risk, and it entails scientific sample selection, acquisition, and documentation for potential return to Earth, so it must also deliver unprecedented value. Even though any sample returned from Mars would be useful for some line of scientific inquiry, it is also true that not all samples would be equally useful for detailed scientific investigation.

[ 3 ] To address the highest priority scientific questions, selection of "outstanding samples" would be required.

[ 1 ] Samples necessary to achieve the scientific objectives of the proposed future sample return mission would be collected, documented, and packaged in a manner suitable for potential return to Earth. A future surface rendezvous would recover the cache and load it into the 'Mars Ascent Vehicle' for its delivery to Earth.

[ 1 ] [ 14 ] If, at the MSL Curiosity rover landing site (2012), scientists do not recognize an outstanding sample, they will want to send a rover to an alternate site selected from orbital data and for which an argument could be made that there is better science or access potential; if MSL does discover outstanding samples, scientists would presumably want to send a rover back to collect them for return, [ 3 ] therefore, having the MAX-C developed for a 2018 launch could have saved time and resources. The proposed sampling requirement would be to collect 20 samples at four sites outside the landing ellipse within one Earth year. The rover would then drive to a safe location to deposit the 20-sample cache for a fetch rover to potentially retrieve sometime after 2020. For such a scenario, the MAX-C rover would be expected to traverse 10 km in 150 driving sols, i.e., ~67 m/sol on average, so an improved rover autonomy would be needed for the candidate MAX-C mission.

[ 6 ] The MAX-C rover would have been able to acquire samples through coring and abrasion. Coring was to be accomplished through the use of a core drill that could produce cores of approximately 10 mm diameter up to 50 mm long, which would be encapsulated in individual sleeves with pressed-in caps. Abrading of surface material would be accomplished through the use of a specialized abrading bit placed in the coring tool. This tool would be intended to remove small amounts of surface material in order to allow instruments access past any dust and/or weathering layer. It would abrade a circular area of similar diameter to the core (8–10 mm). Translation of the arm would be used to scan the individual abrasion spots.

[ 7 ] The rover should be able to cache at least 38 core samples.

[ 13 ] Technology development [ edit ] A cost of $70M was estimated to fund the technology development activities; [ 7 ] the mission concept would require technology development in four key areas: [ 3 ] [ 7 ] Coring, encapsulation, and caching: Lightweight tools/mechanisms for obtaining and handling cored samples.

Instruments: Additional technology focus to mature instruments that could address the measurement needs posed herein, particularly the micro-scale mineralogy, organics, and elemental composition mapping.

Planetary protection/contamination control: Bio-cleaning, cataloguing of bio-contaminants, and transport modeling to ensure cached samples would be returnable.

Rover navigation: On-board image processing and navigation to increase traverse rate.

Precision landing: A major scientific priority is to improve access to complex terrain, which requires significantly narrowing the landing ellipse.

Based on a draft project schedule and a full JPL team experimental study, total project cost in dollars, not including launch vehicle, was estimated to be between $1.5-2.0 Billion.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Solar System portal Spaceflight portal Astrobiology – Science concerned with life in the universe Astrobiology Field Laboratory – Canceled NASA Mars rover concept Biological Oxidant and Life Detection – Hypothetical Mars Mission ExoMars – Astrobiology programme Exploration of Mars Life on Mars – Scientific assessments on the microbial habitability of Mars Mars 2020 – Astrobiology Mars rover mission by NASA Mars Exploration Rover – NASA mission to explore Mars via two rovers Mars sample return mission – Mars mission to collect rock and dust samples Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Mars Science Laboratory – Robotic mission that deployed the Curiosity rover to Mars in 2012 Signs Of LIfe Detector – Spacecraft instrument to detect biosignatures Viking program – Pair of NASA landers and orbiters sent to Mars in 1976 References [ edit ] ^ a b c McLennan, Scott (September 10, 2009), "Proposed 2018 Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C) Mission" (PDF) , Proposal of the MEPAG Mid-Range Rover Science Analysis Group (MRR-SAG) , NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory ^ Mars Exploration Program Analysis (July 9, 2009) ^ a b c d e f g Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C): A Potential Rover Mission for 2018 Archived 2010-05-28 at the Wayback Machine (September 15, 2009) ^ de Selding, Peter B. (20 April 2011).

"ESA Halts Work on ExoMars Orbiter and Rover" .

Space News . Archived from the original on May 24, 2012 . Retrieved 2011-04-21 .

^ Svitak, Amy (18 April 2011).

"U.S., Europe Plan Single-rover Mars Mission for 2018" .

Space News . Archived from the original on May 24, 2012 . Retrieved 2011-04-21 .

^ a b Strategic Technology Development for Future Mars Missions (2013-2022) Archived 2010-05-28 at the Wayback Machine (PDF) 15 September 2009 ^ a b c d e f g h i j Pratt, Lisa, ed. (October 14, 2009), "Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher: A potential rover mission for 2018" (PDF) , JPL Document Review , pp. 94 pp ^ a b Amos, Jonathan (7 April 2011).

"US and Europe mull single 2018 Mars rover" .

BBC News . Retrieved 2011-04-08 .

^ Morring Jr., Frank (14 February 2012).

"NASA Units Hope For Robotic Mars Mission In 2018" .

Aviation Week . Archived from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 4 January 2016 .

^ Kremer, Ken (1 February 2012).

"Experts React to Obama Slash to NASA's Mars and Planetary Science Exploration" .

Universe Today .

^ Instruments selected for Mars 2020, NASA's latest rover .

Astrobites , Joseph O'Rourke. September 9, 2014.

^ MEPAG 2-Rover International Science Analysis Group (2R-iSAG) (September 2010), "Two Rovers to the Same Site on Mars, 2018: Possibilities for Cooperative Science", Astrobiology , 10 (7): 663– 685, Bibcode : 2010AsBio..10..663M , doi : 10.1089/ast.2010.0526 , PMID 20932131 .

{{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d Salvo, Christopher G.; Elfving, Anders, eds. (March 17, 2010), "Proposed Mars Astrobiology Explorer –Cacher (MAX-C) & ExoMars 2018 (MXM-2018) Mission Formulation Status" (PDF) , 22nd MEPAG Meeting , Monrovia, California, USA: Jet Propulsion Laboratory ^ Boyle, Alan (February 24, 2010).

"Bringing back Mars life" .

MSNBC News . Archived from the original on 2010-02-27.

External links [ edit ] Videos on the MAX-C rover field tests (2010) v t e Spacecraft missions to Mars List of missions to Mars List of Mars orbiters List of artificial objects on Mars Active Flybys Psyche ‡ (2023, flyby in 2026) Orbiters 2001 Mars Odyssey Mars Express Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter timeline MAVEN ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter Hope Tianwen-1 orbiter Rovers Curiosity Mars Science Laboratory timeline Perseverance Mars 2020 timeline Past Flybys Mars 1 † Mariner 4 Zond 2 † Mariner 6 and 7 Mars 6 Mars 7 Rosetta ‡ Dawn ‡ Mars Cube One Europa Clipper ‡ Hera ‡ Orbiters Mars 2 Mars 3 Mariner 9 Mars 4 † Mars 5 Viking program Viking 1 Viking 2 Phobos program Phobos 1 † Phobos 2 † Mars Observer † Mars Global Surveyor Nozomi † Mars Climate Orbiter † Mangalyaan Landers Mars 2 † Mars 3 † Mars 6 † Mars 7 † Viking 1 Viking 2 Mars Pathfinder Mars Polar Lander † / Deep Space 2 † Beagle 2 † Phoenix ExoMars Schiaparelli † InSight Tianwen-1 lander Rovers PrOP-M † Sojourner Mars Exploration Rover Spirit timeline Opportunity timeline Zhurong Aircraft Ingenuity helicopter flights Mars 2020 Failed launches Mars 1M No.1 1M No.2 2MV-4 No.1 2MV-3 No.1 Mariner 3 Mars 2M No.521 2M No.522 Mariner 8 Mars 3MS No.170 Mars 96 Fobos-Grunt / Yinghuo-1 Future Planned EscaPADE (2025) Tera-hertz Explorer (TEREX) (mid 2020s) Martian Moons eXploration (MMX) (2026) Mangalyaan-2 (2026) Tianwen-3 (2028) Rosalind Franklin (2028) MBR Explorer ‡ (2028, flyby in 2031) NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return Mars Sample Recovery Helicopters Kazachok Proposed MAGGIE SpaceX Mars program Mars-Grunt Cancelled or not developed Aerial Regional-scale Environmental Survey Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection DePhine Icebreaker Life Marsokhod Mars 4NM & 5NM Mars 5M (Mars-79) Mars-Aster Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C) Mars Geyser Hopper Mars Exploration Ice Mapper Mars One Mars Micro Orbiter Mars Surveyor Lander Mars Telecommunications Orbiter MELOS rover MetNet NetLander Northern Light Next Mars Orbiter PADME Phootprint Sample Collection for Investigation of Mars (SCIM) Sky-Sailor SpaceX Red Dragon Vesta Voyager Mars Exploration Concepts Flyby Orbiter Landing Atmospheric entry Rover Aircraft Sample return Human mission Permanent settlement Colonization Terraforming Strategies Mars Scout Program Mars Exploration Program Mars Exploration Joint Initiative Mars Next Generation Advocacy The Mars Project The Case for Mars Inspiration Mars Mars Institute Mars Society Mars race Missions are ordered by launch date. Sign † indicates failure en route or before intended mission data returned.

‡ indicates use of the planet as a gravity assist en route to another destination.

v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mars_Astrobiology_Explorer-Cacher&oldid=1187538122 " Categories : Missions to Mars Cancelled spacecraft Cancelled astrobiology space missions Proposed NASA space probes Mars rovers Projects disestablished in 2011 Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from July 2023 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from July 2023 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from July 2023 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 29 November 2023, at 22:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher 8 languages Add topic

