Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pyramid of Energy 2 Pyramid of biomass 3 Pyramid of Numbers 4 History 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecological pyramid 36 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Graphical representation of biomass or biomass productivity The pyramid of energy represents how much energy, initially from the sun, is retained or stored in the form of new biomass at each trophic level in an ecosystem. Typically, about 10% of the energy is transferred from one trophic level to the next, thus preventing a large number of trophic levels. Energy pyramids are necessarily upright in healthy ecosystems, that is, there must always be more energy available at a given level of the pyramid to support the energy and biomass requirement of the next trophic level.

An ecological pyramid (also trophic pyramid , Eltonian pyramid , energy pyramid , or sometimes food pyramid ) is a graphical representation designed to show the biomass or bioproductivity at each trophic level in an ecosystem .

A pyramid of energy shows how much energy is retained in the form of new biomass from each trophic level, while a pyramid of biomass shows how much biomass (the amount of living or organic matter present in an organism) is present in the organisms. There is also a pyramid of numbers representing the number of individual organisms at each trophic level. Pyramids of energy are normally upright, but other pyramids can be inverted (pyramid of biomass for marine region) or take other shapes (spindle shaped pyramid).

Ecological pyramids begin with producers on the bottom (such as plants) and proceed through the various trophic levels (such as herbivores that eat plants, then carnivores that eat flesh, then omnivores that eat both plants and flesh, and so on).  The highest level is the top of the food chain .

Biomass can be measured by a bomb calorimeter .

Pyramid of Energy [ edit ] A pyramid of energy or pyramid of productivity shows the production or turnover (the rate at which energy or mass is transferred from one trophic level to the next) of biomass at each trophic level. Instead of showing a single snapshot in time, productivity pyramids show the flow of energy through the food chain . Typical units are grams per square meter per year or calories per square meter per year. As with the others, this graph shows producers at the bottom and higher trophic levels on top.

When an ecosystem is healthy, this graph produces a standard ecological pyramid . This is because, in order for the ecosystem to sustain itself, there must be more energy at lower trophic levels than there is at higher trophic levels. This allows organisms on the lower levels to not only maintain a stable population, but also to transfer energy up the pyramid. The exception to this generalization is when portions of a food web are supported by inputs of resources from outside the local community . In small, forested streams, for example, the volume of higher levels is greater than could be supported by the local primary production .

Energy usually enters ecosystems from the Sun. The primary producers at the base of the pyramid use solar radiation to power photosynthesis which produces food. However most wavelengths in solar radiation cannot be used for photosynthesis , so they are reflected back into space or absorbed elsewhere and converted to heat. Only 1 to 2 percent of the energy from the sun is absorbed by photosynthetic processes and converted into food.

[ 1 ] When energy is transferred to higher trophic levels, on average only about 10% is used at each level to build biomass, becoming stored energy. The rest goes to metabolic processes such as growth, respiration, and reproduction.

[ 2 ] Advantages of the pyramid of energy as a representation: It takes account of the rate of production over a period of time.

Two species of comparable biomass may have very different life spans . Thus, a direct comparison of their total biomasses is misleading, but their productivity is directly comparable.

The relative energy chain within an ecosystem can be compared using pyramids of energy; also different ecosystems can be compared.

There are no inverted pyramids.

The input of solar energy can be added.

Disadvantages of the pyramid of energy as a representation: The rate of biomass production of an organism is required, which involves measuring growth and reproduction through time.

There is still the difficulty of assigning the organisms to a specific trophic level. As well as the organisms in the food chains there is the problem of assigning the decomposers and detritivores to a particular level.

Pyramid of biomass [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A pyramid of biomass shows the total biomass of the organisms involved at each trophic level of an ecosystem. These pyramids are not necessarily upright. There can be lower amounts of biomass at the bottom of the pyramid if the rate of primary production per unit biomass is high.

A pyramid of biomass shows the relationship between biomass and trophic level by quantifying the biomass present at each trophic level of an ecological community at a particular time. It is a graphical representation of biomass (total amount of living or organic matter in an ecosystem) present in unit area in different trophic levels. Typical units are grams per square meter, or calories per square meter.
The pyramid of biomass may be "inverted". For example, in a pond ecosystem, the standing crop of phytoplankton , the major producers , at any given point will be lower than the mass of the heterotrophs , such as fish and insects. This is explained as the phytoplankton reproduce very quickly, but have much shorter individual lives.

Pyramid of Numbers [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A pyramid of numbers shows the number of individual organisms involved at each trophic level in an ecosystem. The pyramids are not necessarily upright. In some ecosystems, there can be more primary consumers than producers.

A pyramid of numbers graphically shows the population, or abundance, in terms of the number of individual organisms involved at each level in a food chain. This shows the number of organisms in each trophic level without considering their individual sizes or biomass. The pyramid is not necessarily upright. For example, it will be inverted if beetles are feeding from the output of forest trees or parasites are feeding on large host animals.

History [ edit ] The concept of a pyramid of numbers ("Eltonian pyramid") was developed by Charles Elton (1927).

[ 3 ] Later, it would also be expressed in terms of biomass by Bodenheimer (1938).

[ 4 ] The idea of the pyramid of productivity or energy relies on the works of G. Evelyn Hutchinson and Raymond Lindeman (1942).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Trophic cascade References [ edit ] ^ Gates DM, Thompson JN and Thompson MB (2018) Efficiency of solar energy utilization Encyclopædia Britannica . Accessed: 26 December 2019.

^ Pauly, D. and Christensen, V (1995) "Primary production required to sustain global fisheries".

Nature 374.6519: 255-257.

^ Elton, C. 1927.

Animal Ecology . New York, Macmillan Co.

link .

^ Bodenheimer, F. S. 1938.

Problems of Animal Ecology . Oxford University Press.

link .

^ Lindeman, R. L. (1942). The trophic-dynamic aspect of ecology.

Ecology 23: 399–418.

link Archived 2017-03-29 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Trebilco, Rowan; Baum, Julia K.

; Salomon, Anne K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2013).

"Ecosystem ecology: size-based constraints on the pyramids of life" .

Trends in Ecology & Evolution .

28 (7): 423– 431.

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2013.03.008 .

ISSN 0169-5347 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Odum, E.P. 1971.  Fundamentals of Ecology.  Third Edition.

W.B. Saunders Company , Philadelphia, External links [ edit ] Food Chains v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐tpbdv
Cached time: 20250812021042
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.298 seconds
Real time usage: 0.419 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 827/1000000
Revision size: 8989/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 55889/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 864/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 27477/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.184/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4349706/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  315.702      1 -total
 29.94%   94.527      1 Template:Reflist
 27.96%   88.285      1 Template:Modelling_ecosystems
 27.31%   86.217      2 Template:Navbox
 23.40%   73.868      1 Template:Cite_journal
 22.38%   70.647      1 Template:Short_description
 18.23%   57.562      2 Template:Unreferenced_section
 16.25%   51.297      2 Template:Unreferenced
 15.37%   48.528      2 Template:Ambox
 11.97%   37.791      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3574959:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021042 and revision id 1293638094. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecological_pyramid&oldid=1293638094 " Categories : Ecology Food chains Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2022 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 21:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecological pyramid 36 languages Add topic

