Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Medieval period Toggle Medieval period subsection 1.1 Peter Abelard 2 16th century 3 17th century Toggle 17th century subsection 3.1 René Descartes 3.2 Nicolas Malebranche 4 18th century 5 19th century Toggle 19th century subsection 5.1 Auguste Comte 5.2 Ferdinand de Saussure 5.3 Henri Bergson 6 20th century Toggle 20th century subsection 6.1 Philosophy of science 6.2 Philosophical anthropology 6.3 Phenomenology 6.4 Existentialism and Absurdism 6.5 Moral and political philosophy 6.6 Structuralism 6.7 Poststructuralism and postmodernism 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents French philosophy 15 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն پښتو Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Historical epistemology ) Philosophy in the French language Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e French philosophy , here taken to mean philosophy in the French language , has been extremely diverse and has influenced Western philosophy as a whole for centuries, from the medieval scholasticism of Peter Abelard , through the founding of modern philosophy by René Descartes , to 20th century philosophy of science , existentialism , phenomenology , structuralism , and postmodernism .

Medieval period [ edit ] Peter Abelard [ edit ] Main article: Peter Abelard Abelard with Héloïse Peter Abelard (1079–1142) was a scholastic philosopher , theologian and logician . The story of his affair with and love for Héloïse has become legendary. The Chambers Biographical Dictionary describes him as "the keenest thinker and boldest theologian of the 12th Century".

[ 1 ] The general importance of Abelard lies in his having fixed more decisively than anyone before him the scholastic manner of philosophizing, with the object of giving a formally rational expression to received ecclesiastical doctrine. However his own particular interpretations may have been condemned, they were conceived in essentially the same spirit as the general scheme of thought afterwards elaborated in the 13th century with approval from the heads of the Church.

He helped to establish the ascendancy of the philosophical authority of Aristotle which became firmly established in the half-century after his death. It was at this time that the completed Organon , and gradually all the other works of the Greek thinker, first came to be available in the schools. Before his time Plato 's authority was the basis for the prevailing Realism. As regards his so-called Conceptualism and his attitude to the question of Universals, see Scholasticism .

Outside of his dialectic, it was in ethics that Abelard showed greatest activity of philosophical thought. He laid particular stress upon the subjective intention as determining, if not the moral character, at least the moral value, of human action. His thought in this direction, anticipating something of modern speculation, is the more remarkable because his scholastic successors accomplished least in the field of morals, hardly venturing to bring the principles and rules of conduct under pure philosophical discussion, even after the great ethical inquiries of Aristotle became fully known to them.

Pope Innocent III accepted Abelard's Doctrine of Limbo, which amended Augustine of Hippo 's Doctrine of Original Sin. The Vatican accepted the view that unbaptized babies did not, as at first believed, go straight to Hell but to a special area of limbo , "limbus infantium". They would therefore feel no pain but no supernatural happiness either (only natural) because, it was held, they would not be able to see the deity that created them.

[ 2 ] 16th century [ edit ] Montaigne became the father of the anti-conformist French spirit.

Michel Eyquem de Montaigne (1533–1592) may have been Catholic, but his anti- dogmatic stances made him the father of the anti-conformist French spirit. His work consists of little trials for his thoughts, filled with autobiographical and casual anecdotes. His intention with his essays was to leave something by which family could remember him. He was the first person to use the word essays, and his writings came to be highly influential upon Shakespeare , Rousseau and Nietzsche . His Pyrrhonian philosophical skepticism , summed up in his personal motto of Que sais-je?

("what do I know?"), served as one of the catalysts for René Descartes' oeuvre.

17th century [ edit ] René Descartes is considered as the founder of modern philosophy.

Modern philosophy began in France with the philosophy of René Descartes (1596–1650). His Meditations on First Philosophy changed the primary object of philosophical thought from ontology to epistemology and overcame the Aristotelian dogmatism inherited in philosophy from Scholasticism , the dominant form of thought in preceding centuries, while simultaneously raising some of the most fundamental problems for future generations of philosophers.

René Descartes [ edit ] Main article: René Descartes René Descartes was concerned with the uncertainty in the sciences and the radical scepticism which spread across Europe when publications of Sextus Empiricus became available. Descartes desired to find indubitable ground on which all the sciences could be placed and progressively built. Thus he rejected anything which appeared uncertain and decided to only accept apodeictic knowledge as truth.

After invoking the possibility of an omnipotent deceiver to reject the external world, the information given to him from his senses, mathematics and logic, Descartes discovered at least one thing could be known apodictically. If he himself was doubting, then he had to exist. Thus Cogito Ergo Sum —I think, therefore I am—became the first principle of Cartesianism .

Descartes then claimed that because he discovered the Cogito through perceiving it clearly and distinctly, anything he can perceive clearly and distinctly must be true. Then he argues that he can conceive of an infinite being, but finite beings cannot produce infinite ideas and hence an infinite being must have put the idea into his mind. He uses this argument, commonly known as an ontological argument , to invoke the existence of an omni-benevolent God as the indubitable foundation that makes all sciences possible. Many people admired Descartes intentions, but were unsatisfied with this solution. Some accused him of circularity , proclaiming his ontological argument uses his definition of truth as a premise, while his proof of his definition of truth uses his ontological argument as a premise. Hence the problems of solipsism , truth and the existence of the external world came to dominate 17th century western thought.

Another famous problem arises from Descartes’ substance dualism . For Descartes, a substance is that which can be conceived independent of everything else and exist independent of anything else. Since Descartes conceived of the mind independent of everything else when doubting everything uncertain, and because if he wanted to God could produce a world in which only the mind existed, he came to define the mind as a different substance from that of body. For Descartes, the mind is defined as an unextended substance and the body as an extended substance. This raised the fundamental question of how it is possible that mind and body interact with one another.

[ 3 ] Nicolas Malebranche [ edit ] Main article: Nicolas Malebranche One solution to the mind–body problem came from Cartesian Nicolas Malebranche (1638–1715). Malebranche maintained that created substances of a different kind cannot interact with one another. In fact, he believed substances of the same kind could not interact either because no necessary causation could be perceived. He proposes then that it is God, an uncreated substance, who brings it about that each time one perceives a 'cause', one also perceives an 'effect'. Hence the doctrine is named occasionalism .

Malebranche was well-known and celebrated in his own time, but has since become somewhat of an obscure figure in the history of western philosophy. His philosophy had a profound effect on it, however, through its influence upon Spinoza and Hume , whose problem of causation was influenced by Malebranche’s occasionalism. It’s possible that Malebranche also influenced George Berkeley , although he rejects any association with Malebranche beyond superficial similarities.

18th century [ edit ] Voltaire came to embody the Enlightenment.

French philosophy in the 18th century was deeply political. It was heavily imbued with Enlightenment principles and many of its philosophers became critics of church and state and promoters of rationality and progress. These philosophers would come to have a deep influence on the politics and ideologies of France and America.

Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu (1689–1755) was a social commentator and political philosopher. His theories deeply influenced the American Founders . His belief that the state powers be separated into legislative , executive , and judicial branches formed the basis for separation of powers under the United States Constitution . In The Spirit of the Laws , Montesquieu outlined the view that man and societies are influenced by climate. He believed that hotter climates create hot-tempered people and colder climates aloof people, whereas the mild climate of France is ideal for political systems. This theory may possibly have been influenced by similar sentiment expressed in Germania , an ethnographic writing by Tacitus , a writer frequently studied by Montesquieu.

Voltaire (1694–1778) came to embody the Enlightenment with his criticisms of Church dogma and French institutions, his defence of civil liberties and his support of social reform. The civil liberties for which he fought were those of the right to a free trial and freedom of religion. He is best remembered for his aphorisms and his satire of Leibniz known as Candide , which tells the tale of a young believer in Leibnizian optimism who becomes disillusioned after a series of hardships.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) distinguished himself from the progressive scientism of the Enlightenment with his proclamation in Discourse on the Arts and Sciences that art and science are corruptors of human morality. Furthermore, he caused controversy with his theory that man is good by nature but corrupted by society, which is a direct contradiction of the Christian doctrine of original sin. Some of his theories continue to be controversial, such as his idea called the general will , which has been both accused of fascism and praised for its socialist ideals. Rousseau’s thought highly influenced the French Revolution , his critique of private property has been seen as a forebear to Marxist ideology, and his picture was the only one to grace the home of Immanuel Kant . He was so highly praised by the French revolutionists, that in 1794 his remains were moved to the Panthéon in Paris.

Denis Diderot (1713–1784) was a key collaborator in the creation of the Encyclopédia . A systematic collection of all the information of the arts and sciences, the Encyclopédia caused great controversy. Diderot was harassed repeatedly by the police, and was even arrested. The ecclesiastical party disliked the Encyclopédia , which was a threat to the aristocracy because it asserted that the state should take care of the people and not itself, religious freedom, freedom of thought and the value of science and industry. In the end, the bookseller began removing all articles he deemed controversial in fear of punishment. The Encyclopédia that Diderot had worked on for twenty years was ruined beyond repair.

19th century [ edit ] Auguste Comte [ edit ] Auguste Comte was the founder of sociology and positivism.

Auguste Comte (1798–1857) was a philosopher born in Montpellier . He was the founder of the discipline of sociology and the doctrine of positivism , and may be regarded as the first philosopher of science in the modern sense of the term.

[ 4 ] Strongly influenced by the Utopian socialist , Henri de Saint-Simon , Comte developed the positive philosophy in an attempt to remedy the social malaise of the French Revolution , calling for a new social paradigm based on the sciences. Comte offered an account of social evolution , proposing that society undergoes three phases in its quest for the truth according to a general ' law of three stages '. Comte's stages were (1) the theological , (2) the metaphysical , and (3) the positive .

[ 5 ] Comte attempted to introduce a cohesive " religion of humanity " which, though largely unsuccessful, was influential in the development of various Secular Humanist organizations in the 19th century. He also created and defined the term " altruism ".

[ 6 ] Comte was of considerable influence in 19th century thought, impacting the work of thinkers such as Karl Marx and John Stuart Mill .

[ 7 ] Ferdinand de Saussure [ edit ] Ferdinand de Saussure founded linguistics, semiotics and structuralism.

Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913) was a Swiss linguist who taught for many years in Paris. He was concerned with distinguishing linguistics from philology by moving from the study of the history of individual words and comparisons of languages to the study of the essential underlying structures of language. His small output of work, most of which was published posthumously, became the foundations of linguistics , semiotics and structuralism , the school of philosophy concerned with the underlying structures which form, limit and affect society, language and the human mind.

Saussure divided language into two parts: the langue , which is the system of signs and rules owned by a community, and parole , the individual acts of speech within the given community. This was likened by Saussure to chess and a game of chess, for before anyone can play, they have to know the rules and structure of the game.

For Saussure, the essential unit of any language is the word, or sign. Like language, he divides the word into two inseparable parts: the signifier, which is the sound image, and the signified, which is the concept associated with the signifier. Saussure stressed the arbitrariness of this association, maintaining that any signifier can refer to any signified. How a sign obtains its meaning is by what it is not within the langue, not what it is. For example, the word ‘dog’ means dog simply because it does not mean cat, bird or cornflakes.

It can already be seen clearly that language is highly dualistic for Saussure. Indeed, he maintained that man thought essentially in dichotomies. For Saussure, the way language can be studied is dualistic too. It can be studied synchronically, i.e. as a complete system within a frozen moment of time, or it can be studied diachronically, which is the examination of its historical development. It can be said that structuralists focussed on the synchronic aspects of culture, while poststructuralists , as a reaction toward the highly dualistic and deterministic characteristics, focussed on the diachronic aspects of culture in an attempt to invoke a grey area.

[ 8 ] Henri Bergson [ edit ] Henri Bergson would play a major part in shaping 20th century thought.

While Ferdinand de Saussure was a relatively obscure thinker in his time, it may be said that Henri Bergson (1859–1941) was somewhat of a celebrity. His philosophy appealed both to academics and the general public from its first inception in 1889 to Bergson’s death in the early 20th century. Although a major influence on William James , Alfred North Whitehead , Jean-Paul Sartre , Emmanuel Lévinas , Maurice Merleau-Ponty and the novelist Marcel Proust , interest in his work greatly decreased after WW2. However, in the late 20th century, through the works of self-proclaimed Bergsonian Gilles Deleuze came a revitalization of interest in Henri Bergson’s oeuvre.

[ 9 ] All of Henri Bergson’s works were concerned with his theory of real time as it is experienced by consciousness . He came by the idea while trying to improve on the evolutionary philosophy of Herbert Spencer , and has likened it to the rolling and unrolling of thread to represent man’s sense of mortality and the continual gain of new memory; a spectrum of a thousand shades with a current of feeling running through them, collecting and retaining them, to represent how all the moments are heterogeneous; and a piece of elastic contracted to a point and then drawn out indefinitely, producing a line which will progressively grow longer and longer, to represent pure, indivisible mobility. However, these images are insufficient and can only show the idea indirectly. The first is too homogeneous, the second is juxtaposed and complete whereas time is in a constant state of becoming, and the third forgets the heterogeneous nature of the idea. In fact, Bergson maintains that the case is the same for any other image of the idea one can produce.

[ 10 ] Bergson calls this idea Duration and defines it as being qualitative, not quantitative, unextended, not extended, a multiplicity yet a unity, mobile and continuously interpenetrating itself. However, it should be warned that Bergson believes Duration cannot be represented by concepts either. Bergson calls the creation of concepts analysis and believes it can never represent the absolute. He likens it to constructing a model of a city out of a collection of photographs taken from every angle and a poem being translated and having commentary piled upon commentary: the model of the city can never replicate the feeling of being in the city itself and the translation and commentaries can never give the simple dimensional value of walking in the city itself. Indeed, symbols always distort the part of an object they represent through generalization to include it and every other objects’ part they represent.

[ 10 ] The Duration can only be grasped through intuition , the sympathy by which one is transported into an object to grasp what is unique and ineffable within it. Intuition is a complete philosophical method that involves placing oneself within the Duration, and expanding it into a continuous heterogeneity, differentiating the extremities within it to create a dualism, before showing them to in fact be one.

[ 10 ] An example of this is Duration itself, which is neither a multiplicity or a unity. But depending on which point of view one recreates it from, one will either reconstruct it as a unity or a multiplicity. Hence substance pluralism and substance monism are in fact two representations of the same phenomenon.

Henri Bergson was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1927 "in recognition of his rich and vitalizing ideas and the brilliant skill with which they have been presented".

[ 11 ] 20th century [ edit ] Main article: Twentieth-century French philosophy French philosophy in the 20th century saw the rise of many schools of thought. The philosophy of science with Poincaré , Bachelard , Cavaillès and Vuillemin . The phenomenology, presented in a Cartesian format and influenced by German thought, particularly the phenomenology of Husserl and Heidegger . Phenomenology was consistently noticeable throughout the 20th century, whereas existentialism spread throughout the west and gained fame, only to die out somewhat with the advent of structuralism , which came to be seen as merely a necessary means of access to post-structuralism , while postmodern thought came to dominate the late 20th century.

Philosophy of science [ edit ] Philosophy of science is a branch of philosophy concerned with the foundations, methods, [ 12 ] and implications of science . The central questions of this study concern what qualifies as science , the reliability of scientific theories, and the ultimate purpose of science. In France, philosophy of science, also known as French historical epistemology [ 13 ] [ 14 ] or French epistemology , [ 15 ] was a prominent school of thought with Henri Poincaré , Émile Meyerson , Pierre Duhem , Léon Brunschvicg , Gaston Bachelard , Alexandre Koyré , Jean Cavaillès , Georges Canguilhem , Jules Vuillemin , Michel Serres , and Jean-Michel Berthelot .

Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) had philosophical views opposite to those of Bertrand Russell and Gottlob Frege , who believed that mathematics was a branch of logic . Poincaré strongly disagreed, claiming that intuition was the life of mathematics; he gives an interesting point of view in his book Science and Hypothesis .

[ 16 ] Pierre Duhem (1861–1916) introduced the Duhem thesis , an early form of confirmation holism .

Gaston Bachelard (1884–1962) introduced the concepts of epistemological obstacle and epistemological break ( obstacle épistémologique and rupture épistémologique ).

Jean Cavaillès (1903–1944) was specialized in philosophy of science concerned with the axiomatic method, formalism, set theory and mathematical logic .

Jules Vuillemin (1920–2001) introduced the concept of the philosophy of algebra and was specialized in philosophy of knowledge .

Philosophical anthropology [ edit ] Marc Augé (1935–2023) was a French anthropologist who explored the philosophical potential of "non-places" . For Augé a place is relational, historical, and concerned with identity and a space without those qualities in a non-place.

[ 17 ] Examples of non-places would be airports, gas stations, and shopping malls.

[ 18 ] Phenomenology [ edit ] Phenomenology can be defined as a way of philosophizing which involves descriptive explanations of phenomena as it is given to consciousness and how it is given to consciousness, which attempts to avoid imposed explanations. In France, phenomenology was seen as a radical Cartesianism which rejected substance dualism to better understand transcendental consciousness. It played a major role in existentialism and many postmodern philosophers' thought, such as Gilles Deleuze and Jacques Derrida , who actually began his career with a deep, critical study of Edmund Husserl . Phenomenology is still an important area of research in France today.

[ 19 ] Emmanuel Lévinas (1906–1995) was one of the first to introduce phenomenology to France, through his translation of Edmund Husserl’s Cartesian Meditations . Lévinas considered ethics primary in philosophy and once proclaimed that it precedes metaphysics and should be considered the first philosophy. He developed a moral philosophy based around notions of the other and the face which introduced ethics into phenomenology, which had been missing since the demise of Max Scheler .

[ 19 ] Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–1961) was concerned with the foundations of perception. His theory of the subject-body was produced as an alternative to René Descartes' Cogito and substance dualism . In contrast to the clear distinction between the mind and the external world, where the latter is but an extension of the former, the subject-body is an existential account of the pre-reflective subject, the subject's perception and the world as intricately intertwined.

Paul Ricœur (1913–2005) was one of the first to introduce phenomenology to France. He was best known for combining phenomenological description with hermeneutics . He was awarded the Kyoto prize in arts and philosophy for having "revolutionized the methods of hermeneutic phenomenology, expanding the study of textual interpretation to include the broad yet concrete domains of mythology, biblical exegesis, psychoanalysis, theory of metaphor, and narrative theory.

Existentialism and Absurdism [ edit ] Existentialism was a prominent school of thought in the first half of the 20th century. Traditionally, existentialism is concerned with the human condition, exploring such topics as purpose, freedom and the experience of the other. It can trace its roots back to philosophers such as Søren Kierkegaard , Friedrich Nietzsche and Martin Heidegger , as well as Lebensphilosophie , but bloomed with the thought of French phenomenologist Jean-Paul Sartre .

Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) defined his existentialism as drawing all the conclusions from a consistent line of atheism. His major thesis is that existence precedes essence. With an immaterial object, such as a knife, an artisan devises an essence, such as that of slicing bread, and then produces an object whose purpose it is to fulfil its essence. However, without God, there is no artisan who developed the essence of man in a teleological sense. So first man is born free, thrown into the world where sole responsibility for his actions rests on his shoulders, then through his actions he defines the essence of not only himself, but of what he believes man ought to be. The denial of this responsibility through excuses is what Sartre termed bad faith . Jean-Paul Sartre was a spokesman for a generation, but his influence waned with the advent of structuralism.

[ 20 ] Albert Camus (1913–1960) rejected being labelled an existentialist, preferring to be called an absurdist .

[ 21 ] In the opening pages of The Myth of Sisyphus , he states what he considers to be the fundamental question of philosophy: is suicide the correct response to an absurd world? Likening a Godless life to the story of Sisyphus , where he is doomed forever to push a rock up a hill only for it to roll down again, Camus’ answer is "No. It requires revolt. [...] The struggle itself is enough to fill a man’s heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy." [ 22 ] Simone de Beauvoir (1908–1986) was an existential feminist . Beauvoir believed that through surrounding women in a false aura of mystery, man had turned her into "the other". Furthermore, she proclaimed women were stereotyped by this aura and that it was used by man as an excuse for not understanding them and dominating them. "The other" is always the underclass. But Beauvoir maintains that Sartre’s thesis (that is, existence precedes essence) applies to women as much as it does to men and that through their choices and actions, women can transcend this aura and reject being the underclass.

[ citation needed ] Moral and political philosophy [ edit ] Simone Weil (1909–1943) was a French philosopher , mystic and political activist who greatly influenced 20th century philosophy including influencing Pope Paul VI . Her notable ideas include decreation (renouncing the gift of free will as a form of acceptance of everything that is independent of one's particular desires; making "something created pass into the uncreated"), uprootedness ( déracinement ), obligations as the basis of rights, attention as compassion, patriotism of compassion, abolition of political parties, the unjust character of affliction ( malheur ), and that compassion must act in the area of metaxy.

Structuralism [ edit ] As previously mentioned, French Structuralism is primarily concerned with the underlying structures which form, limit and affect society, language and the human mind. It finds its roots in the thought of Ferdinand de Saussure , who was concerned with linguistics . But soon structuralism began to be applied to anthropology , social sciences and psychology . Structuralism played a major role in intellectual thought after World War Two, where it rejected existential concepts of freedom for the idea of man as determined by structures in the thought of such thinkers as Claude Lévi-Strauss and Jacques Lacan . However, by the end of the century it became perceived as important not for itself, but for the schools of thought it produced, such as poststructuralism and deconstruction .

Claude Lévi-Strauss (1908–2009) applied Saussure’s structuralism to anthropology, specifically in the topic of intermarriage between tribes.

[ 23 ] Roland Barthes (1915–1980) was a literary critic and semiologist who applied Saussure’s thought to literary theory. In Mythologies , Barthes explored articles, advertisements, movies, etc. to demonstrate the deep-seated bourgeois propaganda found within. He described these myths as second-order signs. A certain form of green bottles signify red wine. The bourgeois then assign a second signifier to this signifier, that of relaxing, healthy, strong wine, be it to sell products or uphold the status quo.

Jacques Lacan (1901–1981) was a psychoanalyst who sought to explain the mind in terms of structures both in order to correct perceived errors in Freud ’s thought as well as errors in the subsequent interpretation of Freud through the theories of Saussure, Strauss and Barthes. Lacan was also influenced by German philosophers G. W. F. Hegel and Martin Heidegger through Alexandre Kojève 's lectures on Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit .

Louis Althusser (1918–1990) and his colleagues, prominently including Étienne Balibar , reworked Marxism using insights from structuralism, against the so-called "humanist" trend in Sartrean and Western Marxisms . Althusser offered an influential new reading of Marx's work, describing an "epistemological break" between the young, Hegelian Marx and the late Marx of Das Kapital .  With his focus on the economic level and theory, Althusser came into conflict with social historians, such as E. P. Thompson .

Poststructuralism and postmodernism [ edit ] Jean-François Lyotard defined postmodernism as incredulity toward metanarratives . Photograph by Bracha L. Ettinger , 1995.

The second half of the 20th century saw the rise of so-called postmodern thought . This rise was especially noticeable in France. However, the term is fairly hard to define. In fact, some people maintain that it is nothing but a slur applied to a group of disparate philosophers wrongly grouped together. However, it can also be seen as a critique of traditional western thought, particularly dichotomies and the belief in progress, influenced heavily by structuralism , phenomenology and existentialism .

Jean-François Lyotard (1924–1998) defined postmodernism as scepticism toward metanarratives . A metanarrative is a kind of grand arching story that encompasses—and claims to predict—everything. An example is Marxism , which explains the communist as the inevitable historical synthesis of the proletariat and capitalist of modern capitalist class division . Lyotard considered the metanarrative an essential feature of modernity. Hence the postmodern condition is the replacement of metanarratives with a multiplicity of micro-narratives, or to call them the appellation Lyotard gave them, language games . Lyotard maintained that these language games lack any all-embracing structure but were brought about by technological developments in such fields as communication and mass media making metanarratives indefensible.

[ 24 ] Michel Foucault (1926–1984) maintained a similar scepticism about absolutes, such as right and wrong, sane and insane, and human nature. His method was not to deny such notions, but to historicize them, examining what in the supposedly necessary may be contingent, and demonstrating the relationships between knowledge and politics, power and knowledge. His main fields of investigation were psychiatry, medicine and disciplinary institutions. Foucault was anti-Hegelian and anti-teleological in his historical excavations. Through his examinations of psychiatry in Madness and Civilization , he showed that the development of psychiatry was not an obvious improvement on previous treatments of the insane, and that furthermore, the apparent scientific neutrality of psychiatric treatments hides the fact that they are a form of controlling defiance of bourgeois society.

[ 25 ] Jacques Derrida (1930–2004) developed deconstruction as a response to structuralism . Deconstruction takes a text, examines binary oppositions within it from several different interpreting standpoints, and then attempts to show them to be dependent upon one another, unstable, ambiguous and historically and culturally defined. Through showing the fluidity of the dichotomies, deconstruction shows the fluidity of the text. Derrida maintained that no meaning is stable, not even the dichotomies classical philosophers took for granted. Through an internal logic, the text deconstructs itself and hence allows highly original interpretations.

Jean Baudrillard (1929–2007) was concerned with the concealment of the fact that there are no truths in a given field. He termed this concealment simulacra . An example he gives is the Borges story of an Empire that creates a map which was so accurate that it laid over and covered the entire city it mapped. The map grew when the Empire grew, and decayed when the empire decayed. When the empire was destroyed, the only object left was the map. For Baudrillard, people live in the map and hence reality crumbles because of misuse.

[ 26 ] Eventually, the difference between reality and illusion becomes indistinguishable for the consciousness. Baudrillard called this hyperreality . An example of this is reality television, which is dependent on the watcher embracing it to create the illusion that it mirrors reality.

Gilles Deleuze (1925–1995) developed a philosophy of difference which valued the simulacrum higher than the idea and its copy, which is an inversion of Plato’s method, which held the idea and its copy in high esteem and neglected the simulacrum . He saw difference as prior to identity and reason as not all-encompassing, but a little haven built in the duration of difference-in-itself. He likened it to Christianity, where if you accept original sin and immaculate conception, then it all makes sense. Deleuze also developed a constructivist view of philosophy as the job of developing concepts, just like it is the poet’s job to produce poems and the painter’s job to paint paintings. For these reasons, Deleuze developed an idiosyncratic way of reading philosophers which he once referred to as buggery. He would use them as stepping stones for creating new concepts which appear to belong to the philosopher he’s reading, but are utterly different. An example is that of Spinoza , whom Deleuze read as an empiricist.

[ 27 ] Hélène Cixous (born 1937) developed a feminist interpretation of post-structuralism most influenced by Derrida. She argued that patriarchal cultures build male domination into their language and literary canon, and that a feminist revolution must account for this. She urged female writers to adopt deconstructionist methods and forward their own vision of life as a woman.

See also [ edit ] List of French philosophers Non-philosophy Speculative realism References [ edit ] ^ Chambers Biographical Dictionary , 2011, ISBN 0-550-18022-2 , page 3 ^ International Theological Commission, the Vatican.

"The Hope of Salvation for Infants Who Die Without Being Baptised" . Archived from the original on 2008-12-22 . Retrieved 2008-12-07 .

^ This section of the article references René Descartes’ Discourse on Method and Meditations on First Philosophy .

^ Michel Bourdeau – Auguste Comte ^ Anthony Giddens , "Positivism and Sociology" .

^ Oxford English Dictionary: altruism. 2nd ed. 1989.

^ Lecture 25: The Age of Ideologies (3): The World of Auguste Comte The History Guide (2000) ^ This section of the article references the Roy Harris translation of the book.

^ Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy .

^ a b c Henri Bergson (1946), The Creative Mind: An Introduction to Metaphysics , pages 159 to 200.

^ "Nobel Prize in Literature 1927" . Nobel Foundation . Retrieved 2008-10-17 .

^ Gargani Julien (2011), Voyage aux marges du savoir : ethno-sociologie de la connaissance , L’Harmattan, p. 168 ^ José Lopez, Society and Its Metaphors: Language, Social Theory and Social Structure , Bloomsbury Academic, 2003, p. 117.

^ E. Reck (ed.), The Historical Turn in Analytic Philosophy , Springer, 2016: ch. 2.1.

^ Conversations on Science, Culture, and Time: Michel Serres Interviewed by Bruno Latour , University of Michigan Press, 1995, p. 8.

^ Gargani Julien (2012), Poincaré, le hasard et l'étude des systèmes complexes , L’Harmattan, p. 124 ^ Augé, Marc; Augé, Marc; Augé, Marc (2006).

Non-places: introduction to an anthropology of supermodernity (Reprint ed.). London: Verso. p. 63.

ISBN 978-1-85984-051-1 .

^ Rozada, Isabel Argüelles (2023-08-31).

"The philosopher Marc Augé defined our cities. Now it's in our hands to make them homey" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 2024-11-09 .

^ a b Dermot Moran, Introduction to Phenomenology .

^ Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism is a Humanism .

^ Les Nouvelles littéraires , November 15, 1945.

^ Albert Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus .

^ Phillips, John W.

"Structural Linguistics and Anthropology" .

National University of Singapore . Archived from the original on 2019-08-10 . Retrieved 2023-01-11 .

^ Jean-François Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition .

^ Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy .

^ Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation .

^ Gilles Deleuze (1925–1995) – The Internet Encyclopaedia of Philosophy .

External links [ edit ] The Journal of French and Francophone Philosophy – the online home of the Bulletin de la Société Américaine de Philosophie de Langue Française (archived 23 July 2011) v t e France topics History Overviews History Timeline Political history Military history Language Economic Foreign relations Journalism Liberalism and radicalism Regions History of Brittany History of Normandy Ancient Prehistory Greek colonies Celtic Gaul Roman Gaul Middle Ages Visigothic Kingdom Francia West Francia Middle Ages Kingdom of France Fundamental laws Early Modern Early modern era House of Bourbon Absolute monarchy Ancien Régime Wars of Religion Thirty Years' War Peace of Westphalia Second Hundred Years' War Louis XIV War of the Spanish Succession Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 Seven Years' War Revolution French Revolution Napoleonic era First Republic First Empire Late Modern Long nineteenth century Restoration July Monarchy Revolution of 1848 Second Republic Coup of 2 December 1851 Second Empire Government of National Defense Third Republic Belle Époque World War I Interwar Années folles World War II Vichy France Free France Liberation Provisional Government Contemporary 1900 to present Fourth Republic Algerian War Fifth Republic May 68 2005 riots Great Recession 2015 Paris attacks 2017 presidential election Coronavirus pandemic 2021 labor protests 2022 presidential election Geography Administrative divisions Cities Climate change Borders Islands Lakes Mountains National parks Rivers World Heritage Sites Politics Constitutions Elections presidential Foreign relations Politics Political scandals Human rights Intersex LGBT Judiciary Law history enforcement criminal law Military Parliament Political parties Economy Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Central bank Economic history Energy Euro Exports Franc (former currency) French subdivisions by GDP Mining Stock exchange Science and technology Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Rail Society Abortion Birth control Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Health care Homelessness Immigration Life expectancy People Poverty Religion secularism Racism Social class Welfare Culture Anthem Architecture Art Coat of arms Cinema Cuisine Cultural icons Fashion Flag Gardens Language Literature Media Music Philosophy Public holidays Sport History Symbols Theatre Outline Category Portal WikiProject v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐l9j9n
Cached time: 20250816113144
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.552 seconds
Real time usage: 0.707 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2283/1000000
Revision size: 41492/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 207848/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1250/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 73970/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.323/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21028525/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  522.790      1 -total
 24.92%  130.282      1 Template:Reflist
 18.70%   97.754      1 Template:Philosophy_sidebar
 16.59%   86.728     14 Template:Navbox
 15.71%   82.141      5 Template:Lang
 11.91%   62.269      1 Template:Short_description
  9.96%   52.075      1 Template:ISBN
  8.75%   45.758      1 Template:France_topics
  8.70%   45.474      4 Template:Cite_web
  8.12%   42.455      1 Template:Philosophy_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3741945:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816113144 and revision id 1279400493. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_philosophy&oldid=1279400493#Philosophy_of_science " Categories : French philosophy Culture of France French literature Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 This page was last edited on 8 March 2025, at 09:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents French philosophy 15 languages Add topic

