Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification 2 Substellar companion 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Substellar object 19 languages العربية Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Português Русский Suomi ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Astronomical object without the mass to sustain hydrogen fusion A substellar object , sometimes called a substar , is an astronomical object , the mass of which is smaller than the smallest mass at which hydrogen fusion can be sustained (approximately 0.08 solar masses ). This definition includes brown dwarfs and former stars similar to EF Eridani B , and can also include objects of planetary mass , regardless of their formation mechanism and whether or not they are associated with a primary star .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Assuming that a substellar object has a composition similar to the Sun 's and at least the mass of Jupiter (approximately 0.001 solar masses), its radius will be comparable to that of Jupiter (approximately 0.1 solar radii ) regardless of the mass of the substellar object (brown dwarfs are less than 75 Jupiter masses). This is because the center of such a substellar object at the top range of the mass (just below the hydrogen-burning limit ) is quite degenerate , with a density of ≈10 3 g/cm 3 , but this degeneracy lessens with decreasing mass until, at the mass of Jupiter, a substellar object has a central density less than 10 g/cm 3 . The density decrease balances the mass decrease, keeping the radius approximately constant.

[ 5 ] Substellar objects like brown dwarfs do not have enough mass to fuse hydrogen and helium, hence do not undergo the usual stellar evolution that limits the lifetime of stars.

A substellar object with a mass just below the hydrogen-fusing limit may ignite hydrogen fusion temporarily at its center. Although this will provide some energy, it will not be enough to overcome the object's ongoing gravitational contraction . Likewise, although an object with mass above approximately 0.013 solar masses will be able to fuse deuterium for a time, this source of energy will be exhausted in approximately 1–100 million years.  Apart from these sources, the radiation of an isolated substellar object comes only from the release of its gravitational potential energy , which causes it to gradually cool and shrink.  A substellar object in orbit around a star will shrink more slowly as it is kept warm by the star, evolving towards an equilibrium state where it emits as much energy as it receives from the star.

[ 6 ] Substellar objects are cool enough to have water vapor in their atmosphere.

Infrared spectroscopy can detect the distinctive color of water in gas giant size substellar objects, even if they are not in orbit around a star.

[ 7 ] Classification [ edit ] William Duncan MacMillan proposed in 1918 the classification of substellar objects into three categories based on their density and phase state: solid, transitional and dark (non-stellar) gaseous.

[ 8 ] Solid objects include Earth, smaller terrestrial planets and moons; with Uranus and Neptune (as well as later mini-Neptune and Super Earth planets) as transitional objects between solid and gaseous. Saturn, Jupiter and large gas giant planets are in a fully "gaseous" state.

Substellar companion [ edit ] Earth and space bound observatories observe Gliese 229 and its companion, which is perhaps 20–40 Jupiter masses in size [ 9 ] A substellar object may be a companion of a star, [ 9 ] such as an exoplanet or brown dwarf that is orbiting a star.

[ 10 ] Objects as low as 8–23 Jupiter masses have been called substellar companions.

[ 11 ] Objects orbiting a star are often called planets below 13 Jupiter masses and brown dwarves above that.

[ 12 ] Companions at that planet-brown dwarf borderline have been called Super-Jupiters , such as that around the star Kappa Andromedae .

[ 13 ] Nevertheless, objects as small as 8 Jupiter masses have been called brown dwarfs.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Brown dwarf List of planet types Planet Red dwarf Sub-brown dwarf References [ edit ] Quoted as Chabrier and Baraffe : Chabrier, Gilles; Baraffe, Isabelle (September 2000). "Theory of Low-Mass Stars and Substellar Objects".

Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics .

38 : 337– 377.

arXiv : astro-ph/0006383 .

Bibcode : 2000ARA&A..38..337C .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.astro.38.1.337 .

S2CID 59325115 .

^ §3, What Is a Planet?

, Steven Soter, Astronomical Journal , 132 , #6 (December 2006), pp. 2513–2519.

^ Chabrier and Baraffe, pp. 337–338 ^ Alula Australis Archived 2006-08-24 at the Wayback Machine , Jim Kaler, in Stars , a collection of web pages.  Accessed on line September 17, 2007.

^ A search for substellar members in the Praesepe and σ Orionis clusters , B. M. González-García, M. R. Zapatero Osorio, V. J. S. Béjar, G. Bihain, D. Barrado Y Navascués, J. A. Caballero, and M. Morales-Calderón, Astronomy and Astrophysics 460 , #3 (December 2006), pp. 799–810.

^ Chabrier and Baraffe, §2.1.1, 3.1, Figure 3 ^ Chabrier and Baraffe, §4.1, Figures 6–8 ^ Hille, Karl (2018-01-11).

"Hubble Finds Substellar Objects in the Orion Nebula" .

NASA . Retrieved 2018-01-30 .

^ MacMillan, W. D.

(July 1918). "On stellar evolution".

Astrophysical Journal .

48 : 35– 49.

Bibcode : 1918ApJ....48...35M .

doi : 10.1086/142412 .

^ a b STScI-1995-48 ^ Mugrauer, M., et al - Direct detection of a substellar companion to the young nearby star PZ Telescopii (2010) ^ S. Geier, et al - Discovery of a Close Substellar Companion to the Hot Subdwarf Star HD 149382 (2009) ^ Boss, A. P.; Basri, Gibor; Kumar, Shiv S.; Liebert, James; Martín, Eduardo L.; Reipurth, B.; "Nomenclature: Brown Dwarfs, Gas Giant Planets, and ?" , in Brown Dwarfs, Proceedings of IAU Symposium #211, held 20–24 May 2002 at University of Hawaii, Honolulu ^ Astronomers Directly Image Massive Star's 'Super-Jupiter'11.19.12 ^ Discovery of a Planetary-Mass Brown Dwarf with a Circumstellar Disk, Luhman, et al., 2005 External links [ edit ] Media related to Substellar objects at Wikimedia Commons Keck views star and companion v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Substellar_object&oldid=1262073508 " Categories : Substellar objects Planets Stars Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 December 2024, at 13:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Substellar object 19 languages Add topic

