Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hypothesis 2 Criticism 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Shadow biosphere 7 languages العربية বাংলা Eesti Italiano Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical biosphere of Earth A shadow biosphere is the hypothesis of a hypothetical microbial biosphere of Earth that would use radically different biochemical and molecular processes from that of currently known life. Although life on Earth is relatively well studied, if a shadow biosphere exists, it may still remain unnoticed because the exploration of micro-organisms targets primarily the biochemistry of macro-organisms.

Hypothesis [ edit ] It has been proposed that the early Earth hosted multiple origins of life, some of which produced chemical variations on life as we know it.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Some argue that these alternative life forms could have become extinct, either by being out-competed by other forms of life, or they might have become one with the present day life via mechanisms like lateral gene transfer .

[ 1 ] Others, however, argue that this other form of life might still exist to this day.

Steven A. Benner, Alonso Ricardo, and Matthew A. Carrigan, biochemists at the University of Florida , argued that if organisms based on RNA once existed, they might still be alive today, unnoticed because they do not contain ribosomes , which are usually used to detect living microorganisms. They suggest searching for them in environments that are low in sulfur , environments that are spatially constrained (for example, minerals with pores smaller than one micrometre ), or environments that cycle between extreme hot and cold.

[ 3 ] Other proposed candidates for a shadow biosphere include organisms using different suites of amino acids in their proteins or different molecular units (e.g., bases or sugars) in their nucleic acids, [ 4 ] having a chirality opposite of ours, using some of the nonstandard amino acids , or using arsenic instead of phosphorus , [ 5 ] having a different genetic code , or even another kind of chemical for its genetic material that are not nucleic acids ( DNA nor RNA ) chains or biopolymers .

[ 6 ] Carol Cleland , a philosopher of science at the University of Colorado (Boulder), argues that desert varnish , whose status as biological or nonbiological has been debated since the time of Darwin, should be investigated as a potential candidate for a shadow biosphere.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ improper synthesis?

] Existence of a shadow biosphere could mean that life has independently evolved on Earth more than once, which means that microorganisms may exist on Earth which have no evolutionary connection with any other known form of life.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] It is suggested that if an alternate form of microbial life on Earth is discovered, the odds are good that life is also common elsewhere in the universe.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Criticism [ edit ] Methods used by proponents and conclusions drawn from experiments that purport to show evidence of shadow biospheres have been criticized. For example, evidence that once seemed to support arsenic as a substitute for phosphorus in DNA could have resulted from lab or field contamination, and DNA that includes arsenic is chemically unstable.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Abiogenesis – Life arising from non-living matter Astrobiology – Science concerned with life in the universe Biological dark matter – Unclassified/poorly understood genetics DNA – Molecule that carries genetic information Extremophile – Organisms capable of living in extreme environments GFAJ-1 – Strain of bacteria Hypothetical types of biochemistry – Possible alternative biochemicals used by life forms Panspermia – Hypothesis on the interstellar spreading of primordial life Purple Earth hypothesis – Astrobiological hypothesis regarding early photosynthetic organisms RNA world hypothesis – Hypothetical stage in the early evolutionary history of life on Earth Xenobiology – Science of synthetic life forms References [ edit ] ^ a b c Cleland, C.E.

(2007) Epistemological issues in the study of microbial life: alternative biospheres . Studies in the History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 38:847–861.

^ a b "Life on Earth… but not as we know it" , Robin McKie, 14 April 2013, The Guardian ^ Benner, S. A., Ricardo, A. and Carrigan, M. A. (2004) Is there a common chemical model for life in the universe?

Archived 2010-12-14 at the Wayback Machine . Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 8, 672-689.

doi : 10.1016/j.cbpa.2004.10.003 .

^ Cleland, C. E.

and Copley, S. D. (2005) The possibility of alternative microbial life on Earth . International Journal of Astrobiology 4(4), 165-173.

^ Davies, P. C. W. , Benner, S.A., Cleland, C.E.

, Lineweaver,C.H., McKay,C.P. and Wolfe-Simon,F.

Signatures of a Shadow Biosphere (2009) Astrobiology. 9(2): 241-249.

doi : 10.1089/ast.2008.0251 .

^ a b c Callaway, Ewen (2009-02-15).

"Short Sharp Science: How to hunt for shadow life" . NewScientist. Archived from the original on 20 November 2011 . Retrieved 2010-05-15 .

^ a b Morgan, James (2009-02-16).

"Alien life 'may exist among us' " .

BBC News . Retrieved 2015-09-08 .

^ "Cosmologist Explores Notion Of 'Alien' Life On Earth" . Sciencedaily.com. 2009-02-26 . Retrieved 2010-05-15 .

^ Vastag, Brian (27 May 2011).

"Debate over arsenic-based life enters a new chapter" .

Washington Post .

Further reading [ edit ] Conover, Emily. (2015) 'Shadow biosphere' might be hiding strange life right under our noses , Science News, Science Cleland, C.E.

(2006) Astrobiology Magazine A Shadow Biosphere Cleland, C.E. (2007) Epistemological issues in the study of microbial life: alternative biospheres . Studies in the History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 38:847–861.

Cleland, C. E. and Copley, S. D. (2005) The possibility of alternative microbial life on Earth . International Journal of Astrobiology 4(4), 165–173.

Davies, P. C. W., Lineweaver, C. H., Finding a Second Sample of Life on Earth, Astrobiology, vol. 5, no. 2, 2005, doi=10.1089/ast.2005.5.154 Wolfe-Simon,F., Davies,P.C.W. and Anbar, A.D. (2009) Did nature also choose arsenic?

International Journal of Astrobiology, Cambridge University Press doi : 10.1017/S1473550408004394 Pace, N. R. (1997) A molecular view of microbial diversity and the biosphere .

Science , 274, 734–740.

Woese, C. R. (2004) The archaeal concept and the world it lives in: a retrospective. Photosynthesis Research, 80, 361–372.

External links [ edit ] A Shadow Biosphere Bacteria stir debate about 'shadow biosphere' Alternate "Life" Styles: Scientists Predict The Possibility Of A Shadow Biosphere v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shadow_biosphere&oldid=1281114450 " Categories : Astrobiology Ecology Evolution of the biosphere Hypothetical life forms Philosophy of biology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from February 2020 This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 11:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shadow biosphere 7 languages Add topic

