Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Key ideas Toggle Key ideas subsection 1.1 Sex positivity 2 Historical roots 3 Related major political issues Toggle Related major political issues subsection 3.1 Pornography 3.2 Prostitution and sex workers 3.3 BDSM 3.4 Sexual orientation 3.5 Gender identity 4 Debates Toggle Debates subsection 4.1 Statutory rape laws 5 Critiques 6 More to review and/or consider 7 See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1 Sex-positive literature 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle External links subsection 11.1 Advocacy of sex-positive feminism 11.1.1 Articles 11.1.2 Organizations Toggle the table of contents Sex-positive feminism 26 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Монгол 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of feminism that emphasizes sexual freedoms Not to be confused with Transfeminism .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sex-positive feminism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Sex-positive feminism , also known as pro-sex feminism , sex-radical feminism , or sexually liberal feminism , is a feminist movement centering on the idea that sexual freedom is an essential component of women's freedom.

[ 1 ] They oppose legal or social efforts to control sexual activities between consenting adults, whether they are initiated by the government, other feminists, opponents of feminism, or any other institution. They embrace sexual minority groups, endorsing the value of coalition -building with marginalized groups. Sex-positive feminism is connected with the sex-positive movement . Sex-positive feminism brings together anti- censorship activists, LGBT activists, feminist scholars, producers of pornography and erotica , among others. Sex-positive feminists believe that prostitution can be a positive experience if workers are treated with respect, and agree that sex work should not be criminalized.

Key ideas [ edit ] Susie Bright , a writer and activist, one of the first persons to be referred to as a sex-positive feminist Nina Hartley , a pornographic film actress who promotes sex positivity Gayle Rubin summarizes the conflict over sex within feminism. She says that one feminist stream criticizes the sexual constraints and difficulties faced by sexually active women (e.g., access to abortion), while another stream views sexual liberalization as an extension of "male privilege".

[ 2 ] Sex-positive feminists reject the vilification of male sexuality that many attribute to radical feminism , and instead embrace the entire range of human sexuality. They argue that the patriarchy limits sexual expression and are in favor of giving people of all genders more sexual opportunities, rather than restricting pornography.

[ 3 ] Sex-positive feminists generally reject sexual essentialism , defined by Rubin as "the idea that sex is a natural force that exists prior to social life and shapes institutions". Rather, they see sexual orientation and gender as social constructs that are heavily influenced by society.

[ 2 ] Some radical feminists reject the dichotomy of "sex-positive" and "sex-negative" feminism, suggesting that instead, the real divide is between liberal feminism and radical feminism .

[ 4 ] Sex-radical feminists in particular, come to a sex-positive stance from a deep distrust in the patriarchy's ability to secure women's best interest in sexually limiting laws. Other feminists identify women's sexual liberation as the real motive behind the women's movement.

Naomi Wolf writes, " Orgasm is the body's natural call to feminist politics." [ 5 ] Sharon Presley , the National Coordinator of the Association of Libertarian Feminists, [ 6 ] wrote that in the area of sexuality , government blatantly discriminates against women.

The social background in which sex-positive feminism operates must also be understood: Christian societies are often influenced by what is understood as 'traditional' sexual morality: according to the Christian doctrine, sexual activity must only take place in marriage, and must be vaginal intercourse; sexual acts outside marriage and 'unnatural sex' (i.e. oral, anal sex, termed as " sodomy ") are forbidden; yet forced sexual intercourse within marriage is not seen as immoral by a few social and religious conservatives, owing to the existence of so-called 'conjugal rights' [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] defined in the Bible at 1 Corinthians 7:3-5.

[ 10 ] Such organization of sexuality has increasingly come under legal and social attack in recent decades.

[ 11 ] [ note 1 ] In addition, in certain cultures, particularly in Mediterranean countries influenced by Roman Catholicism , traditional ideas of masculinity and female purity are still influential. This has led to what many interpret as a double standard between male and female sexuality ; men are expected to be sexually assertive as a way of affirming their masculinity , but for a woman to be considered 'good', she must remain pure.

[ 12 ] Indeed, Cesare Lombroso claimed in his book, The Female Offender , that women could be categorized into three types: the Criminal Woman , the Prostitute , and the Normal Woman . As such, highly sexed women (prostitutes) were deemed as abnormal.

[ 13 ] Feminists "ranging from Betty Friedan and Kate Millett to Karen DeCrow, Wendy Kaminer and Jamaica Kincaid" supported the right to consume pornography.

[ 14 ] Feminists who have advocated a sex-positive position include writer Kathy Acker , academic Camille Paglia , sex educator Megan Andelloux , Susie Bright , Rachel Kramer Bussel , Diana Cage , Avedon Carol , Patrick Califia , Betty Dodson , Nancy Friday , Jane Gallop , Laci Green , porn performer Nina Hartley , Josephine Ho , Amber L. Hollibaugh , Brenda Howard , Laura Kipnis , Wendy McElroy , Inga Muscio , Joan Nestle , Marcia Pally, Carol Queen , Candida Royalle , Gayle Rubin , Annie Sprinkle , Tristan Taormino , Ellen Willis , and Mireille Miller- Young.

[ 15 ] [ United States-centric ] Sex positivity [ edit ] According to sexologist and author Carol Queen , in an interview with researcher and professor Lynn Comella, "[sex positivity] is the cultural philosophy that understands sexuality as a potentially positive force in one's life, and it can be [...] contrasted with sex-negativity , which sees sex as problematic, disruptive, dangerous. Sex-positivity allows for and [...] celebrates sexual diversity , differing desires and relationships structures, and individual choices based on consent... [negative sexual experiences caused by lack of information, support, and choices] are the cultural conditions that sex-positivity allows us to point out as curtailers of healthy, enjoyable sexual experience." Queen also added, "This sense that many of us were being denied space and credentials to speak for ourselves and speak about issues within our community is what [...] led to the efflorescence of sex-positive feminism. And it is why there is a sex-positive feminism and not just sex-positivity." [ 16 ] Historical roots [ edit ] Carol Queen , a sexologist and sex-positive feminist Authors such as Gayle Rubin and Wendy McElroy see the roots of sex-positive feminism stemming from the work of sex reformers and workers for sex education and access to contraception, such as Havelock Ellis , Margaret Sanger , Mary Dennett and, later, Alfred Kinsey and Shere Hite .

[ 2 ] [ 17 ] However, the contemporary incarnation of sex-positive feminism appeared more recently, following an increasing feminist focus on pornography as a source of women's oppression in the 1970s.

The rise of second-wave feminism was concurrent with the sexual revolution and rulings that loosened legal restrictions on access to pornography. In the 1970s, radical feminists became increasingly focused on issues around sexuality in a patriarchal society. Some feminist groups began to concern themselves with prescribing what proper feminist sexuality should look like. This was especially characteristic of lesbian separatist groups, but some heterosexual women's groups, such as Redstockings , became engaged with this issue as well. On the other hand, there were also feminists, such as Betty Dodson , who saw women's sexual pleasure and masturbation as central to women's liberation. Pornography was not a major issue during this era; radical feminists were generally opposed to pornography, but the issue was not treated as especially important until the mid-1970s.

There were, however, feminist prostitutes-rights advocates, such as COYOTE , which campaigned for the decriminalization of prostitution .

The late 1970s found American culture becoming increasingly concerned about the aftermath of a decade of greater sexual freedom, including concerns about explicit violent and sexual imagery in the media, the mainstreaming of pornography, increased sexual activity among teenagers, and issues such as the dissemination of child pornography and the purported rise of " snuff films ".

[ citation needed ] (Critics maintain that this atmosphere amounted to a moral panic , which reached its peak in the mid-1980s.

[ citation needed ] ). These concerns were reflected in the feminist movement, with radical feminist groups claiming that pornography was a central underpinning of patriarchy and a direct cause of violence against women .

Robin Morgan summarized this idea in her statement, "Pornography is the theory; rape the practice." Andrea Dworkin and Robin Morgan began articulating a vehemently anti-porn stance based in radical feminism beginning in 1974, and anti-porn feminist groups, such as Women Against Pornography and similar organizations, became highly active in various US cities during the late 1970s. As anti-porn feminists broadened their criticism and activism to include not only pornography, but prostitution and sadomasochism, other feminists became concerned about the direction the movement was taking and grew more critical of anti-porn feminism.

This included feminist BDSM practitioners (notably Samois ), prostitutes-rights advocates, and many liberal and anti-authoritarian feminists for whom free speech, sexual freedom, and advocacy of women's agency were central concerns.

One of the earliest feminist arguments against this anti-pornography trend amongst feminists was Ellen Willis 's essay "Feminism, Moralism, and Pornography" first published in October 1979 in the Village Voice .

[ 18 ] In response to the formation of Women Against Pornography in 1979, Willis wrote an article (the origin of the term, "pro-sex feminism"), expressing worries about anti-pornography feminists' attempts to make feminism into a single-issue movement , arguing that feminists should not issue a blanket condemnation against all pornography and that restrictions on pornography could just as easily be applied to speech that feminists found favorable to themselves.

[ 19 ] Rubin calls for a new feminist theory of sex, saying that existing feminist thoughts on sex had frequently considered sexual liberalization as a trend that only increases male privilege. Rubin criticizes anti-pornography feminists who she claims "have condemned virtually every variant of sexual expression as anti-feminist," arguing that their view of sexuality is dangerously close to anti-feminist, conservative sexual morality. Rubin encourages feminists to consider the political aspects of sexuality without promoting sexual repression . She also argues that the blame for women's oppression should be put on targets who deserve it: "the family, religion, education, child-rearing practices, the media, the state, psychiatry, job discrimination, and unequal pay..." rather than on relatively un-influential sexual minorities.

[ 2 ] McElroy (1995) argues that for feminists in the 1970s and 1980s, turning to matters of sexual expression was a result of frustration with feminism's apparent failure to achieve success through political channels: in the United States, the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) had failed, and abortion rights came under attack during the Reagan administration.

Scholar Elaine Jeffreys observes that the 'anti-prostitute' position gained increased critical purchase in China during the establishment of the international movement for prostitutes in 1985, demanding recognition of prostitutes' rights as an emancipation and labor issue rather than of criminality, immorality or disease.

In her 1992 book, Sexual Reality: A Virtual Sex World Reader , sex-positive feminist Susie Bright dedicated a chapter to a salon gathering she co-hosted with fellow feminists Laura Miller , Amy Wallace , and Lisa Palac at Wallace's Berkeley Hills mansion, attended by 16 women writers and served by fully nude men they called "slaveboys". The hosts had advertised for "slaveboys" in the San Francisco Weekly , stating, " Genteel and Bohemian gathering of women writers requires comely slaveboys to serve at our tea party . You will serve nude and will not speak unless spoken to. [...]". The ad received about 100 responses, from which six were selected after "nude auditions". The "slaveboys" served tea and meals, provided foot massages, polished nails, brushed hair, tended the fire, and posed for photographs with the guests. Bright also addresses criticism from unattended friends who called the setup "reverse sexism ", to which she responded unapologetically, adding a note of regret for not having sex with them.

[ 20 ] By the 2000s, the positive-sex position had driven various international human rights NGOs to actively pressure the Chinese government to abandon its official policy of banning prostitution in post-reform China and recognize voluntary prostitution as legitimate work.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Related major political issues [ edit ] Pornography [ edit ] Further information: Feminist views on pornography and Opposition to pornography The issue of pornography was perhaps the first issue to unite sex-positive feminists, though current sex-positive views on the subject are wide-ranging and complex. During the 1980s, Andrea Dworkin and Catharine MacKinnon, as well as activists inspired by their writings, worked in favor of anti-pornography ordinances in a number of U.S. cities, as well as in Canada. The first such ordinance was passed by the city council in Minneapolis in 1983. MacKinnon and Dworkin took the tactic of framing pornography as a civil rights issue, arguing that showing pornography constituted sex discrimination against women. The sex-positive movement response to this argument was that legislation against pornography violates women's right to free speech. Soon after, a coalition of anti-porn feminists and right-wing groups succeeded in passing a similar ordinance in Indianapolis . This ordinance was later declared unconstitutional by a Federal court in American Booksellers v. Hudnut .

Rubin writes that anti-pornography feminists exaggerate the dangers of pornography by showing the most shocking pornographic images (such as those associated with sadomasochism ) out of context, in a way that implies that the women depicted are actually being raped, rather than emphasizing that these scenes depict fantasies and use actors who have consented to be shown in such a way.

[ 2 ] Sex-positive feminists argue that access to pornography is as important to women as to men and that there is nothing inherently degrading to women about pornography.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] However, anti-pornography feminists disagree, often arguing that the very depiction of such acts leads to the actual acts being encouraged and committed.

[ 25 ] Feminist curators such as Jasmin Hagendorfer organize feminist and queer porn film festivals (e.g.

PFFV in Vienna).

[ 26 ] Prostitution and sex workers [ edit ] Further information: Feminist views on prostitution Some sex-positive feminists believe that women and men can have positive experiences as sex workers and that where it is illegal, prostitution should be decriminalized. They argue that prostitution is not necessarily bad for women if prostitutes are treated with respect and if the professions within sex work are destigmatized.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Sex workers are adults who receive money (or other goods) in exchange for consensual sexual services. In the United States, sex work is legal. The sex workers' rights movement started in the 1970s, and one of the founding groups was COYOTE. The goal of the sex workers activist is to fight for workers by having a better work environment/ conditions, reducing negative fed back, and stopping prohibition.

[ 29 ] Carol Leigh is an American woman who is an artist, filmmaker, and sex worker rights activist. Carol Leigh was the first woman to use the term "sex worker". She wanted to educate others about the understanding of sex workers as well as the rights they should have. In an interview, she stated how she sees her own sex work and the sex work of others as having the possibility to serve a higher, spiritual function in society.

[ 30 ] BDSM [ edit ] Main article: Feminist views on BDSM Women acting as bondage riggers for other women Sadomasochism (BDSM) has been criticized by anti porn feminists for eroticizing power and violence and for reinforcing misogyny (Rubin, 1984). They argue that women who choose to engage in BDSM are making a choice that is ultimately bad for women. Sex-positive feminists argue that consensual BDSM activities are enjoyed by many women and validate these women's sexual inclinations. They argue that feminists should not attack other women's sexual desires as being "anti-feminist" or internalizing oppression and that there is no connection between consensual sexually kinky activities and sex crimes.

While some anti-porn feminists suggest connections between consensual BDSM scenes and rape and sexual assault , sex-positive feminists find this to be insulting to women. It is often mentioned that in BDSM, roles are not fixed to gender , but personal preferences. Furthermore, many argue that playing with power (such as rape scenes) through BDSM is a way of challenging and subverting that power, rather than reifying it.

While the negativities about BDSM are discussed a lot, sex-positive feminists are focusing on safety in the BDSM community. Consent is the most important rule when it comes to BDSM.

[ 31 ] Cara Dunkley and Lori Brotto discuss the importance of consent in their journal: Consent represents an ongoing interactive and dynamic process that entails several precautionary measures, including negotiations of play, open communication of desires and boundaries, mutually defining terms, the notion of responsibility and transparency, and ensuring protection from harm through competence and skill.

[ 32 ] Critics discuss that communication with sexual partners is very important.

Sexual orientation [ edit ] McElroy argues that many feminists have been afraid of being associated with homosexuality .

[ 17 ] Betty Friedan , one of the founders of second-wave feminism, warned against lesbianism and called it "the lavender menace" (a view she later renounced).

[ 33 ] Sex-positive feminists believe that accepting the validity of all sexual orientations is necessary in order to allow women full sexual freedom. Rather than distancing themselves from homosexuality and bisexuality because they fear it will hurt mainstream acceptance of feminism, sex-positive feminists believe that women's liberation cannot be achieved without also promoting acceptance of homosexuality and bisexuality.

Gender identity [ edit ] Some trans exclusionary radical feminists , such as Germaine Greer , have criticized transgender women ( male-to-female ) as men attempting to appropriate female identity while retaining male privilege , and transgender men ( female-to-male ) as women who reject solidarity with their gender. One of the main exponents of this point of view is Janice Raymond .

[ 34 ] In The Whole Woman , [ 35 ] Greer went so far as to explicitly compare transgender women to rapists for forcing themselves into women's spaces.

[ 36 ] Many transgender people see gender identity as an innate part of a person. Some feminists [ who?

] also criticize this belief, arguing instead that gender roles are societal constructs, and are not related to any natural factor.

[ 37 ] Sex-positive feminists support the right of all individuals to determine their own gender and promote gender fluidity as one means for achieving gender equality .

Patrick Califia has written extensively about issues surrounding feminism and transgender issues, especially in Sex Changes: Transgender Politics .

[ 38 ] Debates [ edit ] Like feminism itself, sex-positive feminism is difficult to define, and few within the movement (particularly the academic arm of the movement) agree on any one ideology or policy agenda.

[ 39 ] An example of how feminists may disagree on whether a particular cultural work exemplifies sex-positivity is Betty Dodson's critique of Eve Ensler 's The Vagina Monologues . Dodson argues that the play promotes a negative view of sexuality, emphasizing sexual violence against women rather than the redemptive value of female sexuality. Many other sex-positive feminists have embraced Ensler's work for its encouragement of openness about women's bodies and sexuality.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Statutory rape laws [ edit ] Further information: Age of consent and Statutory rape There is debate among sex-positive feminists about whether statutory rape laws are a form of sexism .

[ 42 ] As illustrated by the controversy over "The Little Coochie Snorcher that Could" from the Vagina Monologues, some sex-positive feminists do not consider all consensual activity between young adolescents and older people as inherently harmful. There has been debate among feminists about whether statutory rape laws benefit or harm teenage girls and about whether the gender of participants should influence the law's treatment of sexual encounters.

[ 42 ] Some sex-positive feminists argue that statutory rape laws were made with non-gender neutral intentions and are presently enforced as such, with the assumption that teenage girls are naive, nonsexual, and in need of protection.

Sex-positive feminists with this view believe that "teen girls and boys are equally capable of making informed choices in regard to their sexuality" [ 43 ] and that statutory rape laws are actually meant to protect "good girls" from sex. Other feminists are opposed or ambivalent about strengthening statutory rape statutes because these preclude young women from entering consensual sexual relationships, even if competent to consent.

[ 44 ] These feminists view statutory rape laws as more controlling than protective – and of course part of the law's historic role was protecting the female's chastity as valuable property. One writer also noted that, at that time, in some states, the previous sexual experience of a teenager could be used as a defense by one accused of statutory rape. She argued that this showed that the laws were intended to protect chastity rather than consent.

[ 44 ] Critiques [ edit ] Works that critique sex-positive feminism includes those of Germaine Greer and the essays by Dorchen Leidholdt .

[ 35 ] [ 45 ] According to Ann Ferguson , sex-positive feminists' only restriction on sexual activity should be the requirement of consent, yet she argues that sex-positive feminism has provided inadequate definitions of consent.

[ 46 ] Sex-positive feminism has also been criticized for focusing on young women, but ignoring middle-aged and elderly women who are unable or unwilling to direct most of their energy into sexuality.

[ 47 ] In her 2005 book Female Chauvinist Pigs , Ariel Levy does not oppose sex-positive feminism per se, though sees a popularized form of sex-positivity as constituting a kind of "raunch culture" in which women internalize objectifying male views of themselves and other women. Levy believes it is a mistake to see this as empowering and further holds that women should develop their own forms of sexual expression.

[ 48 ] The response by sex-positive feminists to Levy's book has been mixed; Susie Bright viewed the book quite favorably, stating that much of what can be seen as "raunch culture" represents a bastardization of the work of earlier sex-positive feminists such as herself.

[ 49 ] Rachel Kramer Bussel , however, sees Levy as largely ignoring much of the female-empowered sexual expression of the last 20 years, or misinterpreting it as internalization of male fantasy.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] More to review and/or consider [ edit ] Tristan Taormino , a sex positive feminist Authors and activists who have written important works about sex-positive feminism, and/or contributed to educating the public about it, include Kathy Acker , Megan Andelloux , Susie Bright , Rachel Kramer Bussel , Diana Cage , Avedon Carol , Patrick Califia , Betty Dodson , Nancy Friday , Jane Gallop , Nina Hartley , Josephine Ho , Amber L. Hollibaugh , Brenda Howard , Laura Kipnis , Wendy McElroy , Inga Muscio , Joan Nestle , Erika Lust , Carol Queen , Candida Royalle , Gayle Rubin , Annie Sprinkle , Tristan Taormino and Ellen Willis .

[ United States-centric ] Several of these have written from the perspective of feminist women working in the sex industry.

Information on formal organizations that endorse sex-positive feminism seems lacking but one major outpost of sex-positive feminism is the former cooperative business Good Vibrations founded by Joani Blank in 1977 in order to sell sex toys and publications about sex in an environment welcoming to women. Blank also founded Down There Press which has published various educational publications inspired by sex-positivity. There are a number of other sex-positive feminist businesses who thrive on a combination of sex toy sales and distribution of educational materials. Good For Her, a woman-owned sex-toy shop in Toronto, Ontario , holds an annual Feminist Porn Awards .

[ 52 ] Nonprofit groups supporting sex-positive feminism include the currently defunct Feminist Anti-Censorship Task Force associated with Carole Vance and Ann Snitow , Feminists for Free Expression, founded by Marcia Pally, and Feminists Against Censorship associated with anti-censorship and civil liberties campaigner Avedon Carol .

[ 53 ] Feminist pornography is a small but growing [ 54 ] segment of the pornography industry . A Feminist Porn Award was established in 2006. The equivalent in Europe is the PorYes award for feminist porn, established in 2009. The magazine On Our Backs was founded in 1986 to promote a more positive attitude towards erotica within the community of lesbian and bisexual women. It flourished until 1994, struggled with financial problems and changing ownership and the final edition was published in 2006.

See also [ edit ] Feminism portal Human sexuality portal Female promiscuity Femalia Free love Go Topless Day Individualist feminism Porn for women Women's erotica Feminist view on Prostitution Sex-positive literature [ edit ] Girl Heroes The Ethical Slut Notes [ edit ] ^ For criminalization of sexual violence in marriage see Marital rape and Marital rape (US law) . For decriminalization of "sodomy" see Sodomy law and Sodomy laws in the United States .

References [ edit ] ^ Schuessler, Jennifer (March 11, 2024).

"The Woman Who Tried to Make Porn Safe for Feminism - How the archive of Candida Royalle, a porn star turned pioneering director, landed at Harvard — and inspired a new book challenging the conventional history of the sexual revolution" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2024 . Retrieved March 11, 2024 .

^ a b c d e Rubin, Gayle S.

(1984), "Thinking sex: notes for a radical theory of the politics of sexuality", in Vance, Carole (ed.), Pleasure and danger: exploring female sexuality , Boston: Routledge & K. Paul, pp.

267– 319, ISBN 9780710202482 .

^ Queen, Carol (1997).

Real live nude girl: chronicles of sex-positive culture . Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: Cleis Press.

ISBN 9781573440738 .

^ Murphy, Meghan. " The divide isn't between 'sex negative' and 'sex positive' feminists — it's between liberal and radical feminism ".

Feminist Current . Published April 11, 2014. Retrieved December 24, 2017.

^ Wolf, Naomi (16 March 1992). "Feminist Fatale: a reply to Camille Paglia".

The New Republic .

^ "Home page" .

alf.org . Association of Libertarian Feminists. Archived from the original on 31 July 2014.

^ "Conjugal Rights (definition)" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ Bonimy, Jasmin (7 September 2009).

"Marital rape ban 'tragically wrong' says the Christian Council" .

The Guardian via Bahamas Crisis Centre . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Valley paper criticized over pastor's column on spousal rape" .

Alaska Dispatch News . 2011-07-22. Archived from the original on 2015-07-15 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "1 corinthians 7:3-7:5 NKJV" .

biblegateway.com . Bible Gateway . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

Let the husband render to his wife the...

^ Lamas, Marta (October 1997). "Nuevos valores sexuales" [New sexual values].

Debate Feminista (in Spanish).

16 : 146– 149.

doi : 10.22201/cieg.2594066xe.1997.16.409 (inactive 12 July 2025).

JSTOR 42624443 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) Pdf.

Publisher's website.

Archived 2017-02-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ Aboim, Sofia (2010), "Of pleasure and violence: sex and sexuality in men's discourses", in Aboim, Sofia (ed.), Plural masculinities: the remaking of the self in private life , Farnham, England Burlington, VT: Ashgate Pub. Co, pp.

137– 156, ISBN 9780754699842 .

^ Lombroso, Cesare ; Ferrero, William (1980) [1895].

The female offender . New York: D. Appleton & Co.

ISBN 9780837708072 .

View online.

^ Carol, Avedon.

"The Harm of Porn: Just Another Excuse to Censor" .

The Law (June–July–August 1995). London.

ISSN 1360-807X . Archived from the original on 2015-07-09.

^ "6 Sex-Positive People Who Fought For Your Pleasure" .

Bustle . 14 September 2015 . Retrieved 2019-10-08 .

^ Queen, Carol; Comella, Lynn (2008).

"The Necessary Revolution: Sex-Positive Feminism in the Post-Barnard Era" .

Communication Review .

11 (3): Communication & Mass Media Complete.

doi : 10.1080/10714420802306783 .

S2CID 144695040 .

^ a b McElroy, Wendy (1995).

XXX: a woman's right to pornography . New York: St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 9780312136260 .

^ Willis, Ellen (October 1979). "Feminism, moralism, and pornography".

The Village Voice .

Re-published as: Willis, Ellen (2012), "Feminism, moralism, and pornography", in Willis, Ellen (ed.), Beginning to see the light: sex, hope, and rock-and-roll , Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.

219– 227, ISBN 9781452948997 .

^ Willis, Ellen (1979). "Lust horizons: is the women's movement pro-sex?".

The Village Voice .

Re-published as: Willis, Ellen (2012), "Lust horizons: is the women's movement pro-sex?", in Willis, Ellen (ed.), Beginning to see the light: sex, hope, and rock-and-roll , Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.

3– 15, ISBN 9781452948997 .

See also: Willis, Ellen (18 October 2005).

"Lust horizons" .

The Village Voice . Archived from the original on 7 April 2016.

^ Bright, Susie (1992).

Susie Bright's Sexual Reality: A Virtual Sex World Reader .

Cleis Press . pp.

45– 54.

ISBN 978-0-939416-58-5 .

OCLC 647016909 – via Internet Archive.

^ Jeffreys, Elaine (2009).

Sex and sexuality in China . London New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415546973 .

^ Jeffreys, Elaine (2009), "Feminist prostitution debates: are there any sex workers in China?", in Edwards, Louise; Roces, Mina (eds.), Women in Asia: critical concepts in Asian studies , Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon New York: Routledge, pp.

301– 325, ISBN 9780415445290 .

^ McElroy, Wendy (1996).

Sexual correctness: the gender-feminist attack on women . Jefferson, N.C: McFarland.

ISBN 9780786402267 .

^ Strossen, Nadine (2000).

Defending pornography: free speech, sex, and the fight for women's rights . New York London: New York University Press.

ISBN 9780814781494 .

^ Dworkin, Andrea (1989), "Pornography is a civil rights issue: 1986", in Dworkin, Andrea (ed.), Letters from a War Zone: Writings, 1976-1989 , New York: E.P. Dutton, pp.

276– 307, ISBN 9780525248248 .

Available to view online as: Dworkin, Andrea .

"Pornography is a civil rights issue" .

No Status Quo .

Nikki Craft . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ Mühlparzer, Hannah.

"Porn Film Festival Vienna: Festival multipler Höhepunkte" .

Der Standard . Retrieved 28 November 2018 .

^ Bell, Kelly J. (2009).

"A Feminist's Argument on How Sex Work Can Benefit Women" .

Inquiries Journal .

1 (11). Archived from the original on 2016-06-27.

^ Comte, Jacqueline (2014-03-01). "Decriminalization of Sex Work: Feminist Discourses in Light of Research".

Sexuality & Culture .

18 (1): 196– 217.

doi : 10.1007/s12119-013-9174-5 .

ISSN 1095-5143 .

S2CID 143978838 .

^ Holston-Zannell, LaLa B. (2020-06-10).

"Sex Work is Real Work, and it's Time to Treat it That Way | News & Commentary" .

American Civil Liberties Union . Retrieved 2022-10-31 .

^ "Carol Leigh: An Interview | vdb.org" .

vdb.org . Retrieved 2022-10-31 .

^ Dunkley, Cara R.; Brotto, Lori A. (2019-04-22). "The Role of Consent in the Context of BDSM".

Sexual Abuse .

32 (6): 657– 678.

doi : 10.1177/1079063219842847 .

ISSN 1079-0632 .

PMID 31010393 .

S2CID 128359900 .

^ Holt, Karen (2016-08-02). "Blacklisted: Boundaries, Violations, and Retaliatory Behavior in the BDSM Community".

Deviant Behavior .

37 (8): 917– 930.

doi : 10.1080/01639625.2016.1156982 .

ISSN 0163-9625 .

S2CID 147465698 .

^ Fetters, Ashley (2013-02-12).

"4 Big Problems With The Feminine Mystique" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 2018-03-23 .

^ Raymond, Janice (1979).

The transsexual empire: the making of the she-male . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 9780807021644 .

^ a b Greer, Germaine (1999).

The whole woman . New York: A.A. Knopf.

ISBN 9780375407475 .

^ Smith, Lydia (16 May 2015).

"Transgender rights versus feminism: What makes a woman?" .

International Business Times . Retrieved 13 November 2016 .

^ Bowen, Innes (1 August 2007).

"Are sex change operations justified?" .

BBC News . Retrieved 23 May 2010 .

^ Califia, Patrick (2003).

Sex changes: the politics of transgenderism (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Cleis Press.

ISBN 9781573448925 .

^ " 'It stopped me having sex for a year': why Generation Z is turning its back on sex-positive feminism" .

the Guardian . 2022-02-02 . Retrieved 2022-05-31 .

^ Dodson, Betty (2001).

"Betty's Response to the Vagina Monologues | Betty Dodson & Carlin Ross" .

www.dodsonandross.com . Retrieved 2022-03-02 .

^ Carnell, Brian (2001).

"Betty Dodson Rips "The Vagina Monologues" – Brian.Carnell.Com" .

brian.carnell.com . Retrieved 2022-03-02 .

^ a b NOTES (March 1999). "Feminist legal analysis and sexual autonomy: using statutory rape laws as an illustration".

Harvard Law Review .

112 (5): 1065– 1081.

doi : 10.2307/1342276 .

JSTOR 1342276 .

Abstract.

^ Oberman, Michelle (1994).

"Turning girls into women: re-evaluating modern statutory rape law" .

Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology .

85 (1): 15– 79.

doi : 10.2307/1144114 .

JSTOR 1144114 .

Pdf.

^ a b Erickson, Nancy S.; Lamanna, Mary Ann (Fall 1990).

"Sex Bias Topics in the Criminal Law Course: A Survey of Criminal Law Professors" .

University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform .

24 (1): 189– 252.

^ Leidholdt, Dorchen ; Raymond, Janice (1990).

The sexual liberals and the attack on feminism . New York: Pergamon Press.

ISBN 9780807762394 .

^ Ferguson, Ann (Autumn 1984). "Sex war: the debate between radical and libertarian feminists".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

10 (1): 110– 111.

doi : 10.1086/494117 .

JSTOR 3174240 .

S2CID 144761986 .

^ "The Sexual Revolution has failed Generation X women | Victoria Smith" .

The Critic Magazine . May 25, 2022.

^ Levy, Ariel (2005).

Female chauvinist pigs: women and the rise of raunch culture . New York: Free Press.

ISBN 9780743249898 .

^ Bright, Susie (blog) (30 September 2005).

"Susie Bright's Journal: Female Chauvinist Pigs at the trough" .

susiebright.blogs.com .

Susie Bright via Blogs.com.

[ self-published source ] ^ Lusty Lady (blog) (21 September 2005).

"Beyond Pornified and Female Chauvanist Pigs " .

lustylady.blogspot.com .

Rachel Kramer Bussel via Blogspot .

[ self-published source ] ^ Lusty Lady (blog) (19 September 2005).

"Tristan Taormino interview at suicide + Female Chauvanist Pigs " .

lustylady.blogspot.com .

Rachel Kramer Bussel via Blogspot .

[ self-published source ] ^ Van Deven, Mandy (2 May 2009).

"Moving beyond the money shot: feminist porn awards" .

Bitch . Bitch Media . Retrieved 3 June 2009 .

^ Carol, Avedon (1994).

Nudes, prudes, and attitudes: pornography and censorship . Cheltenham: New Clarion Press.

ISBN 9781873797136 .

^ Claire, Potter (Spring 2016).

"Not Safe for Work: Why Feminist Pornography Matters" .

Dissent Magazine . Retrieved 2022-03-02 .

Further reading [ edit ] Basiliere, Jenna (Fall 2009). "Political is personal: scholarly manifestations of the feminist sex wars".

Michigan Feminist Studies .

22 (1): 1– 25.

hdl : 2027/spo.ark5583.0022.101 .

Pdf.

Benjamin, Jessica (1983), "Master and slave: the fantasy of erotic domination", in Barr Snitow, Ann; Stansell, Christine ; Thompson, Sharon (eds.), Powers of desire: the politics of sexuality , New York: Monthly Review Press, pp.

460–467 , ISBN 9780853456100 .

Dodson, Betty (15 March 2001).

"Betty's response to the Vagina Monologues " .

dodsonandross.com .

Betty Dodson with Carlin Ross.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2016.

[ self-published source ] Easton, Dossie ; Liszt, Catherine A.

(1997).

The ethical slut: a guide to infinite sexual possibilities . San Francisco, California: Greenery Press.

ISBN 9781890159016 .

Friend, Tad (February 1994). "Yes (Feminist women who like sex)".

Esquire .

Hearst Magazines .

Gerhard, Jane F. (2001).

Desiring revolution: second-wave feminism and the rewriting of American sexual thought, 1920 to 1982 . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 9780231528795 .

Glick, Elisa (April 2000). "Sex positive: feminism, queer theory, and the politics of transgression".

Feminist Review .

64 (64): 19– 45.

doi : 10.1080/014177800338936 .

JSTOR 1395699 .

S2CID 145181041 .

Hopkins, Susan (2002).

Girl heroes: the new force in popular culture . Annandale, New South Wales: Pluto Press.

ISBN 9781864031577 .

"Institute for Advanced Study of Human Sexuality (IASHS)" . Archived from the original on 2013-03-17 . Retrieved 2017-02-11 .

Johnson, Merri (2002).

Jane sexes it up: true confessions of feminist desire . New York: Four Walls Eight Windows.

ISBN 9781568581804 .

"The National Association for the Advancement of Science & Art in Sexuality" .

Sprinkle, Annie (2006).

Hardcore from the heart: the pleasures, profits and politics of sex in performance . London: Continuum.

ISBN 9780826490698 .

External links [ edit ] Advocacy of sex-positive feminism [ edit ] Articles [ edit ] Bright, Susie (October 1993).

"The Prime of Miss Kitty MacKinnon" (PDF) .

East Bay Express . Oakland, California.

Archived at Susie Bright's Journal (website)).

McElroy, Wendy .

"A Feminist Overview of Pornography, Ending in a Defense Thereof (blog)" .

wendymcelroy.com .

Wendy McElroy .

[ self-published source ] McElroy, Wendy (July 1995).

"From a Sexually Incorrect Feminist" .

Penthouse .

Archived at WendyMcElroy.com (website).

Newitz, Annalee (May 8, 2002).

"Obscene Feminists: Why Women Are Leading the Battle Against Censorship" .

San Francisco Bay Guardian .

Archived from the original on March 3, 2016.

Organizations [ edit ] "Feminists for Free Expression" . Archived from the original on 2006-04-26.

"Feminists Against Censorship" . Archived from the original on 1997-02-12 . Retrieved 2006-05-04 .

"Sex Worker Outreach Project" . Archived from the original on 2020-06-16 . Retrieved 2006-06-18 .

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Second-wave feminism The Feminine Mystique (1963) God Giving Birth (1968) The personal is political Consciousness raising Sex-positive feminism (1979) Feminist sex wars People Ti-Grace Atkinson Simone de Beauvoir Susan Brownmiller Judy Chicago Angela Davis Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz Andrea Dworkin Zillah Eisenstein Shulamith Firestone Jo Freeman Betty Friedan Germaine Greer Carol Hanisch Bell Hooks Shigeko Kubota Audre Lorde Catharine MacKinnon Ana Mendieta Kate Millett Robin Morgan Linda Nochlin Diane di Prima Adrienne Rich Faith Ringgold Sheila Rowbotham Sylvia Sleigh Miriam Schapiro Barbara Smith Valerie Solanas Gloria Steinem Alice Walker Michele Wallace Ellen Willis Monique Wittig Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sex-positive_feminism&oldid=1305994984 " Categories : Sex-positive feminism Feminism and pornography Feminism and prostitution Feminism and sexuality Third-wave feminism Feminist movements and ideologies Human sexuality Liberal feminism Second-wave feminism Sexual revolution Women and sexuality Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from February 2017 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2021 United States-centric Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2025 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 08:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sex-positive feminism 26 languages Add topic

