Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pharaonic history 2 Roman province(s) 3 Episcopal sees 4 Cultural references 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources and external links Toggle the table of contents Thebaid 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Administrative region in Aegyptus For other uses, see Thebaid (disambiguation) .

Provincia Thebais Θηβαΐς ἐπαρχία Θηβαΐδος Province of the Byzantine Empire , Diocese of Egypt c. 293–641 Capital Ptolemais Historical era Late Antiquity • Division by emperor Diocletian c. 293 • Persian occupation 612–628 • Conquest by Arabs 641 Today part of Egypt Map of the late Roman Diocese of Egypt , with Thebais in the south.

The Thebaid or Thebais ( Ancient Greek : Θηβαΐς , Thēbaïs ) was a region in ancient Egypt , comprising the 13 southernmost nomes of Upper Egypt , from Abydos to Aswan .

[ 1 ] Pharaonic history [ edit ] Pyramidion of Nebamun. Possibly top of a stela. Limestone. 19th Dynasty. From Egypt. Bought in the Thebaid (Thebais) but probably it came from Deir el-Medina. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology, London The Thebaid acquired its name from its proximity to the ancient Egyptian capital of Thebes ( Luxor ). During the Ancient Egyptian dynasties this region was dominated by Thebes and its priesthood at the temple of Amun at Karnak .

In Ptolemaic Egypt , the Thebaid formed a single administrative district under the Epistrategos of Thebes, who was also responsible for overseeing navigation in the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean . The capital of Ptolemaic Thebaid was Ptolemais Hermiou , a Hellenistic colony on the Nile which served as the center of royal political and economic control in Upper Egypt .

Roman province(s) [ edit ] During the Roman Empire , Diocletian created the province of Thebais , guarded by the legions I Maximiana Thebanorum and II Flavia Constantia . This was later divided into Upper ( Latin : Thebais Superior , Greek : Ἄνω Θηβαΐς , Anō Thēbaïs ), comprising the southern half with its capital at Thebes, and Lower or Nearer ( Latin : Thebais Inferior , Greek : Θηβαΐς Ἐγγίστη , Thēbaïs Engistē ), comprising the northern half with capital at Ptolemais .

Around the 5th century, since it was a desert , the Thebaid became a place of  retreat of a number of Christian hermits , and was the birthplace of Pachomius .

[ 2 ] In Christian art , the Thebaid was represented as a place with numerous monks.

Episcopal sees [ edit ] Ancient episcopal sees of Thebais Prima (Thebaid I) listed in the Annuario Pontificio as Catholic titular sees : [ 3 ] Antaeopolis ( Tjebu ) Antinoöpolis , the Metropolitan Archbishopric Apollonopolis Parva (Côm-Esfaht, now Qus ) Cusae Hermopolis Magna = Maior Hypselis (Chutb = Shutb) Oasis Magna ( Kharga Oasis ) Panopolis ( Akhmim ) Ancient episcopal sees of Thebais Secunda (Thebaid II) listed in the Annuario Pontificio as Catholic titular sees : [ 3 ] Apollonopolis Magna ( Edfu ) Coptus ( Qift ) Diocletianopolis in Thebaide (Qus) Diospolis Superior (Hu) Hermonthis Latopolis ( ancient Esna ) Maximianopolis in Thebaide (Qena) Philae Pselchis ( Temple of Dakka ) Ptolemais in Thebaide (Ptolemais Hermiou), the Metropolitan Archbishopric Syene ( Aswan ) Tentyris ( Dendera ) Thinis Cultural references [ edit ] Anatole France 's novel, Thaïs , opens on a monastic and ascetic community along the Nile, in Thebaid.

See also [ edit ] List of Catholic dioceses in Egypt References [ edit ] ^ Windham, Dharma (March 2006).

Reluctant Goddess: Kleopatra and the Stolen Throne . Infinity Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-7414-3092-2 .

^ "Thebaid" .

Catholic Encyclopedia .

^ a b Annuario Pontificio 2013 (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2013 ISBN 978-88-209-9070-1 ), "Sedi titolari", pp. 819-1013 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Wood, James , ed. (1907).

The Nuttall Encyclopædia . London and New York: Frederick Warne.

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) Sources and external links [ edit ] Bagnall, R., J. Drinkwater, A. Esmonde-Cleary, W. Harris, R. Knapp, S. Mitchell, S. Parker, C. Wells, J. Wilkes, R. Talbert, M. E. Downs, M. Joann McDaniel, B. Z. Lund, T. Elliott, S. Gillies (15 February 2012).

"Places: 991398 (Thebais)" . Pleiades . Retrieved March 8, 2012 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) GCatholic - (Current, Titular and) Defunct sees in Egypt v t e Late Roman and early Byzantine provinces (4th–7th centuries AD) History As found in the Notitia Dignitatum . Provincial administration reformed and dioceses established by Diocletian , c.

293. Permanent praetorian prefectures established after the death of Constantine I . Empire permanently partitioned after 395. Exarchates of Ravenna and Africa established after 584. After massive territorial losses in the 7th century, the remaining provinces were superseded by the theme system in c. 640–660, although in Asia Minor and parts of Greece they survived under the themes until the early 9th century.

Western Roman Empire (395–476) Praetorian prefecture of Gaul Diocese of Gaul Alpes Poeninae et Graiae Belgica I Belgica II Germania I Germania II Lugdunensis I Lugdunensis II Lugdunensis III Lugdunensis IV Maxima Sequanorum Diocese of Vienne 1 Alpes Maritimae Aquitanica I Aquitanica II Narbonensis I Narbonensis II Novempopulania Viennensis Diocese of Spain Baetica Balearica Carthaginensis Gallaecia Lusitania Mauretania Tingitana Tarraconensis Diocese of the Britains Britannia I Britannia II Flavia Caesariensis Maxima Caesariensis Valentia (?) Praetorian prefecture of Italy Diocese of Suburbicarian Italy Apulia et Calabria Campania Corsica Lucania et Bruttium Picenum Suburbicarium Samnium Sardinia Sicilia Tuscia et Umbria Valeria Diocese of Annonarian Italy Alpes Cottiae Flaminia et Picenum Annonarium Liguria et Aemilia Raetia I Raetia II Venetia et Histria Diocese of Africa 2 Africa proconsularis (Zeugitana) Byzacena Mauretania Caesariensis Mauretania Sitifensis Numidia (divided as Cirtensis and Militiana during the Tetrarchy) Tripolitania (Roman province) Eastern Roman Empire (395–c. 640) Praetorian prefecture of Illyricum Diocese of Pannonia 3 Dalmatia Noricum mediterraneum Noricum ripense Pannonia I Pannonia II Savia Valeria ripensis Diocese of Dacia Dacia Mediterranea Dacia Ripensis Dardania Moesia I Praevalitana Diocese of Macedonia Achaea Creta Epirus Nova Epirus Vetus Macedonia Prima Macedonia II Salutaris Thessalia Praetorian prefecture of the East Diocese of Thrace 5 Europa Haemimontus Moesia II 4 Rhodope Scythia 4 Thracia Diocese of Asia 5 Asia Caria 4 Hellespontus Islands 4 Lycaonia (370) Lycia Lydia Pamphylia Pisidia Phrygia Pacatiana Phrygia Salutaris Diocese of Pontus 5 Armenia I 5 Armenia II 5 Armenia Maior 5 Armenian Satrapies 5 Armenia III (536) Armenia IV (536) Bithynia Cappadocia I 5 Cappadocia II 5 Galatia I 5 Galatia II Salutaris 5 Helenopontus 5 Honorias 5 Paphlagonia 5 Pontus Polemoniacus 5 Diocese of the East 5 Arabia Cilicia I Cilicia II Cyprus 4 Euphratensis Isauria Mesopotamia Osroene Palaestina I Palaestina II Palaestina III Salutaris Phoenice I Phoenice II Libanensis Syria I Syria II Salutaris Theodorias (528) Diocese of Egypt 5 Aegyptus I Aegyptus II Arcadia Augustamnica I Augustamnica II Libya Superior Libya Inferior Thebais Superior Thebais Inferior Other territories Taurica Quaestura exercitus (536) Spania (552) 1 Later the Septem Provinciae 2 Re-established after reconquest by the Eastern Empire in 534 as the separate Prefecture of Africa 3 Later the Diocese of Illyricum 4 Placed under the Quaestura exercitus in 536 5 Affected (i.e. boundaries modified, abolished or renamed) by Justinian I 's administrative reorganization in 534–536 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thebaid&oldid=1297835705 " Categories : States and territories disestablished in the 7th century Roman provinces in Africa Roman Egypt Byzantine Egypt Geography of ancient Egypt Late Roman provinces 293 establishments 290s establishments in the Roman Empire 3rd-century establishments in Egypt 290s 640s disestablishments in the Byzantine Empire 641 disestablishments 7th-century disestablishments in Egypt 640s disestablishments Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Former country articles requiring maintenance No local image but image on Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Greek-language text CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Nuttall Encyclopedia CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Egypt articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Articles missing coordinates with coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 20:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thebaid 22 languages Add topic

