Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scholarly books and journals 2 Editing in the 21st century 3 Visual editing 4 Self-editing 5 Technical editing 6 Editing services 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Editing 46 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা བོད་ཡིག Čeština Cymraeg Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Lietuvių മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of selecting and preparing media to convey information For information on editing Wikipedia, see Help:Editing .

"Edits", "Editor", and "Editors" redirect here. For other uses of "Editor", see Editor (disambiguation) . For other uses of "Edit", see Edit (disambiguation) .

"Quarters of the news editor", one of a group of four photos in the 1900 brochure Seattle and the Orient , which was collectively captioned " The Seattle Daily Times —Editorial Department".

Editing is the process of selecting and preparing written , visual , audible , or cinematic material used by a person or an entity to convey a message or information. The editing process can involve correction, condensation, organization, and many other modifications performed with an intention of producing a correct, consistent, accurate and complete piece of work.

[ 1 ] The editing process often begins with the author's idea for the work itself, continuing as a collaboration between the author and the editor as the work is created. Editing can involve creative skills, human relations and a precise set of methods.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Practicing editing can be a way to reduce language error in future literature works.

[ 4 ] Editors work on producing an issue of Bild , West Berlin , 1977. Previous front pages are affixed to the wall behind them.

There are various editorial positions in publishing. Typically, one finds editorial assistants reporting to the senior-level editorial staff and directors who report to senior executive editors. Senior executive editors are responsible for developing a product for its final release. The smaller the publication, the more these roles overlap.

The top editor at many publications may be known as the chief editor , executive editor , or simply the editor. A frequent and highly regarded contributor to a magazine may acquire the title of editor-at-large or contributing editor . Mid-level newspaper editors often manage or help to manage sections, such as business, sports and features. In U.S. newspapers, the level below the top editor is usually the managing editor .

In the book publishing industry, editors may organize anthologies and other compilations, produce definitive editions of a classic author's works (scholarly editor), and organize and manage contributions to a multi-author book (symposium editor or volume editor). Obtaining manuscripts or recruiting authors is the role of an acquisitions editor or a commissioning editor in a publishing house.

[ 5 ] Finding marketable ideas and presenting them to appropriate authors are the responsibilities of a sponsoring editor.

Copy editors correct spelling , grammar and align writings to house style . Changes to the publishing industry since the 1980s have resulted in nearly all copy editing of book manuscripts being outsourced to freelance copy editors.

[ 5 ] At newspapers and wire services , press or copy editors write headlines and work on more substantive issues, such as ensuring accuracy, fairness, and taste. In some positions, they design pages and select news stories for inclusion. At British and Australian newspapers, the term is sub-editor . They may choose the layout of the publication and communicate with the printer. These editors may have the title of layout or design editor or (more so in the past) makeup editor .

In film editing , many editing techniques are used, such as post-processing and video and audio assembly.

[ 6 ] Scholarly books and journals A draft of a scholarly publication that has been edited.

Within the publishing environment, editors of scholarly books are of three main types, each with particular responsibilities: Acquisitions editor (or commissioning editor in Britain), who contracts with the author to produce the copy Project editor or production editor , who sees the copy through its stages from manuscript to bound book and usually assumes most of the budget and schedule responsibilities Copy editor or manuscript editor , who prepares the copy for conversion into printed form.

In the case of multi-author edited volumes , before the manuscript is delivered to the publisher it has undergone substantive and linguistic editing by the volume's editor, who works independently of the publisher.

As for scholarly journals , where spontaneous submissions are more common than commissioned works, the position of journal editor or editor-in-chief replaces the acquisitions editor of the book publishing environment, while the roles of production editor and copy editor remain. However, another editor is sometimes involved in the creation of scholarly research articles. Called the authors' editor , this editor works with authors to get a manuscript fit for purpose before it is submitted to a scholarly journal for publication.

The primary difference between copy editing scholarly books and journals and other sorts of copy editing lies in applying the standards of the publisher to the copy. Most scholarly publishers have a preferred style that usually specifies a particular dictionary and style manual—for example, The Chicago Manual of Style , the MLA Style Manual or the APA Publication Manual in the U.S., or the New Hart's Rules in the U.K.

Editing in the 21st century Editing has a long history dating back to the earliest times of written language. Over time, editing has evolved greatly, particularly with the emergence of new forms of media and language that have led to a move towards multimodality .

[ 7 ] Today, hardcopies and print are no longer the main focus of editing as new content like film and audio require different kinds of edits.

Technical editing is now more commonly done using applications and websites on devices, which requires editors to be familiar with online platforms like Adobe Acrobat , Microsoft Office , and Google Docs . The significance and intentions behind editing have also changed, moving beyond print due to the continuous advancements in technology. As a result, the grounds and values of editing have changed as well.

[ 8 ] For instance, text is often shortened and simplified online because of the preference for quick answers among this generation. Additionally, the advancement in social issues has made it possible to offer easy access to vast amounts of information.

[ 9 ] Apart from editing written work, video editing has also evolved. Nowadays, non-linear editing is the main way of editing video clips, but in the 1900s, it was linear editing . As computer systems and software have developed, video clips are now able to be uploaded directly to the editing software, making the editing process quicker. With this evolution of editing, creativity has been sped up, editing has become easier, and there are now countless ways for writers to tell stories.

[ 10 ] Visual editing Editing visuals can involve a variety of professional tools such as a media keyboard in use at France 24 .

In terms of editing visual content, the two main forms are photographic and cinematic. Photo editing has evolved considerably from humble means, dating back to the early 20th century. During the 1920s, photographers established a new discipline of creative editing by creating collages from multiple photos.

[ 11 ] By the late 1980s, it became possible to computerize images by running physical photos through a scanner. Over time, software began to develop, aimed toward the manipulation of different qualities of a photo. Today, there are a multitude of applications to choose from to edit the content or qualities of photos; PhotoShop is a common example, as well as other applications such as Adobe Lightroom. Modern photo editing techniques include, but are not limited to linearization, white balance, noise reduction, tone reproduction and compression.

[ 12 ] The other form of visual editing is cinematic editing. Cinematic editing entails anything that is to be used as cinematic material, mainly films. Cinematic editing dates back to the early 1900s when American filmmaker, D.W. Griffith , produced the first films that essentially paved the way for the editing techniques that are still used today.

[ 13 ] The progression of technology brought about advancements in gear, which meant filmmakers were able to achieve new techniques in the post-production process through editing. Editors went from physically cutting and rearranging film to working on virtual timelines using software like Davinci Resolve or Premiere pro .

Self-editing Self-editing is the process of evaluating one's own writing and fixing errors. This does not require any specialized knowledge, and simply aims to improve the overall quality of a literary work. It is an essential part of the editing process, benefiting both language learners and those writing in their native language.

Students often find learning about editing rewarding in both learning a language [ 14 ] and improving language skills. However, the writing field currently debates whether self-editing is the best way to reduce errors in student writing. Some studies have shown that self-editing is more effective at reducing language errors in the short term than peer-editing.

[ 15 ] However, in the long term, both approaches have similar effects on students.

[ 15 ] Others have found that the collaborative dialogue provided by peer-editing may cause it to be much better at reducing language errors than self-editing.

[ 4 ] Today, self-editing is being taught in numerous ways. Some researchers have found a significant improvement in student essays through self-editing worksheets.

[ 16 ] Others have experimented with mobile apps. Similar to the worksheets, these mobile based editing exercises have been shown to reduce error specifically in English learners' papers.

[ 17 ] Just as applications like Google Docs and Grammarly can highlight grammatical errors, these applications may teach students to identify these mistakes, among others, by themselves.

While there hasn't yet been a definitive answer on the best editing techniques to improve language errors, numerous studies have shown that learning to edit helps in both learning a language and improving native language skills.

Technical editing See also: Technical writing and Technical communication Technical editing involves reviewing text written on a technical topic, identifying usage errors and ensuring adherence to a style guide . It aims to improve the clarity of the text or message from the author to the reader. Technical editing is actually the umbrella term for all the different kinds of edits that might occur.

[ 7 ] Technical editing may include the correction of grammatical mistakes, misspellings, mistyping, incorrect punctuation, inconsistencies in usage, poorly structured sentences, wrong scientific terms, wrong units and dimensions, inconsistency in significant figures, technical ambivalence, technical disambiguation, statements conflicting with general scientific knowledge, correction of synopsis, content, index, headings and subheadings, correcting data and chart presentation in a research paper or report, and correcting errors in citations.

From basics to more critical changes, these adjustments to the text can be categorized by the different terms within technical editing. There are policy edits, integrity edits, screening edits, copy clarification edits, format edits and mechanical style edits, language edits, etc.

[ 7 ] The two most common and broad are substantive editing and copy editing. Substantive editing is developmental because it guides the drafting process by providing essential building blocks to work off of. They work closely with the author to help supply ideas. Copy editing happens later in the drafting process and focuses on changing the text so that it's consistent throughout in terms of accuracy, style, flow, and so on. This is usually the preferred editing for the surface-level cleaning up of work.

[ 18 ] Large companies dedicate experienced writers to the technical editing function. Organizations that cannot afford dedicated editors typically have experienced writers peer-edit text produced by less experienced colleagues.

It helps if the technical editor is familiar with the subject being edited. The "technical" knowledge that an editor gains over time while working on a particular product or technology does give the editor an edge over another who has just started editing content related to that product or technology.

General essential skills include attention to detail, patience, persistence, the ability to sustain focus while working through lengthy pieces of text on complex topics, tact in dealing with writers, and excellent communication skills. Additionally, one does not need an English major to partake but language aptitude certainly helps.

[ 19 ] Editing services "Paid editing" redirects here. For paid editing on Wikipedia, see Paid editing on Wikipedia .

Editing is a growing field of work in the service industry . There is little career training offered for editors.

[ 20 ] Paid editing services may be provided by specialized editing firms or by self-employed ( freelance ) editors.

Editing firms may employ a team of in-house editors, rely on a network of individual contractors or both.

[ 21 ] Such firms are able to handle editing in a wide range of topics and genres, depending on the skills of individual editors. The services provided by these editors may be varied and can include proofreading , copy editing , online editing , developmental editing , editing for search engine optimization , etc.

Self-employed editors work directly for clients (e.g., authors, publishers) or offer their services through editing firms, or both. They may specialize in a type of editing (e.g., copy editing) and in a particular subject area. Those who work directly for authors and develop professional relationships with them are called authors' editors . There is hope for self-employed editors because all editing differs based on tradition, experience, education, personal style, values, etc.

[ 19 ] See also Audio editing Author editing Film editing Literary editor Redaction Social edition Stealth edit Textual scholarship Video editing Writer References ^ Mamishev, Alexander, Williams, Sean, Technical Writing for Teams: The STREAM Tools Handbook , Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, John Wiley & Sons. Inc., Hoboken, 2009, p. 128.

^ "Encarta Dictionary definition of "editing" " . Archived from the original on 22 October 2009.

^ "Encarta Dictionary definition of 'editor' " . Archived from the original on 6 February 2009.

^ a b Diab, N. M. (2010). Effects of peer-versus self-editing on students' revision of language errors in revised drafts.

System , 38 (1), 85–95.

^ a b Poland, Louise, The business, Craft and Profession of the Book Editor, in Carter, David, Galligan, Anne, (eds.), Making books: contemporary Australian publishing , Queensland University Press, 2007, p. 100.

^ Orpen, Valerie (2003).

Film Editing: The Art of the Expressive . Wallflower Press.

ISBN 978-1-903364-53-6 .

^ a b c Buehler, Mary Fran (1981).

"Defining Terms in Technical Editing: The Levels of Edit as a Model" .

Technical Communication .

28 (4): 10– 15.

JSTOR 43094307 .

^ Buehler, Mary Fran (1981).

"Defining Terms in Technical Editing: The Levels of Edit as a Model" .

Technical Communication .

28 (4): 10– 15.

JSTOR 43094307 .

^ Hayhoe, George F (2007).

"The Future of Technical Writing and Editing" .

Technical Communication .

54 (3): 281– 282.

JSTOR 43089503 .

^ SocialGuru (24 June 2023).

"The Evolution of Video Editing: From Analog to Digital" .

Medium . Retrieved 17 October 2023 .

^ "History of digital photo manipulation | National Science and Media Museum" .

www.scienceandmediamuseum.org.uk . 16 June 2021 . Retrieved 17 October 2023 .

^ "Chapter 1: Develop a Lightroom + Photoshop Mindset - Crafting the Landscape Photograph with Lightroom Classic and Photoshop [Book]" .

www.oreilly.com . Retrieved 17 October 2023 .

^ Crittenden, Roger (2003).

Film and Video Editing . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780203427866 .

ISBN 978-1-135-37270-5 .

^ Ferris, Dana R; Hsiang Liu; Aparna Sinha; Manuel Senna. (2013). Written corrective feedback for individual L2 writers.

Journal of Second Language Writing 22.3 , 307–329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2012.09.009 ^ a b Diab, N. M. (2016). A comparison of peer, teacher and self-feedback on the reduction of language errors in student essays.

System , 57 , 55–65.

^ Holbrook, G., & Park, V. J. (2017). Student perceptions of the effectiveness of self-editing on their writing: towards a self-regulated approach.

Journal of Learning Development in Higher Education , 12 . https://doi.org/10.47408/jldhe.v0i12.425 ^ Li, Z. and Hegelheimer, V. (2013) 'Mobile-assisted grammar exercises: effects on self-editing in L2 writing', Language Learning & Technology , 17(3), pp.135-156.

^ Nobles, Heidi (2019).

"I will not edit your paper (Will I?): Tutoring and/or editing in the writing center [Tutors' column]" (PDF) .

WLN: A Journal of Writing Center Scholarship .

43 ( 5– 6): 21– 24.

doi : 10.37514/WLN-J.2019.43.5.05 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2023 . Retrieved 22 March 2023 .

^ a b Putnam, Constance E. (1985).

"Myths about Editing" .

Technical Communication .

32 (2): 17– 20.

JSTOR 43095639 .

^ Malone, Micheal S. (2018).

"Editing" The Craft of Professional Writing: A Guide for Amateur and Professional Writers . Anthem Press. pp.

283– 292.

ISBN 978-1-78308-830-0 .

^ Appiah, Bernard (2009).

"Science editing at an Indian firm: perspectives of two US visitors" (PDF) .

Science Editing .

32 (4): 118– 119. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2013.

Further reading Overholser, Geneva (December 1998).

"Editor Inc" .

American Journalism Review .

[ permanent dead link ] Stephen, Leslie (1898).

"The Evolution of Editors" .

Studies of a Biographer . Vol. 1. London: Duckworth and Co. pp.

37– 73.

Morrison, Blake (6 August 2005).

"Black day for the blue pencil" .

The Observer .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

Ó Brógáin, Séamas (2015).

A Dictionary of Editing . Vol. 1. Dublin: Claritas. Archived from the original on 1 September 2017 . Retrieved 25 May 2016 .

Greenberg, Susan L. (2015) Editors talk about editing: insights for readers, writers and publishers , New York: Peter Lang Munro, Craig (2021) Literary Lion Tamers: book editors who made publishing history, Brunswick, Victoria: Scribe Publications ISBN 9781925713220 External links Library resources about Editing Resources in your library The dictionary definition of editing at Wiktionary Media related to Editing at Wikimedia Commons v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal v t e Book publishing process Copy preparation Submission Literary agent Publisher's reader Contract negotiation intellectual property rights royalty rates, format, etc.

Editing Literary editor Commissioning editor Developmental editor Authors' editor Book editor Copy editing Prepress Design Indexing Typesetting Proof-reading List of proofreader's marks Book production Printing Folding Binding Trimming Imprint v t e Journalism roles Editing Editor Copy editor Contributing editor Assignment editor Public editor Duty editor Political editor Managing editor Editor-at-large Editor-in-chief Editorial board Staff Journalists (reporters) Columnist Blogger Meteorologist News presenter Pundit / Commentator Fixer Stringer Correspondent Fact checker Food critic Gossip columnist News analyst Staff writer Photographer v t e Journalism Newsroom Journalist ( Staff writer · Correspondent · News presenter ) Columnist Editors ( Editor-in-chief · Managing editor · Political editor · Editorial board · Assignment editor · Duty editor · Public editor · Editor-at-large · Contributing editor ) Weather presenter News bureau News director Pundit Stringer Profession News Article ( Headline · Byline · Dateline · Report · Special report · Exclusive · Interview · Column · Opinion piece · Editorial · Op-ed ) Writing style ( Five Ws · Inverted pyramid ) Ethics and standards Chequebook Churnalism Codes of ethics Culture Editing ( Copy editing · Fact-checking ) Fake news Horse race Journalese Media bias ( False balance ) News values ( Above the fold · Man bites dog ) Objectivity Pink-slime Scandals Sensationalism Sources Spiking Tabloid ( Television ) Yellow Beats Arts Business Data Entertainment Environment Fashion Local Medicine Music Politics Science Sports Technology Traffic Video games War Weather World Genres Adversarial Advocacy ( Interventionism ) Analytic Blogging Citizen Civic Collaborative Comics-based Community Database Enterprise Explanatory Feature story Gonzo Human-interest Immersion Infotainment / Soft media Interpretive Investigative Long-form Narrative New Journalism Non-profit Opinion Peace Photojournalism Public service Sensor Underground Video Visual Watchdog Social impact Decline of newspapers ( News desert ) Fourth Estate Fifth Estate Editorial independence Freedom of information Freedom of the press ( Defamation · Safety ) Journalism school Media manipulation News propaganda ( Model ) Public relations ( Media relations · News embargo · Press conference · Press release ) Source protection News media Newspapers ( Newspaper of record · Middle-market · Newspaper formats · Broadsheet · Tabloid · Online ) Magazines Broadcast journalism ( TV and radio ) Digital journalism Multimedia Documentary film News agencies Alternative media List of journalism articles – Outline Authority control databases International FAST National United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐j9lz4
Cached time: 20250818151109
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.683 seconds
Real time usage: 0.816 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2764/1000000
Revision size: 23104/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 110138/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2858/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 108314/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.470/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7000062/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  698.925      1 -total
 36.83%  257.389      4 Template:Navbox
 25.56%  178.639      1 Template:Journalism
 24.33%  170.060      7 Template:Excerpt
 20.37%  142.388      1 Template:Reflist
 11.01%   76.941      1 Template:Books
 10.54%   73.673      5 Template:Cite_web
  7.80%   54.524      1 Template:Short_description
  5.56%   38.839      7 Template:Cite_journal
  5.25%   36.724      5 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:167897:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818151109 and revision id 1304748618. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Editing&oldid=1304748618 " Categories : Editing Journalism occupations Mass media occupations Editors Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use dmy dates from July 2022 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 23:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Editing 46 languages Add topic

