Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Local economy 3 Community support 4 Criticism 5 Thomas Lyson 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Civic agriculture 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Food production as linked to one's responsibility to society This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Civic agriculture" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Civic agriculture is the trend towards locally based agriculture and food production that is tightly linked to a community's social and economic development. It is also connected to the citizenship and environmentalism within a community.

[ 1 ] Civic agriculture is geared towards meeting consumer demands in addition to boosting the local economy in the process through jobs, farm to food production efforts, and community sustainability.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term was first coined by Thomas Lyson, professor of sociology at Cornell, to represent an alternative means of sustainability for rural agricultural communities in the era of industrialized agriculture.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Civic agriculture is geared towards fostering a self sustainable local economy through an integral community structure in which the entire community is in some part responsible for their food production.

[ 3 ] Civic agriculture can provide a variety of benefits to a community such as cleaner water, fresher foods, and a better connection between farmers and the community.

[ 4 ] However, there are also critiques that are concerned with the way in which civic agriculture promotes community responsibility and possibly creates a false sense of citizenship.

[ 1 ] The intent of civic agricultural practices is to move away from the industrialized sector and into a localized community effort.

Origin [ edit ] Civic agriculture is a means by which rural agricultural communities can remain subsistent in a largely industrialized agriculture sector.  The term was coined by the late Thomas A. Lyson, Department of Development Sociology, Cornell University, at the 1999 Rural Sociology Society Annual Meeting.

[ 2 ] In his 2004 book, Civic Agriculture: Reconnecting Farm, Food and Community Lyson argues that in containing food production for a specific community to that community, one is further connecting the community so that it may be economically independent and socially unified. Lyson expounds on his ideas, arguing that because of the interlocked relationship between the food economy and consumers, people have a civic duty to support important agricultural engagements. Lyson claims that communities that show an active involvement in civic agriculture aid economic development by supporting their local food production.

[ 2 ] In committing to civic agriculture, local communities contribute to an economic growth in the local agricultural sector.

Manifestations of movement towards Civic Agriculture: Community supported agriculture ( CSA ) Farmer's markets Specialized agricultural districts Alternative food stores Artisanal food Consumer cooperatives Local economy [ edit ] The basis of civic agriculture is rooted in pre-industrialization farming practices. Farmers today [ when?

] are turning to civic agriculture in order to remain economically viable within an industrialized society and corporate agriculture practices. Civic agriculture promotes the sustainability of the local economy by containing the source and production of food to a particular region.

[ 2 ] One of the primary objectives of localization is to improve farmer income.

[ 1 ] Dependent upon the advanced nature of the civic agriculture production, that region is then reliant upon a small subset of farmers for the majority of their food goods. That subset of farmers must farm a variety of commodities in order to provide for the region.

[ 5 ] This practice fosters entrepreneurship within the community by treating farming as an economically viable practice, creates jobs through employment of the local community, and keeps the production and consumption of agriculture in one region making that region economically sustainable within itself.

Community support [ edit ] Civic agriculture connects the community by eliminating the fragmented nature of agriculture production. It reconnects farmers to the community and creates a social connection between the farmers and the community that is dependent upon them. The community is linked together by the prospect of its success being dependent upon the success of the collective. Civic agriculture ensures locally oriented practices that serve as a driving force for the way in which the community operates socially and politically. Socially, the general well-being of the community becomes a primary concern when civic agriculture is being practiced.

[ 2 ] Additionally, in rooting a community to its own food production, the practice fosters a sense of belonging and responsibility within the community.

[ 1 ] There is a concern however, that in creating this sense of community support, civic agriculture does not encourage the community to do more than simply produce food in order to be considered a good citizen. In other words, those that produce for or on behalf of the community, can see that action as being the only necessary contributing factor that they offer to the community.

[ 1 ] Criticism [ edit ] There is a wide range of criticism that those opposed to civic agriculture provide as reasons for a community to not participate in the practice. One critique is that although civic agriculture is focused on localization and a modern means of economic sustainability, it still relies upon traditional economic practices of supply and demand. Without the participation of an industrial sector as the connector between the farmer and the consumer, the farmers of a particular region are directly constrained to demand oriented economics.

[ 1 ] Another critique of civic agriculture is that in fostering a sense of entrepreneurship, farming practices become individualized as a marketing technique for differentiation. In attempting to differentiate their product, farmers limit the spread of information regarding their particular farming practices in order to compete within the respective market.

[ 1 ] While one of the goals of civic agriculture includes connecting the farmer to the community, some argue that it indeed does not and furthers the separation between the two as farmers are still isolated socially and geographically.

[ 4 ] There also exist the concern with regards to power within the community, as the power is not necessarily equally divided. Wealthier individuals hold a higher power of the dollar and have the ability to control both the farmer and the poorer consumers in terms of what is produced and what is available for consumption respectively.

[ 4 ] Thomas Lyson [ edit ] Thomas Lyson was a notable sociologist who spent much of his professional career analyzing the possible impacts and outcomes of civic agriculture. After coining the phrase in 1999, Lyson used his time as a professor at Cornell University to propose ways that rural communities could support themselves not only by providing food to the community, but also by providing jobs and thus supporting the local, rural economy.

[ 6 ] Lyson's interest in rural community subsistence stemmed from his time spent traveling the globe, specifically in the back roads of Appalachia.

[ 6 ] In his novel Civic Agriculture: Reconnecting Farm, Food, and Community , Lyson warns against the increasingly industrial approach being developed in the world of agriculture today as being detrimental to the independent family farm which serves as the backbone of the rural community.

[ 3 ] Lyson spent a considerable portion of his career exploring the economic opportunities presented before rural communities and the ways in which those opportunities should be utilized in order to ensure the prosperity of the community.

[ 6 ] Thomas Lyson died in 2006.

[ 7 ] In 2013, The Lyson Center for Civic Agriculture and Food Systems was created, a food systems development program in Ithaca, New York . Since 2013, it has been a project within the Center for Transformative Action, a nonprofit organization affiliated with Cornell University .

[ 8 ] The aim of the center is to provide research oriented solutions to the current problems that exist within our various food systems.

[ 5 ] The center publishes the Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community Development, an open access journal on food systems and food systems research [ 9 ] and facilitates the North American Food Systems Network. The Lyson Center also publishes the Sustainable Food Systems Sourcebook.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Program., University of Florida. Humanities and Agriculture (2000).

Agriculture and human values . [Kluwer]. pp.

217– 224.

OCLC 499757833 .

^ a b c d e f Lyson, Thomas A. (2004).

Civic Agriculture: Reconnecting Farm, Food, and Community . UPNE. pp.

1– 22.

ISBN 978-1-58465-414-8 .

^ a b c Dupuis, E. Melanie (September 2005). "Civic Agriculture: Reconnecting Farm, Food, and CommunityCivic Agriculture: Reconnecting Farm, Food, and Community, by LysonThomas A.. Medford, MA: Tufts University Press; Lebanon, NH: University Press of New England, 2004. 136 pp. $50.00 cloth. ISBN: 1-58465-413-9. $16.95 paper. ISBN: 1-58465-414-7".

Contemporary Sociology: A Journal of Reviews .

34 (5): 521– 522.

doi : 10.1177/009430610503400539 .

ISSN 0094-3061 .

S2CID 151510172 .

^ a b c Kiernan, Nancy Ellen; Brasier, Kathy; Barbercheck, Mary; Sachs, Carolyn; Trauger, Amy (2010-03-01). " "Our market is our community": women farmers and civic agriculture in Pennsylvania, USA".

Agriculture and Human Values .

27 (1): 43– 55.

doi : 10.1007/s10460-008-9190-5 .

ISSN 1572-8366 .

S2CID 153557413 .

^ a b "Our vision and mission" .

Lyson Center Values . Retrieved 18 September 2018 .

^ a b c "Thomas A. Lyson" .

www.lysoncenter.org . Retrieved 2018-11-27 .

^ "CU sociologist Thomas A. Lyson, local foods advocate, dies" .

^ "Thomas Anthony Lyson" .

Cornell University . 2006.

hdl : 1813/18296 .

^ a b "Home" .

www.lysoncenter.org . Retrieved 2018-11-27 .

External links [ edit ] Lyson Center Website v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civic_agriculture&oldid=1292168326 " Category : Sustainable agriculture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2018 All articles needing additional references All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2022 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 15:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Civic agriculture 1 language Add topic

