Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Policies 2 Notable members 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents German Free-minded Party 13 languages Беларуская Български Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political party in the German Empire German Free-minded Party Deutsche Freisinnige Partei Chairman of the Central Committee Franz von Stauffenberg (1884–1893) Chairman of the Executive Committee Rudolf Virchow (1884–1893) Chairman of the Select Committee Eugen Richter (1884–1890) Karl Schrader (1890) Eugen Richter (1890–1893) Founded 5 March 1884 ; 141 years ago ( 1884-03-05 ) Dissolved 7 May 1893 ; 132 years ago ( 1893-05-07 ) Merger of German Progress Party Liberal Union Succeeded by Free-minded People's Party Free-minded Union Newspaper Parlamentarische Korrespondenz Ideology Liberalism Radicalism Social progressivism Parliamentarism Laicism Political position Centre-left Colours Yellow Politics of Germany Political parties Elections The German Free-minded Party ( German : Deutsche Freisinnige Partei , DFP ) or German Radical Party [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] was a short-lived liberal party in the German Empire , founded on 5 March 1884 as a result of the merger of the German Progress Party and the Liberal Union , an 1880 split-off of the National Liberal Party .

Policies [ edit ] The economists Ludwig Bamberger and Georg von Siemens as well as the liberal politician Eugen Richter were among the prime movers of the merger in the view of the forthcoming accession of the considered liberal Crown Prince Frederick William to the throne (which took place only in 1888). Richter aspired to build up a strong united liberal force in the Reichstag parliament, similar to the British Liberal Party under William Ewart Gladstone . The Free-minded Party supported the expansion of parliamentarism in the German constitutional monarchy , separation of church and state and Jewish emancipation .

Under party chairman Franz August Schenk von Stauffenberg along with his deputies Albert Hänel and Rudolf Virchow , the Free-minded Party received disappointing 17.6% of the votes in the 1884 federal election , representing a drop of 3.6% from the combined parties' results in the previous 1881 federal election . The main beneficiaries of this defection were the Conservative forces, supporting the protectionist , colonialist and anti-socialist policies of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck . In the 1887 federal election , the party again lost half of their seats, falling to 32 Reichstag mandates. Though urged by his wife Princess Royal Victoria , Crown Prince Frederick William did not dare court trouble with Bismarck by openly taking the party's side. His early death in 1888 and the accession of his son William II terminated all liberal hopes.

During the decline in support, the differences between progressives and centre-right liberals became irreconcilable. Upon Bismarck's death in 1890, the parties lost their common adversary. In 1893, the Free-minded Party split in conflict over Chancellor Leo von Caprivi 's policies into the Free-minded People's Party and the Free-minded Union . A re-union took place in 1910, when both further weakened liberal parties merged with the German People's Party to form the Progressive People's Party .

Notable members [ edit ] Members of the Free-minded Party at the Reichstag foyer, 1889, Heinrich Berling , Erwin Lüders , Philipp Schmieder , Moritz Klotz , Adolph Hoffmann , Max von Forckenbeck , Paul Kohli , Alexander Meyer , Paul Langerhans , Albert Traeger , Julius Lerche , Friedrich Witte , Georg von Siemens , August Munckel , Eugen Richter , August Maager , Asmus Lorenzen , Friedrich Schenck , Johann Heinrich Nickel , Reinhart Schmidt , Max Broemel .

Ludwig Bamberger Theodor Barth Max von Forckenbeck Albert Hänel Max Hirsch Albert Kalthoff Ludwig Loewe Theodor Mommsen Eugen Richter Heinrich Edwin Rickert Georg von Siemens Rudolf Virchow Ludwig Büchner See also [ edit ] Contributions to liberal theory Liberal democracy Liberalism Liberalism in Germany Liberalism worldwide List of liberal parties References [ edit ] Tillich, Paul ; Translated by Franklin Sherman (1957).

The Socialist Decision . Harper & Row. p. 57.

^ Bonham, Gary (1991).

Ideology and Interests in the German State . Routledge. p. 72.

^ Retallack, James (1992).

Antisocialism and Electoral Politics in Regional Perspective: The Kingdom of Saxony . Cambridge University Press. p. 62.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Lerman, Katharine Anne (2004).

Bismarck . Pearson. p. 199.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Deutsche Freisinnige Partei .

Preceded by German Progress Party liberal German parties 1884–1893 Succeeded by Free-minded People's Party Preceded by Liberal Union Succeeded by Free-minded Union v t e Political parties in Germany until the end of World War I Socialist General German Workers' Association (ADAV) Lassallean General German Workers' Association (LADAV) Social Democratic Workers' Party of Germany (SDAP) Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany (MSPD) Catholic Centre Party (Zentrum) Liberal Social liberal German Progress Party (DFP) Democratic People's Party (DVP) German People's Party (DtVP) Liberal Union (LV) German Free-minded Party (DFsP) Free-minded People's Party (FVP) Free-minded Union (FV) National-Social Association (NSV) Democratic Union (DV) Progressive People's Party (FVP) National liberal National Liberal Party (NLP) Imperial Liberal Party (LRP) Conservative Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) Christian Social Party (CSP) German Fatherland Party Conservative Party (Prussia) Antisemitic German Reform Party (DRP) German Social Party (DSP) German Social Reform Party (DSRP) Regionalist Saxon People's Party German-Hanoverian Party (DHP) Bavarian Peasants' League (BB) Polish Party Danish Party Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=German_Free-minded_Party&oldid=1280302216 " Categories : Defunct liberal political parties Defunct political parties in Germany Political parties established in 1884 Liberal parties in Germany Radical parties Political parties of the German Empire Political parties disestablished in 1893 1884 establishments in Germany Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 March 2025, at 20:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents German Free-minded Party 13 languages Add topic

