Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Climate change 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Environmental issues in Mali 4 languages Español Hausa Igbo Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Desertification in Mali ) A stack of fuel wood in Mali. Consumption of wood for timber is contributing to Mali's continuing deforestation.

Environmental issues in Mali include desertification , deforestation , soil erosion , drought , and inadequate supplies of potable water . Deforestation is an especially serious and growing problem. According to the Ministry of the Environment, Mali’s population consumes 6 million tons of wood per year for timber and fuel. To meet this demand, 4,000 square kilometers of tree cover are lost annually, virtually ensuring destruction of the country’s savanna woodlands.

One of Mali's major environmental issues is desertification. Mali has been in a drought for decades now and it is really affecting the country. Soil erosion, deforestation, and loss of pasture land are all major problems in Mali. Mali also has a shortening water supply .

[ 1 ] To help sustain Mali's ever-growing problem the government has assigned 3.7 percent of Mali’s total land area protected. It has ratified international environmental agreements pertaining to biodiversity , climate change , desertification , endangered species , and ozone layer protection .

[ 2 ] According to the U.N.

FAO, 10.2% or about 12,490,000 ha of Mali is forested. Mali had 530,000 ha of planted forest. Change in forest cover : Between 1990 and 2010, Mali lost an average of 79,100 ha or 0.56% per year, totaling to a loss of 11.2%, or around 1,582,000 ha, during that period.

[ 3 ] Mali had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.16/10, ranking it 51st globally out of 172 countries.

[ 4 ] Climate change [ edit ] Visualisation of temperature change in Mali, 1901 to 2020.

Though Mali contributes very little to the world's greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions , it is among the list of countries most vulnerable to climate change .

[ 5 ] Climate change is increasing both the intensity and frequency of floods and droughts in the country as well as the likelihood of climate disasters.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] It is also likely to adversely affect food production [ 7 ] and diseases, [ 8 ] and increases social vulnerability among the country's residents.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Wildlife of Mali Rally for Education about Sustainable Development , political party References [ edit ] ^ "Mali- Environment." Encyclopedia of The Nations. N.p., n.d. Web. 16 May 2013 ^ "Land and Resources, Environmental Issues." countries quest. N.p., n.d. Web. 17 May 20 [1] ^ "Mali Forest Information and Data" .

rainforests.mongabay.com . Retrieved 2018-10-12 .

^ Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez, M.; Mittermeier, R.; Murray, N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky, J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper, C.; Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor, R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.; Venter, O.; Visconti, P.; Wang, S.; Watson, J. E. M. (2020).

"Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity - Supplementary Material" .

Nature Communications .

11 (1).

doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 7723057 .

^ a b c Badal, Lionel (2021-12-09).

"Mali in the Frontlines of Climate Change - Our World" .

Our World: United Nations University . Retrieved 2021-07-13 .

^ "Mali's invisible front line: climate change in a conflict zone" .

International Committee of the Red Cross . 2021-02-18.

^ Bharwani, Sukaina (2011-03-25).

"Mali - An assessment of vulnerability, climate risks, impacts and trends" .

weADAPT | Climate change adaptation planning, research and practice . Retrieved 2021-07-13 .

^ "Climate Change Parameters, Diarrhoeal Diseases and Malaria in the Health Districts of Nara and Commune VI of Bamako District, Mali, 2000-2010: A Retrospective Study" (PDF) .

WHO . 2015 . Retrieved 2021-07-13 .

External links [ edit ] Environment - Mali - problem, farming The battle on the frontline of climate change in Mali at BBC News v t e Mali articles History Ghana Empire Mali Empire History of the Mali Empire Songhai Empire Segou Empire Kénédougou Kingdom Kaarta Massina Empire Toucouleur Empire Wassoulou Empire French Sudan Mali Federation 2012 Tuareg rebellion 2012 coup Mali War Ebola disease event 2020 protests 2020 coup 2021 coup Geography Borders Cercles Cities Communes Environmental issues Mountains National parks Regions Rivers Wildlife Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT rights Law enforcement Military National Assembly Political parties President Prime Minister Vice President Economy Foreign aid Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Child marriage Demographics Ethnic groups Education Health Human trafficking Languages Prostitution Religion Slavery Women Culture Cuisine Films Flag Literature Media Music Polygamy Public holidays Outline Index Category Portal v t e Environmental issues in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_issues_in_Mali&oldid=1234433553 " Categories : Environment of Mali Environmental issues by country Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 14 July 2024, at 09:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental issues in Mali 4 languages Add topic

