Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Creative work and activism 2 Theories 3 The Uprising and Breathing Toggle The Uprising and Breathing subsection 3.1 The Uprising 3.2 Breathing 4 Bibliography (selected) Toggle Bibliography (selected) subsection 4.1 Books 4.2 Essays and speeches 5 Filmography 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Franco Berardi 10 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian philosopher and activist (born 1949) Franco Berardi Berardi delivering a lecture in 2016 Born ( 1949-11-02 ) 2 November 1949 (age 75) Bologna , Italy Other names Bifo Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Autonomist Marxism Notable works The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy (2009) This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e Franco " Bifo " Berardi (born 2 November 1949) is an Italian Marxist philosopher, theorist and activist in the autonomist tradition, whose work mainly focuses on the role of the media and information technology within post-industrial capitalism . Berardi has written over two dozen published books, as well as a number of essays and speeches.

Creative work and activism [ edit ] In 1962, at the age of 13, Berardi became a member of the Italian Communist Youth Federation , but was expelled due to "factionalism." He participated in the events of May '68 at the University of Bologna , where he graduated with a degree in Aesthetics. During this time he joined the extra-parliamentary group Potere Operaio and met Antonio Negri . Berardi founded the magazine A/traverso in 1975 and worked with the magazine until 1981, when it reached its high point of publishing. He was also part of the staff of Radio Alice , the first free pirate radio station in Italy, from 1976 to 1978.

Like others involved in the political movement of Autonomia in Italy during the 1970s, Berardi fled to Paris, where he worked with Félix Guattari in the field of schizoanalysis . During the 1980s, Berardi contributed to the magazines Semiotexte (New York), Chimerees (Paris), Metropoli (Rome) and Musica 80 (Milan). During the 1990s, he published Mutazione e Ciberpunk (Genoa, 1993), Cibernauti (Rome, 1994), and Félix (Rome, 2001). He has also collaborated with artists such as Warren Neidich and publications such as e-flux in the contemporary arts field. Currently he is working with the magazine Derive Approdi as well as teaching social history of communication at the Accademia di belle Arti in Milan . He is the co-founder of the e-zine rekombinant.org and of the telestreet movement, founding the channel Orfeo TV .

[ 1 ] Theories [ edit ] Unlike orthodox Marxists , Berardi's autonomist theories draw on psychoanalysis , schizoanalysis and communication theory to show how subjectivity and desire are bound up with the functioning of the capitalist system, rather than portraying events such as the 2008 financial crisis merely as an example of the inherently contradictory logic of capitalist accumulation.

[ 2 ] Thus, he argues against privileging labour in critique and says that "the solution to the economic difficulty of the situation cannot be solved with economic means: the solution is not economic." [ 3 ] Human emotions and embodied communication become increasingly central to the production and consumption patterns that sustain capital flows in post-industrial society , and as such Berardi uses the concepts of " cognitariat " and "info labour" to analyze this psycho-social process.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Among Berardi's other concerns are cultural representations and expectations about the future — from proto-Fascist Futurism [ 6 ] to post-modern cyberpunk (1993). This represents a greater concern with ideas and cultural expectations than the determinist-materialist expression of a Marxism which is often confined to purely economic or systemic analysis. He also pioneered the idea of "Semiocapitalism," which is a discussion of the role that semiotics play in our capitalist system, and is a critique of the issues this causes. The primary component of this theory is the depression of the psyche that is caused by the exponentially increasing rate of proliferation of semiotics and symbols in to the cybersphere for the sake of profits.

The Uprising and Breathing [ edit ] Two of Berardi's books, The Uprising and Breathing , are closely related speculative works which treat the 2008 financial crisis , financial capitalism and the subsequent protest movements of the early 21st century such as Occupy Wall Street and the Arab Spring .  In both works Berardi criticizes neoliberal financial capitalism, claiming that its supporting infrastructure of automation (e.g. computer trading on the stock market)—together with standardized computer language conventions on social media (e.g. the like button on Facebook)—hollow out language to the detriment of human actors who naturally communicate in more sensuous and subjective ways.  As remedies Berardi suggests poetry and "chaos"—citing the elegies of Rilke and Guattari 's work on chaos—as methods for human subjects to overcome the lived experience of market logic.  Additionally both books cite the work of Deleuze and Guattari , Marx's Fragment on Machines from the Grundrisse , the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus by Wittgenstein , and Symbolic Exchange and Death by Baudrillard .

The Uprising [ edit ] In The Uprising Berardi rejects economic discourse, asserting that economics itself is not a science but rather a form of political ideology.

[ 7 ] [ a ] Consequently he further rejects the notion that neoliberal economic policy is based in the objectivity of science, but is instead merely a political program and an undesirable one.  Against the mathematical language of economics (which he alleges masquerades as scientific) Berardi proposes a speculative (and also unscientific) rhetoric of poetry, which he intends to disrupt the conventional wisdom of contemporary economics.

Berardi decries the automation and standardization of language via computer technology, which he alleges results in an impoverished language as experienced by the human subject, with the result that it is more difficult to conceptualize another form of life apart from the current economic/political situation.

[ b ] He also criticizes the fragmentation of precarious work (e.g. seasonal work, telecommuting) which leads to social atomization and precludes social solidarity, and further rejects neoliberal and conservative economic views.

[ 10 ] As remedies, Berardi proposes both a rediscovery of poetic language which speaks directly to humans, and also a redirection of the general intellect —a Marxist term deriving from the Grundrisse , referring to the cognitive capacity of society—away from capitalism and towards social solidarity.

Breathing [ edit ] In Breathing , Berardi uses respiration as a metaphor to discuss modern society.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Beginning with his own asthma and the death of Eric Garner , [ 13 ] he advances the notion that humanity is experiencing a "breathlessness" [ 14 ] in all areas of life as a result of being out of sync with contemporary capitalism and technology.  The book continues several of the themes previously treated in The Uprising .

Berardi cites Chaosmosis , a text by Félix Guattari, to establish a dichotomy of rhythm and chaos.  This dichotomy is then compared with (regular and irregular) breathing and the alleged tension between humans and capitalist society.

The established order—social, political, economic, and sexual—aims to enforce a concatenation that stiffens and stifles the vibrational oscillation of singularities.  This stiffening of vibrant bodies results in what Guattari calls 'spasms'.  Guattari did not have time to further elaborate his concept of the chaosmic spasm, as he died a few months after the publication of Chaosmosis , but I think that this concept is crucial for an understanding of subjectivity under today's conditions of info-neural acceleration.  The spasm provokes suffering and breathlessness in the nervous system and the consciousness of the social organism.  But the spasm is 'chaosmic', in Guattari's terms, inasmuch as it invites the organism to remodulate its vibration and to create, ex nihilo, a harmonic order by way of resingularization." — Breathing , pp. 23–24.

The rhetorical suggestion is that humanity is obliged to "shake off" capitalism in a spasm which will allow the social body to "breathe regularly" again, in a new rhythm.

[ 15 ] Later, Berardi examines other alleged social ills of the early 21st century.  He cites the novels of Jonathan Franzen as providing "insight into what is happening to the American mind, and particularly to the American unconscious, during the reign of Trump... the living brain of America is decaying, seized by anxiety and depression, furiously looking for scapegoats and for revenge." [ 16 ] Berardi criticizes the virtual reality of dating apps (juxtaposed with reports of decreased sexual activity among millennials) [ 17 ] and internet forum posts by the American hacker and troll weev [ 18 ] as further examples of sickness in society.  As proposed remedies, Berardi returns to poetry and the notion of seeking different rhythms of life.

Bibliography (selected) [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Quit Everything: Interpreting Depression.

London: Repeater Books, 2024.

ISBN 9781915672513 The Third Unconscious: The Psychosphere in the Viral Age.

London & New York: Verso Books, 2021.

ISBN 9781839762536 The Second Coming.

Cambridge: Polity Press, 2019.

ISBN 1509534849 Breathing: Chaos and Poetry.

Cambridge, Mass.: Semiotext(e) / Intervention Series, 2018.

ISBN 1635900387 Futurability: The Age of Impotence and the Horizon of Possibility.

London & New York: Verso Books, 2017.

ISBN 1784787442 And: Phenomenology of the end.

Cambridge, Mass.: Semiotext(e), 2015.

ISBN 1584351705 Heroes: Mass Murder and Suicide.

London & New York: Verso Books, 2015.

ISBN 1781685789 The Uprising: On Poetry and Finance.

Cambridge, Mass.: Semiotext(e) / Intervention Series, 2012.

ISBN 1584351128 After the Future.

Edited by Gary Genosko and Nicholas Thoburn. Oakland & Edinburgh: AK Press, 2011.

ISBN 1849350590 The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy .

Translated by Francesca Cadel and Giuseppina Mecchia, with preface by Jason E. Smith. Los Angeles, CA: Semiotexte, 2009.

ISBN 1584350768 With Marco Jacquement and Gianfranco Vitali.

Ethereal Shadows: Communications and Power in Contemporary Italy.

London: Autonomedia, 2009.

Precarious Rhapsody. Semio-capitalism and the Pathologies of the Post-Alpha Generation.

London: Autonomedia, 2009.

Skizomedia. Trent'anni di mediattivismo.

Untranslated: Schizomedia: Thirty Years of Media Activism.

Rome: Derive Approdi, 2006.

Il sapiente, il mercante, il guerriero: dal rifiuto del lavoro all'emergere del cognitariato Untranslated: The Warrior, The Merchant, and the Sage: the Emergence of the Cognitariat Refusal of Work.

Rome: DeriveApprodi, 2004.

With Jacquement e Vitali and Baldini Castoldi Dalai.

Telestreet. Macchina immaginativa non omologata.

Untranslated: Telestreet: Machine Imagination Not Approved.

2003.

Alice è il diavolo. Storia di una radio sovversiva.

Untranslated: Alice is the Devil: Story of a Subversive Radio.

Shake, 2002.

Un'estate all'inferno.

Untranslated: Summer in Hell.

Ed. Luca Sossella. 2002.

Félix. Narrazione del mio incontro con il pensiero di Guattari, cartografia visionaria del tempo che viene.

Translated: Félix Guattari. Thought, Friendship, and Visionary Cartography.

London: Palgrave, 2008.

La fabbrica dell'infelicita'. New economy e movimento del cognitariato.

Untranslated: The Factory of Unhappiness: New Economy and Movement of the Cognitariat.

Rome: DeriveApprodi, 2001.

La nefasta utopia di Potere Operaio.

Untranslated: The Ominous Utopia of Workers' Power.

Castelvecchi, 1997.

Exit, il nostro contributo all'estinzione della civilta.

Untranslated: Exit – Our Contribution to the Extinction of Civilization.

Cibernauti.

Untranslated: Cybernauts.

Castelvecchi, 1995.

Come si cura il nazi, Neuromagma.

Untranslated: How is the Nazi, Neuromagma.

1994.

Mutazione e cyberpunk.

Untranslated: Mutation and Cyberpunk.

1993.

Piu' cyber che punk.

Untranslated: More Cyber Than Punk.

1990.

Infovirus.

Untranslated. Topia. 1985.

Enfin le ciel est tombè sur la terre.

Untranslated: Finally the Sky Fell to the Earth.

Seuil, 1978.

Contro il lavoro.

Untranslated: Against Work.

Milano: Feltrinelli, 1970.

Essays and speeches [ edit ] "Futurism and the reversal of the future" . London: May 2009.

"Communism is back but we should call it the therapy of singularisation" . London: February 2009.

"The Post-Futurist Manifesto" . Trans. R. W. Flint. 2009.

"Biopolitics and Connective Mutation" Archived 14 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

Culture Machine, Vol. 7, 2005.

"What is the Meaning of Autonomy Today: Subjectivation, Social Composition, Refusal of Work" Archived 17 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

Replicart.

September 2003.

"The Obsession with Identity Fascism" . Trans. Steve Wright. From The Ominous Utopia of Worker Control (Untranslated text, 1997).

"Info Labour and Precarity" . Trans. Eric Empson.

Filmography [ edit ] The Move (documentary). Directed by Renato de Maria. 1991.

See also [ edit ] Gilles Deleuze Michel Foucault Félix Guattari Maurizio Lazzarato Antonio Negri Post-structuralism Post-Marxism Paolo Virno Notes [ edit ] ^ "It is difficult to believe that something like 'economic science' really exists.  What is a science?  Without embarking on epistomological discussions, I would simply say that science is a form of knowledge which is free of dogma, which is able to extrapolate general laws from the observation of empirical phenomena (and consequently able to predict something about what will happen next), and finally which is able to understand those kinds of changes that Thomas Kuhn has labeled paradigm shifts .  As far as I know, the discourse named 'economics' does not correspond to this schema." [ 8 ] ^ "The techno-linguistic machine is giving language to human beings, and also taking the place of human beings in language for the current generation.  The first generation that learned more words from a machine than from their mothers has a problem concerning the relationship between words and the body, between words and affection.  The separation of language learning from the body of the mother and from the body in general is changing language itself, and is changing the relationship between language and the body." [ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ Biography at Generation-Online .

^ Berardi, Franco.

The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy.

Trans. Francesca Cadel and Giuseppina Mecchia, with preface by Jason E. Smith. Los Angeles, CA: Semiotexte, 2009.

^ Berardi, Franco.

"Franco 'Bifo' Berardi about crisis" on YouTube . Lithuania: Alytus Art Strike Biennial, 2009.

^ "Info Labour and Precarity" . Trans. Eric Empson.

^ Il sapiente, il mercante, il guerriero: dal rifiuto del lavoro all'emergere del cognitariato.

Untranslated: The Warrior, The Merchant, and the Sage: the Emergence of the Cognitariat Refusal of Work.

Rome: DeriveApprodi, 2004.

^ "Futurism and the reversal of the future" . London: May 2009.

^ Berardi, Franco "Bifo" (2012).

The Uprising . Semiotext(e) Intervention Series. Vol. 14. Semiotext(e).

ISBN 9781584351122 .

^ The Uprising , p. 72.

^ The Uprising , p. 101.

^ The Uprising , pp. 44–48.

^ Berardi, Franco "Bifo" (2019).

Breathing . Semiotext(e) Intervention Series. Vol. 26. Semiotext(e).

ISBN 9781635900385 .

^ Tremblay, Jean-Thomas (28 February 2019).

"Breathing: Chaos and Poetry – Franco "Bifo" Berardi" .

Full Stop .

^ Breathing , p. 15.

^ Breathing , p. 10.

^ Breathing , p. 50.

^ Breathing , pp. 74–75.

^ Breathing , pp. 96–103.

^ Breathing , pp. 135–136.

External links [ edit ] Biography at Generation-Online Biography at Affinity Project Franco Berardi's author page on Through Europe Irony and the Politics of Composition in the Philosophy of Franco "Bifo" Berardi . Extensive essay on Berardi's political and philosophical trajectory from the 1960s activism with Potere Operaio to Radio Alice and Autonomia to his contemporary analysis of the networked society.

Interview with Franco Berardi for Ràdio Web MACBA (2011). Museu d’Art Contemporani de Barcelona.

Review of Franco Berardi's After the Future by Ben Lear on Viewpoint Magazine "This Theorist Believes That Capitalism Creates Mass Murderers by Causing People to 'Malfunction' " .

Vice . 16 April 2015.

(Interview) v t e Critique of work Historical persons Abbie Hoffman Edward Bellamy Alfredo M. Bonanno André Gorz Bob Black Günther Anders Guy Debord Heinrich Böll Ivan Illich Mikhail Bakunin Paul Lafargue Walter Benjamin Antonio Negri Bertrand Russell Friedrich Nietzsche Henry David Thoreau Herbert Marcuse Jerry Rubin Josef Pieper Karl Marx Max Stirner Max Weber Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Raoul Vaneigem Renzo Novatore Zo d'Axa Contemporary persons Franco Berardi L. Susan Brown Madeleine Bunting David Graeber Michael Hardt Maurizio Lazzarato Claus Peter Ortlieb Roland Paulsen Jeremy Rifkin Penelope Rosemont Mark Slouka Nick Srnicek Claire Wolfe John Zerzan Terminology and related topics 996 working hour system Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aktion Arbeitsscheu Reich All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy Autonomism Bare minimum Monday Bullshit job Career catfishing Coffee badging Corporatocracy Conscious quitting Cycle of poverty Dolce far niente Effects of overtime Eight-hour day Employee ghosting Extermination through labour Career cushioning Careerism Flextime Forced labour Four-day workweek Funemployment Ghost job Uberisation / Gig worker Glass cliff Happiness economics Honeymoon-hangover effect Hush trip Infinite workday Job crafting Job cuffing Jobless employed Karoshi Loud quitting Neijuan Microretirement Occupational burnout Occupational safety and health Occupational stress Orange S.A. suicides Overwork Performance punishment Post-work society Precariat Presenteeism Digital presenteeism Productivity theater Professional abuse Protestant work ethic Psychological safety Quick quitting Quiet hiring Quiet promotion Quiet quitting Quiet thriving Lazy girl job Rage applying Refusal of work Resenteeism Right to rest and leisure Sampo generation Sunday scaries Six-hour day Tang ping Technological unemployment Toxic workplace Narcissism Psychopathy Wage slavery Work ethic Workaholic Working poor Work–life interface Theater, movies, music and art À Nous la Liberté Office Space Swedish Public Freedom Service " Take This Job and Shove It " The Future of Work and Death The Main Thing Is Work!

The Working Class Goes to Heaven Yama—Attack to Attack Literature Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral Bartleby, the Scrivener Bonjour paresse Bullshit Jobs The Conquest of Bread Critique of Economic Reason Fight Club Future Primitive and Other Essays In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays Inventing the Future Manifesto Against Work New Escapologist On the Poverty of Student Life The Society of the Spectacle Steal This Book The Abolition of Work The End of Work The Human Use of Human Beings The Idler The Revolution of Everyday Life The Right to Be Lazy The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy Communities R/antiwork CrimethInc.

Situationist International See also Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Job strain Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Franco_Berardi&oldid=1302566872 " Categories : 1949 births Autonomism Autonomia Operaia Critics of work and the work ethic Italian anti-capitalists Italian communists Italian Marxists Living people Marxist theorists Potere Operaio Refusal of work Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2022 Articles with hCards Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 06:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Franco Berardi 10 languages Add topic

