Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and World War II 2 Early political career 3 Chancellor Toggle Chancellor subsection 3.1 Foreign policy 3.2 Domestic policies 3.2.1 Brandt's popularity 3.3 Chancellor of domestic reform 3.3.1 Social assistance 3.3.2 Health care 3.3.3 Retirement 3.3.4 Education 3.3.5 Housing and urban development 3.3.6 Civil, family, and animal rights 3.3.7 Military 3.3.8 Consumers' and workers' rights 3.3.9 Environment 3.3.10 Economy 3.4 1972 crisis 3.5 New elections 3.6 Guillaume affair 4 Post-Chancellorship Toggle Post-Chancellorship subsection 4.1 Socialist International 4.2 Brandt Report 4.3 Reunification 4.4 Hostages in Iraq 5 Death and legacy 6 Brandt's family 7 Honours Toggle Honours subsection 7.1 Foreign honours 8 Selected works 9 Notes 10 References 11 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Willy Brandt 98 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русский Sardu Seeltersk Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chancellor of West Germany from 1969 to 1974 Not to be confused with Vassily Brandt .

This article is about the German politician. For people with a similar name, see William Brandt (disambiguation) .

Willy Brandt Official portrait, 1980 Chancellor of Germany [ a ] In office 22 October 1969 – 7 May 1974 President Gustav Heinemann Vice-Chancellor Walter Scheel Preceded by Kurt Georg Kiesinger Succeeded by Walter Scheel (acting) Helmut Schmidt Leader of the Social Democratic Party In office 16 February 1964 – 14 June 1987 Federal Manager Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski Holger Börner Egon Bahr Peter Glotz Preceded by Erich Ollenhauer Succeeded by Hans-Jochen Vogel Vice-Chancellor of Germany In office 1 December 1966 – 22 October 1969 Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger Preceded by Hans-Christoph Seebohm Succeeded by Walter Scheel Minister for Foreign Affairs In office 1 December 1966 – 20 October 1969 Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger Preceded by Gerhard Schröder Succeeded by Walter Scheel Governing Mayor of West Berlin In office 3 October 1957 – 30 November 1966 Mayor Franz Amrehn Heinrich Albertz Preceded by Otto Suhr Succeeded by Heinrich Albertz President of the German Bundesrat In office 1 November 1957 – 31 October 1958 First Vice President Kurt Sieveking Preceded by Kurt Sieveking Succeeded by Wilhelm Kaisen President of the Abgeordnetenhaus of Berlin In office 11 January 1955 – 2 October 1957 Preceded by Otto Suhr Succeeded by Kurt Landsberg Parliamentary constituencies Member of the Bundestag for North Rhine-Westphalia In office 20 October 1969 – 8 October 1992 Preceded by Multi-member district Succeeded by Heike Niggemeyer Member of the Abgeordnetenhaus of Berlin In office 3 December 1950 – 14 March 1971 Preceded by Multi-member district Succeeded by Multi-member district Delegate to the Bundestag for West Berlin In office 17 October 1961 – 27 December 1961 Preceded by Multi-member district Succeeded by Hans Wellmann In office 7 September 1949 – 15 October 1957 Preceded by Constituency established Succeeded by Multi-member district Personal details Born Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm ( 1913-12-18 ) 18 December 1913 Lübeck , Free City of Lübeck , German Empire (now Schleswig-Holstein , Germany ) Died 8 October 1992 (1992-10-08) (aged 78) Unkel , Rhineland-Palatinate , Germany Resting place Zehlendorf , Berlin Citizenship Germany (revoked 1938; regained 1948) Norway (1940–1948) Political party Social Democratic Party (1930–1931; from 1948) Other political affiliations Socialist Workers' Party (1931–1946) Spouses Carlotta Thorkildsen ​ ​ ( m.

1941; div.

1948) ​ Rut Hansen ​ ​ ( m.

1948; div.

1980) ​ Brigitte Seebacher ​ ( m.

1983) ​ Children 4, including Matthias Awards Nobel Peace Prize (1971) Signature Willy Brandt ( German: [ˈvɪliː ˈbʁant] ⓘ ; born Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm ; 18 December 1913 – 8 October 1992) was a German politician and statesman who was leader of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) from 1964 to 1987 and concurrently served as the chancellor of West Germany from 1969 to 1974.

[ 1 ] He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1971 for his efforts to strengthen cooperation in Western Europe through the EEC and to achieve reconciliation between West Germany and the countries of Eastern Europe .

[ 2 ] He was the first Social Democratic chancellor since 1930.

[ 3 ] Fleeing to Norway and then Sweden during the Nazi regime and working as a left-wing journalist, he took the name Willy Brandt as a pseudonym to avoid detection by Nazi agents, and then formally adopted the name in 1948. Brandt earned initial fame as governing mayor of West Berlin . He served as the foreign minister and as the vice chancellor in Kurt Georg Kiesinger 's cabinet, and became chancellor in 1969.

[ 4 ] As chancellor, he maintained West Germany's close alignment with the United States and focused on strengthening European integration in Western Europe, while launching the new policy of Ostpolitik aimed at improving relations with Eastern Europe. Brandt was controversial on both the right wing, for his Ostpolitik , and on the left wing, for his support of American policies, including his silence on the Vietnam War [ 5 ] that he broke only in 1973, [ 6 ] and right-wing authoritarian regimes.

[ 7 ] The Brandt Report became a recognised measure for describing the general North–South divide in world economics and politics between an affluent North and a poor South. Brandt was also known for his fierce anti-communist policies at the domestic level, culminating in the Radikalenerlass (Anti-Radical Decree) in 1972.
In 1970, while visiting a memorial to the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising crushed by the Germans, Brandt unexpectedly knelt and meditated in silence, a moment remembered as the Kniefall von Warschau .

Brandt resigned as chancellor in 1974, after Günter Guillaume , one of his closest aides, was exposed as an agent of the Stasi , the East German secret service . Brandt died from colon cancer in 1992, aged 78.

Early life and World War II [ edit ] Willy Brandt was born Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm in the Free City of Lübeck ( German Empire ) on 18 December 1913.

[ 8 ] His mother was Martha Frahm (1894–1969) [ 9 ] a single parent, who worked as a cashier for a department store. His father was a teacher from Hamburg named John Heinrich Möller (1887–1958) [ 10 ] whom Brandt never met. As his mother worked six days a week, he was mainly brought up by his mother's stepfather, Ludwig Frahm (1875–1935). He joined the "Socialist Youth" in 1929 and at age 16 became a full member of the Social Democratic Party (SPD) in 1930 despite the age minimum normally being 18. He also wrote for the Volksbote , a local Social Democrat daily, under editor-in-chief Julius Leber , who would have a "decisive influence" on him.

[ 11 ] He, along with half the youth-wing of the Lübeck SPD, left the party to join the more left wing Socialist Workers Party (SAP) in October 1931, which was allied to the POUM in Spain and, more significant to Brandt, had close ties with the Norwegian Labour Party . His break with Leber and the SPD lost him promised financial support for university studies and his job at the Volksbote . After passing his Abitur in 1932 at Johanneum zu Lübeck , he took work at the shipbroker and ship's agent F.H. Bertling.

[ 12 ] In 1933 he left Germany for Norway to escape Nazi persecution. It was at this time that he adopted the pseudonym Willy Brandt to avoid detection by Nazi agents. In 1934, he took part in the founding of the International Bureau of Revolutionary Youth Organizations , and was elected to its secretariat.

[ 13 ] Willy Brandt became one of Wilhelm Reich ’s subjects for his experiments on the electrophysiology of pleasure and anxiety.

[ 14 ] Herbert Frahm's Norwegian passport photograph, c.

1938–1940 Brandt was in Germany from September to December 1936, disguised as a Norwegian student named Gunnar Gaasland . The real Gunnar Gaasland was married to Gertrud Meyer from Lübeck in a marriage of convenience to protect her from deportation. Meyer had joined Brandt in Norway in July 1933. In 1937, during the Spanish Civil War , Brandt worked in Spain as a journalist. In 1938, the German government revoked his citizenship, so he applied for Norwegian citizenship. In 1940, he was arrested in Norway by occupying German forces, but his real identity was not uncovered as he wore a Norwegian uniform. Upon his release, he escaped to neutral Sweden . In August 1940, he became a Norwegian citizen, receiving his passport from the Norwegian legation in Stockholm , where he lived until the end of the war. He lectured in Sweden on 1 December 1940 at Bommersvik College about problems experienced by the social democrats in Nazi Germany and the occupied countries at the start of the Second World War . In exile in Norway and Sweden, he learned Norwegian and Swedish. He spoke Norwegian fluently, and retained a close relationship with Norway.

[ 15 ] In late 1946, Brandt returned to Berlin , working for the Norwegian government. In 1948, he re-joined the SPD and became a German citizen again, formally adopting the pseudonym Willy Brandt as his legal name. In 2021, it became known that Brandt served as a paid informant for the US Counterintelligence Corps from 1948 to 1952. He supplied reports on circumstances in the GDR, including the situation of East German authorities and industries, as well as Soviet troops.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] According to Thomas Boghardt , Brandt and SPD man Hans E. Hirschfeld received 200,000 German Mark from the Americans in 1950 for promoting his political career, after both had met with the Americans at the German CIA headquarters in Frankfurt . Both were sworn to "secrecy". The Americans wanted to strengthen the SPD over the Communists in Berlin. Over the next two years, Hirschfeld received a further 106,000 Marks. Even after the end of his informant activities, he is said to have remained in contact with US intelligence.

[ 18 ] Early political career [ edit ] Brandt's official Bundestag portrait, 1953 Brandt was elected to the West German Bundestag (the federal parliament) in the 1949 West German federal election as a SPD delegate from West Berlin, serving there until 1957. Concurrently, he was elected as an SPD representative to the Abgeordnetenhaus (the state-level parliament) of West Berlin in the 1950 West Berlin state election , and served there through 1971. In the 1969 West German federal election he was again elected to the Bundestag, but as a delegate from North Rhine-Westphalia , and remained in the Bundestag as a delegate from that state until his death in 1992.

[ 19 ] In 1950, Brandt, while a member of the Bundestag and the editor-in-chief of the Berliner Stadtblatt , received a secret payment of about 170,000 Deutsche Mark from the U.S. government (equivalent to €460,386 in 2021).

[ 20 ] Brandt in 1959 as Governing Mayor of West Berlin From October 1957 to 1966, Willy Brandt served as Governing Mayor of West Berlin , [ 21 ] during a period of increasing tension in East–West relations that led to the construction of the Berlin Wall .

[ 22 ] In his first year as mayor of Berlin, he also served as the president of the Bundesrat in Bonn. He was an outspoken critic of Soviet repression of the 1956 Hungarian Uprising and of Nikita Khrushchev 's 1958 proposal that Berlin receive the status of a " free city ". He was supported by the influential publisher Axel Springer .

[ 1 ] As mayor of West Berlin, Brandt accomplished much in the way of urban development. New hotels, office-blocks, and flats were constructed, while both Schloss Charlottenburg and the Reichstag building were restored. Sections of the "Stadtring" Bundesautobahn 100 inner city motorway were opened, while a major housing programme was carried out, with roughly 20,000 new dwellings built each year during his time in office.

[ 23 ] Brandt meeting John F. Kennedy in 1961 At the start of 1961, U.S. President John F. Kennedy saw Brandt as a figure destined for high office in West Germany and was hoping he would replace Konrad Adenauer as chancellor following elections later that year.

[ 24 ] Kennedy made this preference clear by inviting Brandt, the West German opposition leader, to an official meeting at the White House a month before meeting with Adenauer, the country's leader. For the president, Brandt stood for Germany's future and for overcoming traditional Cold War thinking.

[ 25 ] Chancellor Adenauer (left) and Mayor Brandt (right) at a press conference in Berlin following the construction of the Berlin Wall , 1961 The diplomatic snub strained relations between Kennedy and Adenauer further during an especially tense time for Berlin.

[ 26 ] However, following the building of the Berlin Wall in August 1961, Brandt was disappointed and angry with Kennedy. Speaking in Berlin three days later, Brandt criticized Kennedy, asserting "Berlin expects more than words. It expects political action." He also wrote Kennedy a highly critical public letter in which he warned that the development was liable "to arouse doubts about the ability of the three Allied Powers to react and their determination" and he called the situation "a state of accomplished extortion".

[ 27 ] Kennedy was furious, but managed to defuse the tension by sending his vice president, Lyndon B. Johnson, to Berlin.

[ 28 ] In June 1963, Brandt figured prominently in the staging of Kennedy's triumphant visit to West Berlin .

[ 29 ] Brandt became the chairman of the SPD in 1964, a post that he retained until 1987, longer than any other party chairman since the founding of the SPD by August Bebel .

[ citation needed ] Brandt was the SPD candidate for the chancellorship in 1961, but he lost to Konrad Adenauer 's conservative Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU). In 1965, Brandt ran again, but lost to the popular Ludwig Erhard . Erhard's government was short-lived, however, and in 1966 a grand coalition between the SPD and CDU was formed, with Brandt serving as foreign minister and as the 5th Vice Chancellor of Germany .

[ 30 ] Chancellor [ edit ] In the 1969 elections , again with Brandt as the leading candidate, the SPD became stronger, and after three weeks of negotiations, the SPD formed a coalition government with the smaller Free Democratic Party of Germany (FDP). Brandt was elected chancellor .

Foreign policy [ edit ] Brandt with French president Georges Pompidou in Cologne , 3 July 1972 As chancellor, Brandt developed his (Neue) Ostpolitik ("new eastern policy") by stages. He was active in creating a degree of rapprochement with East Germany , and also in improving relations with the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and other Eastern Bloc (communist) countries.

Brandt introduced his Ostpolitik gradually starting in 1967 with the establishment of diplomatic relations with Romania and making a trade agreement with Czechoslovakia. In 1968, he restored diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia. However, the August 1968, Kremlin-controlled invasion of Czechoslovakia by the Warsaw Pact was a profound disappointment. He condemned the invasion and put Ostpolitik on hold while he negotiated a coalition with the Free Democrats. In late 1969, he indicated his readiness to meet with East German leadership on the basis of equality, without preconditions. He also expressed an eagerness to meet with the USSR and Poland to resolve frontier questions that had remained unsettled since 1945. He met with the East German premier Willi Stoph in 1970.

Brandt made a six-point proposal that would involve two separate German states that respected each other's territorial integrity and settle disputes peacefully. They would cooperate as neighbours and the rights of the Four Powers in Berlin would be respected by both of them, and finally, the situation around Berlin would be improved. No agreements were reached at first, but talks continued. In 1970, he signed a treaty with the Soviet Union, which normalised relations and recognized existing national boundaries. The treaty with Poland in December 1970 accepted the current boundaries, which had long been in dispute. During a visit to a monument to the German occupation-era Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, he unexpectedly, and apparently spontaneously, knelt ( Kniefall von Warschau ), honoring the victims. This was met with a strong positive reaction worldwide but was highly controversial among the German public at the time.

Monument commemorating the Kniefall von Warschau The Berlin question was settled in 1971 to West Germany's satisfaction. The crowning step came with the Basic Treaty with East Germany. The status quo was legitimized, relations were formalized on the basis of equality, and both Germanies joined the United Nations in 1973.

[ 31 ] Brandt became the first German chancellor to address the United Nations General Assembly.

Time magazine in the U.S. named Brandt as its Man of the Year for 1970, stating, "Willy Brandt is in effect seeking to end World War II by bringing about a fresh relationship between East and West. He is trying to accept the real situation in Europe, which has lasted for 25 years, but he is also trying to bring about a new reality in his bold approach to the Soviet Union and the East Bloc." [ 32 ] President Richard Nixon also was pushing détente on behalf of the United States. The Nixon policies amounted to co-opting Brandt's Ostpolitik.

[ 33 ] In 1971, Brandt received the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in improving relations with East Germany, Poland, and the Soviet Union. Brandt negotiated a peace treaty with Poland, and agreements on the boundaries between the two countries, signifying the official and long-delayed end of World War II . Brandt negotiated parallel treaties and agreements with Czechoslovakia.

Brandt with U.S. president Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger , 2 May 1973 In West Germany, Brandt's Neue Ostpolitik was extremely controversial, dividing the populace into two camps. One camp embraced all of the conservative parties, and most notably those West German residents and their families who had been driven west ("die Heimatvertriebenen ") by Stalinist ethnic cleansing from Historical Eastern Germany , especially the part that was given to Poland as a consequence of the end of the war; western Czechoslovakia (the Sudetenland ); and the rest of Eastern Europe, such as in Romania . These groups of displaced Germans and their descendants loudly voiced their opposition to Brandt's policy, calling it "illegal" and "high treason".
A different camp supported and encouraged Brandt's Neue Ostpolitik as aiming at "change through rapprochement " ( Wandel durch Annäherung ), encouraging change through a policy of engagement with the (communist) Eastern Bloc , rather than trying to isolate these countries diplomatically and commercially. Brandt's supporters claim that the policy did help to break down the Eastern Bloc's " siege mentality " and also helped to increase its awareness of the contradictions in its brand of socialism/communism, which – together with other events – eventually led to the downfall of Eastern European communism.

Domestic policies [ edit ] Brandt's popularity [ edit ] Brandt talking at an SPD meeting in Dortmund , 1983 Brandt's predecessor as chancellor, Kurt Georg Kiesinger , had been a member of the Nazi party, and was a more old-fashioned conservative-liberal intellectual. Brandt, having fought the Nazis and having faced down communist Eastern Germany during several crises while he was the mayor of Berlin, became a controversial, but credible, figure in several different factions. As the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Kiesinger's grand coalition cabinet, Brandt helped to gain further international approval for West Germany, and he laid the foundation stones for his future Neue Ostpolitik . There was a wide public-opinion gap between Kiesinger and Brandt in the West German polls.

Both men had come to their own terms with the new baby boomer lifestyles. Kiesinger considered them to be "a shameful crowd of long-haired drop-outs who needed a bath and someone to discipline them". On the other hand, Brandt needed a while to get into contact with, and to earn credibility among, the " Ausserparlamentarische Opposition " (APO) ("the extra-parliamentary opposition"). The students questioned West German society in general, seeking social, legal, and political reforms. The unrest led to a renaissance of right-wing parties in some of the Bundeslands ' (German states under the Bundesrepublik) Parliaments.

Brandt, however, represented a figure of change, and he followed a course of social, legal, and political reforms. In 1969, Brandt gained a small majority by forming a coalition with the FDP. In his first speech before the Bundestag as the chancellor, Brandt set forth his political course of reforms ending the speech with his famous words, "Wir wollen mehr Demokratie wagen" (literally: "We want to dare more democracy", or more figuratively, "We want to take a chance on more Democracy"). This speech made Brandt, as well as the Social Democratic Party, popular among most of the students and other young West German baby-boomers who dreamed of a country that would be more open and more colorful than the frugal and still somewhat-authoritarian Bundesrepublik that had been built after World War II. However, Brandt's Neue Ostpolitik lost him a large part of the German refugee voters from East Germany, who had been significantly pro-SPD in the postwar years.

Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Socialism in Germany Ideologies Anarchism Communism and Marxism Leninism Marxism-Leninism Maoism Trotskyism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Orthodox Marxism Christian socialism Catholic socialism Democratic socialism Eco-socialism Liberal socialism Revolutionary socialism Social democracy Bernsteinism State socialism Lassallism Principles Anti-capitalism Anti-fascism Environmental justice Equality Equality of opportunity Progress Proletariat Radical democracy Redistribution Social justice Solidarity State intervention Sustainability History Anti-Socialist Laws German resistance to Nazism March Revolution November Revolution Kiel mutiny Spartacist uprising Post-war period in Germany East Germany SPD Programs Gotha Erfurt Godesberg Staatssozialismus Weimar Constitution West German student movement Intellectuals Benjamin Brecht Eisler Engels Fromm Hess Kautsky Lassalle Luxemburg Marcuse Marx Mühsam Niekisch Zetkin Politicians Bebel Bernstein Brandt Ebert Honecker Kaiser Lafontaine Liebknecht (Karl) Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Müller Naumann Pieck Ramelow Schmidt Schulz Schumacher Thälmann Ulbricht Wagenknecht Parties Active Communist Party of Germany (KPD) Die Linke Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance (BSW) Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) Defunct Communist Party of Germany (KPD) General German Workers' Association (ADAV) Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) Lassallean General German Workers' Association (LADAV) Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany (MSPD) Old Social Democratic Party of Germany (ASPD) Social Democratic Workers' Party of Germany (SDAP) Socialist Workers' Party of Germany (SAPD) Organisations Active Friedrich Ebert Foundation Rosa Luxemburg Foundation Defunct Antifaschistische Aktion Black Band Red Army Faction Iron Front Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold Roter Frontkämpferbund Ruhr Red Army Media Junge Welt Neues Deutschland Die Tageszeitung Related topics Antifa Fantifa Frankfurt School History of the Social Democratic Party of Germany Three Arrows Germany portal Socialism portal v t e Chancellor of domestic reform [ edit ] Although Brandt is perhaps best known for his achievements in foreign policy, his government oversaw the implementation of a broad range of social reforms, and was known as a "Kanzler der inneren Reformen" ('Chancellor of domestic reform').

[ 34 ] According to the historian David Childs , "Brandt was anxious that his government should be a reforming administration and a number of reforms were embarked upon".

[ 35 ] Within a few years, the education budget rose from 16 billion to 50 billion DM, while one out of every three DM spent by the new government was devoted to welfare purposes. As noted by the journalist and historian Marion Dönhoff , "People were seized by a completely new feeling about life. A mania for large-scale reforms spread like wildfire, affecting schools, universities, the administration, and family legislation. In the autumn of 1970 Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski of the SPD declared, 'Every week more than three plans for reform come up for decision in cabinet and in the Assembly.'" [ 36 ] Federal spending rose significantly under Brandt; [ 37 ] increasing by an average of 12% per year between 1970 and 1974, with most of the additional spending allocated to transport, education and welfare.

[ 38 ] During Brandt's time in office, social expenditure rose from one quarter to a third of GDP.

[ 39 ] According to Helmut Schmidt , Willy Brandt's domestic reform programme had accomplished more than any previous programme for a comparable period.

[ 40 ] Levels of social expenditure were increased, [ 41 ] with more funds allocated towards housing, transportation, schools, and communication, [ 42 ] and substantial federal benefits were provided for farmers.

[ 43 ] Various measures were introduced to extend health care coverage, [ 44 ] while federal aid to sports organisations was increased.

[ 43 ] A number of social reforms were instituted [ 45 ] whilst the welfare state was significantly expanded [ 46 ] (with total public spending on social programs nearly doubling between 1969 and 1975), [ 47 ] with health, housing, and social welfare legislation bringing about welcome improvements, [ 43 ] and by the end of the Brandt Chancellorship West Germany had one of the most advanced systems of welfare in the world.

[ 34 ] Substantial increases were made in social security benefits such as injury and sickness benefits, [ 34 ] pensions, [ 48 ] unemployment benefits, [ 34 ] [ 49 ] housing allowances, [ 50 ] basic subsistence aid allowances, [ 51 ] and family allowances and living allowances.

[ 52 ] In the government's first budget, sickness benefits were increased by 9.3%, pensions for war widows by 25%, pensions for the war wounded by 16%, and retirement pensions by 5%.

[ 42 ] Numerically, pensions went up by 6.4% (1970), 5.5% (1971), 9.5% (1972), 11.4% (1973), and 11.2% (1974). Adjusted for changes in the annual price index, pensions went up in real terms by 3.1% (1970), 0.3% (1971), 3.9% (1972), 4.4% (1973), and 4.2% (1974).

[ 53 ] Between 1972 and 1974, the purchasing power of pensioners went up by 19%.

[ 54 ] In 1970, war pensions were increased by 16%.

[ 55 ] War victim's pensions went up by 5.5% in January 1971, and by 6.3% in January 1972. By 1972, war pensions for orphans and parents had gone up by around 40%, and for widows by around 50%. Between 1970 and 1972, the "Landabgaberente" (land transfer pension) went up by 55%.

[ 56 ] Between 1969 and 1974, the average real standard rate of income support rose (in 1991 prices) from around 300 DM to around 400 DM.

[ 57 ] Between 1970 and 1974, unemployment benefits rose from around 300 euros to around 400 euros per month, and unemployment assistance from just under 200 euros per month to just under 400 euros per month.

[ 58 ] In 2001 prices, the average standard social assistance benefit level rose from around 200 euros per month in 1969 to over 250 euros per month in 1974.

[ 59 ] During most of Brandt's years as chancellor, the majority of benefits increased as a percentage of average net earnings.

[ 60 ] In 1970, seagoing pilots became retrospectively insurable and gained full social security as members of the Non-Manual Workers Insurance Institute. That same year, a special regulation came into force for District Master Chimney Sweeps, making them fully insurable under the Craftsman's Insurance Scheme.

[ 55 ] An increase was made in tax-free allowances for children, which enabled 1,000,000 families to claim an allowance for the second child, compared to 300,000 families previously.

[ 42 ] The Second Modification and Supplementation Law (1970) increased the allowance for the third child from DM 50 to DM 60, raised the income-limit for the second child allowance from DM 7,800 to DM 13,200; subsequently increased to DM 15,000 by the third modification law (December 1971), DM 16,800 by the fourth modification law (November 1973), and to DM 18,360 by the fifth modification law (December 1973).

[ 50 ] A flexible retirement age after 62 years was introduced (1972) for invalids and disabled persons, [ 61 ] and social assistance was extended to those who previously had to be helped by their relatives.

[ 45 ] From 1971, special subventions were provided to enable young farmers to quit farming "and facilitate their entry into the non-agricultural pension system by means of back payments".

[ 62 ] Social assistance [ edit ] The Third Modification Law (1974) extended individual entitlements to social assistance by means of higher-income limits compatible with the receipt of benefits and lowered age limits for certain special benefits. Rehabilitation measures were also extended, child supplements were expressed as percentages of standard amounts and were thus indexed to their changes, and grandparents of recipients were exempted from potential liability to reimburse expenditure of social assistance carrier.

[ 50 ] The Third Social Welfare Amendment Act (1974) brought considerable improvements for the disabled, those in need of care, and older persons, [ 63 ] and a new fund of 100 million marks for disabled children was established.

[ 42 ] Allowances for retraining and advanced training and for refugees from East Germany were also increased, [ 42 ] together with federal grants for sport.

[ 42 ] In addition, increases were made in the pensions of 2.5 million war victims.

[ 36 ] Following a sudden increase in the price of oil, a law was passed in December 1973 granting recipients of social assistance and housing allowances a single heating-oil allowance (a procedure repeated in the winter of 1979 during the Schmidt Administration).

[ 64 ] Improvements and automatic adjustments of maintenance allowances for participants in vocational training measures were also carried out, [ 56 ] and increased allowances were provided for training and retraining, together with special allowances for refugees from East Germany.

[ 65 ] There was determined, by statutory regulation issued in February 1970, the category of persons most seriously disabled "to whom, with regard to maintenance aid, an increased demand (50% of the appropriate rate) is being conceded, and, within the scope of relief in special living conditions: a higher rate of nursing aid".

[ 66 ] In 1971, the retirement age for miners was lowered to 50.

[ 67 ] An April 1972 law providing for "promotion of social aid services" aimed to remedy, through various beneficial measures (particularly in the field of national insurance and working conditions), the staff-shortage suffered by social establishments in their medico-social, educational and other work. A bill to harmonize re-education benefits and another bill relating to severely disabled persons became law in May and September 1972 respectively.

[ 61 ] In 1972, winter payments for construction workers were introduced.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] To assist family planning and marriage and family guidance, the government allocated DM 2,232,000 in 1973 for the payment and for the basic and further training of staff. A special effort was also made in 1973 to organize the recreation of disabled persons , with a holiday guide for the disabled issued with the aid of the Federal Ministry of Family and Youth Affairs and Health in order to help them find suitable holiday accommodation for themselves and their families. From 1972 to 1973, the total amount of individual aids granted by Guarantee Fund for the integration of young immigrants increased from 17 million DM to 26 million DM.

[ 71 ] Under a law passed in April 1974, the protection hitherto granted to the victims of war or industrial accidents for the purpose of their occupational and social reintegration was extended to all disabled persons, whatever the cause of their disability, provided that their capacity to work had been reduced by at least 50%.

[ 72 ] Health care [ edit ] In the field of health care, various measures were introduced to improve the quality and availability of health care provision. Free hospital care was introduced for 9 million recipients of social relief, [ 36 ] while a contributory medical service for 23 million panel patients was introduced.

[ 36 ] Pensioners were exempted from paying a 2% health insurance contribution, [ 42 ] while improvements in health insurance provision were carried out, [ 34 ] as characterised by an expanded sickness insurance scheme, with the inclusion of preventative treatment.

[ 50 ] The income limit for compulsory sickness insurance was indexed to changes in the wage level (1970), [ 50 ] and the right to medical cancer screening for 23.5 million people was introduced.

[ 73 ] In January 1971, the reduction of sickness allowance in case of hospitalisation was discontinued.

[ 74 ] That same year, compulsory health insurance was extended to the self-employed.

[ 75 ] In 1970, the government included nonmedical psychotherapists and psychoanalysts in the national health insurance program.

[ 76 ] Pupils, students and children in kindergartens were incorporated into the accident insurance scheme, [ 50 ] which benefited 11 million children.

[ 36 ] Free medical checkups were introduced that same year, [ 77 ] while the Farmers' Sickness Insurance Law (1972) introduced compulsory sickness insurance for independent farmers, family workers in agriculture, and pensioners under the farmers' pension scheme, medical benefits for all covered groups, and cash benefits for family workers under compulsory coverage for pension insurance.

[ 50 ] Participation in employer's health insurance was extended to four million employees.

[ 73 ] A Development Law of December 1970 made it possible for all employees to voluntarily become members of the statutory sickness insurance. The level of income for compulsory sickness insurance was indexed to 75% of the respective assessment level for pension insurance, while voluntarily insured employees were granted a claim to an allowance towards their sickness insurance from their employer. This law also introduced a new type of sickness insurance benefit, namely facilities for the early diagnosis of disease. Apart from the discretionary service of disease prevention which had existed since 1923, insured persons now had a right in certain circumstances to medical examinations aimed at the early diagnosis of disease. According to one study, this marked a change in the concept of sickness insurance: it now aimed at securing good health.

[ 64 ] The Hospital Financing Law (1972) secured the supply of hospitals and reduced the cost of hospital care, "defined the financing of hospital investment as a public responsibility, single states to issue plans for hospital development, and the federal government to bear the cost of hospital investment covered in the plans, rates for hospital care thus based on running costs alone, hospitals to ensure that public subsidies together with insurance fund payments for patients cover total costs".

[ 50 ] The Benefit Improvement Law (1973) made entitlement to hospital care legally binding (entitlements already enjoyed in practice), abolished time limits for hospital care, introduced entitlement to household assistance under specific conditions, and also introduced entitlement to leave of absence from work and cash benefits in the event of a child's illness.

[ 50 ] In 1971, to encourage the growth of registered family holiday centres, the Federal Government granted subsidies for the building and appointing of 28 of these centres at a total cost of 8 million DM.

[ 74 ] Free preliminary investigations were introduced for 2.5 million children up until the age of 4 for the early detection and correction of developmental disorders, and health research was expanded. Federal grants were increased, especially for the Cancer Research Centre in Heidelberg, while a Federal Institute for Sport Science was set up, together with the Institute for Social Medicine and Epidemiology in Berlin. In addition, funding for new rehabilitation facilities was increased.

[ 56 ] Retirement [ edit ] The Pension Reform Law (1972) guaranteed all retirees a minimum pension regardless of their contributions [ 78 ] and institutionalized the norm that the standard pension (of average earners with forty years of contributions) should not fall below 50% of current gross earnings.

[ 50 ] The 1972 pension reforms improved eligibility conditions and benefits for nearly every subgroup of the West German population.

[ 79 ] The income replacement rate for employees who made full contributions was raised to 70% of average earnings. The reform also replaced 65 as the mandatory retirement age with a "retirement window" ranging between 63 and 65 for employees who had worked for at least thirty-five years. Employees who qualified as disabled and had worked for at least thirty-five years were extended a more generous retirement window, which ranged between the ages of 60 and 62. Women who had worked for at least fifteen years (ten of which had to be after the age of 40) and the long-term unemployed were also granted the same retirement window as the disabled. In addition, there were no benefit reductions for employees who had decided to retire earlier than the age of 65.

[ 80 ] The legislation also changed the way in which pensions were calculated for low-income earners who had been covered for twenty-five or more years. If the pension benefit fell below a specified level, then such workers were allowed to substitute a wage figure of 75% of the average wage during this period, thus creating something like a minimum wage benefit.

[ 81 ] According to one study, the 1972 pension reform "enhanced" the reduction of poverty in old age.

[ 82 ] Voluntary retirement at 63 with no deductions in the level of benefits was introduced, [ 79 ] together with the index-linking of war victims' pensions to wage increases.

[ 34 ] Guaranteed minimum pension benefits for all West Germans were introduced, [ 47 ] along with automatic pension increases for war widows (1970).

[ 77 ] Fixed minimum rates for women in receipt of very low pensions were also introduced, together with equal treatment for war widows.

[ 83 ] Improvements in pension provision were made for women and the self-employed, [ 84 ] a new minimum pension for workers with at least twenty-five years' insurance was introduced, [ 51 ] faster pension indexation was implemented, with the annual adjustment of pensions brought forward by six months, [ 85 ] and the Seventh Modification Law (1973) linked the indexation of farmers' pensions to the indexation of the general pension insurance scheme.

[ 50 ] A new pension for "severely handicapped" persons was introduced in 1972, [ 86 ] along with occupational injury annuities [ 87 ] and a special pension for long-standing insurant from the age of 63 and a pension due to "limited earning capacity" from the age of 62.

[ 88 ] In addition, a special pension benefit was introduced for workers aged 60 and above after unemployment.

[ 89 ] Under the Severely Handicapped Persons Act of April 1974, a seriously disabled person could retire early on an old age pension at the age of 62 years, provided that he "complied with the other provisions of the legislation on pension insurance".

[ 72 ] Education [ edit ] In education, the Brandt Administration sought to widen educational opportunities for all West Germans. The government presided over an increase in the number of teachers, [ 36 ] generous public stipends were introduced for students to cover their living costs, [ 45 ] and West German universities were converted from elite schools into mass institutions.

[ 45 ] The school leaving age was raised to 16, [ 90 ] and spending on research and education was increased by nearly 300% between 1970 and 1974.

[ 90 ] Working through a planning committee set up for the "joint task" of university development, the Federal Government started to make investment costs in 1971.

[ 91 ] Fees for higher or further education were abolished, [ 34 ] while a considerable increase in the number of higher education institutions took place.

[ 34 ] A much-needed school and college construction program was carried out, [ 34 ] together with the introduction of postgraduate support for highly qualified graduates, providing them with the opportunity to earn their doctorates or undertake research studies.

[ 92 ] A law on individual promotion of vocational training came into force in October 1971, which provided for financial grants for attendance at further general or technical teaching establishments from the second year of studies at higher technical schools, academies and higher education establishments, training centres of second degree, or certain courses of television teaching. Grants were also made in certain cases for attendance at training centres located outside the Federal Republic.

[ 74 ] The education budget was doubled from 3% to 6%, while an expansion of secondary education took place. The number of university students went up from 100,000 to 650,000, 30,000 more places were created in the schools, and an additional 1 billion marks were allocated for new school buildings. In addition, the provision of scholarships was expanded, with the 1970 programme providing for, in the words of one observer, "5,000 new scholarships for graduates, and double that number were being awarded three years later".

[ 65 ] Grants were introduced for pupils from lower income groups to stay on at school, together with grants for those going into any kind of higher or further education.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Increases were also made in educational allowances, [ 50 ] as well as spending on science.

[ 52 ] In 1972, the government allocated 2.1 million DM in grants to promote marriage and family education.

[ 61 ] Under the Approbationsordnung (medical education profession act) of 1970, the subject of psychosomatic medicine and psychotherapy at German universities became a compulsory subject for medical students, [ 94 ] and that same year education of clinical and biomedical engineers was introduced.

[ 95 ] The Brandt Administration also introduced enabling legislation for the introduction of comprehensives, but left it to the Lander "to introduce them at their discretion". While the more left-wing Lander "rapidly began to do so", other Lander found "all sorts of pretexts for delaying the scheme". By the mid-1980s, Berlin had 25 comprehensives while Bavaria only had 1, and in most Lander comprehensives were still viewed as "merely experimental".

[ 96 ] Housing and urban development [ edit ] In the field of housing, various measures were carried out to benefit householders, such as improving the rights of tenants and increasing rental assistance. According to the Rent Subsidies Act (Wohngeldgesetz) of 1970, "low-income tenants and owners of accommodations are supported with rents and burdens subsidies".

[ 97 ] The determination of the income of families taken into consideration for housing allowances was simplified, [ 98 ] and increased levels of protection and support for low-income tenants and householders were introduced, [ 34 ] which led to a drop in the number of eviction notices. By 1974, three times as much was paid out in rent subsidies as in 1969, and nearly one and a half million households received rental assistance.

[ 63 ] Increases were made in public housing subsidies, [ 99 ] as characterised by a 36% increase in the social housing budget in 1970 [ 42 ] and by the introduction of a programme for the construction of 200,000 public housing units (1971).

[ 100 ] From 1970 to 1971, an 18.1% increase in building permits for social housing units was made.

[ 101 ] Other reforms aimed at improving tenants' rights included protection against conversion of rental housing into condominiums, the prohibition of the misappropriation of living space, new regulation of the apartment broker system, and a fee scale for engineers and architects. In addition, the income limits for eligibility for social housing were raised and adapted in order of general income trends.

[ 56 ] A loose form of rent regulation was introduced under the name of Vergleichmieten (comparable rents), [ 102 ] together with the provision of "for family-friendly housing" freight or rent subsidies to owners of apartments or houses whose ceiling had been adapted to increased expenses or incomes (1970).

[ 103 ] In addition, a law for the creation of property for workers was passed, under which a married worker would normally keep up to 95% of his pay, and graded tax remission for married wage-earners applied up to a wage of 48,000 marks, which indicated the economic prosperity of West Germany at that time.

[ 42 ] The Town Planning Act (1971) encouraged the preservation of historical heritage and helped open up the way to the future of many German cities, [ 83 ] while the Urban Renewal Act (1971) helped the states to restore their inner cities and to develop new neighbourhoods.

[ 104 ] In addition, the Guidelines of December 1972 on the usage of federal funds in assisting social housing construction laid down that a certain standard needed to be observed when building homes for severely disabled persons.

[ 105 ] The Second Housing Allowance Law of December 1970 simplified the administration of housing allowances and extended entitlements, increased the income limit to 9,600 DM per year plus 2,400 DM for each family member, raised the general deduction on income to determine reckonable income from 15% to 20%, allowance rates listed in tables replacing complicated calculation procedure based on "bearable rent burdens".

[ 50 ] The Housing Construction Modification Law (1971) increased the income-limit for access to low rent apartments under the social housing programme from 9,000 DM to 12,000 DM per annum plus 3,000 DM (instead of 2,400) for each family member. The law also introduced special subsidies to reduce the debt burden for builders not surpassing the regular income-limit by more than 40%. Under a 1973 law, the limits were increased to 1,000 DM plus 9,000 DM and 4,200 DM for additional family members.

[ 50 ] The Rent Improvement Law (1971) strengthened the position of tenants. Under this legislation, notice was to be ruled illegal "where appropriate substitute accommodation not available; landlords obliged to specify reasons for notice", [ 50 ] whilst the Eviction Protection Law (1971) established tenant protection against rent rises and notice. The notice was only lawful if in the "justified interest of the landlord". Under this law, higher rents were not recognised as "justified interest".

[ 50 ] The Second Eviction Protection Law (1972) made the tenant protection introduced under the Eviction Protection Law of 1971 permanent. Under this new law, the notice was only lawful where the landlord proved a justified personal interest in the apartment. In addition, rent increases were only lawful if they were not above normal comparable rents in the same area.

[ 50 ] Directives on the housing of foreign workers came into force in April 1971. These directives imposed certain requirements for space, hygiene, safety, and amenities in the accommodations offered by employers. That same year, the Federal Government granted a sum of 17 million DM to the Länder for the improvement and modernization of housing built before 21 June 1948.

[ 74 ] In addition, according to a 1971 regulation of the Board of the Federal Labour Office, "construction of workers' hostels qualified for government financial support under certain conditions".

[ 106 ] The "German Council for town development", which was set up by virtue of Article 89 of a law to foster urban building, was partly aimed at planning a favourable environment for families (such as the provision of playgrounds). In 1971, the Federal Labour Office made available DM 425 million in the form of loans to provide 157,293 beds in 2,494 hostels. A year later, the Federal Government (Bund), the Lander and the Federal Labour Office promoted the construction of dwellings for migrant workers. They set aside 10 million DM for this purpose, which allowed the financing of 1650 family dwellings that year.

[ 61 ] Development measures were begun in 1972 with federal financial aid granted to the Lander for improvement measures relating to towns and villages, and in the 1972 budget, DM 50 million was earmarked, i.e. a third of the total cost of some 300 schemes. A council for urban development was formed in May 1972 with the purpose of promoting future work and measures in the field of urban renovation.

[ 61 ] In 1973, the government provided assistance of DM 28 million for the modernisation of old dwellings.

[ 71 ] New rules were introduced regarding improvements in the law relating to rented property, and control of the rise in rents and protection against cancellation of leases also safeguarded the rights of migrant workers in the sphere of housing.

[ 61 ] A law of July 1973 fixed the fundamental and minimum requirements regarding workers' dwellings, mainly concerning space, ventilation and lighting, protection against damp, heat and noise, power and heating facilities and sanitary installations.

[ 71 ] Civil, family, and animal rights [ edit ] Regarding civil rights, the Brandt Administration introduced a broad range of socially liberal reforms aimed at making West Germany a more open society. Greater legal rights for women were introduced, as exemplified by the standardisation of pensions, divorce laws, regulations governing the use of surnames, and the introduction of measures to bring more women into politics.

[ 83 ] The voting age was lowered from 21 to 18, [ 107 ] the age of eligibility for political office was lowered to 21, [ 92 ] and the age of majority was lowered to 18 in March 1974.

[ 92 ] The Third Law for the Liberalization of the Penal Code (1970) liberalised "the right to political demonstration", [ 40 ] [ 92 ] while equal rights were granted to illegitimate children that same year.

[ 51 ] A 1971 amendment to a federal civil service reform bill enabled fathers to apply for part-time civil service work.

[ 108 ] In 1971, corporal punishment was banned in schools, [ 109 ] and that same year a new Highway Code was introduced.

[ 110 ] In 1973, a measure was introduced that facilitated the adoption of young children by reducing the minimum age for adoptive parents from 35 to 25.

[ 71 ] A women's policy machinery at the national level was established in 1972 [ 111 ] while amnesty was guaranteed in minor offences connected with demonstrations.

[ 92 ] From 1970 onwards, parents as well as landlords were no longer legally prohibited "to give or rent rooms or flats to unmarried couples or to allow them to stay overnight".

[ 112 ] In October 1972, the legal aid system was improved with the compensation paid to private lawyers for legal services to the poor increased.

[ 113 ] The Bausparkassen Act of 1972 [ 114 ] placed all bausparkassen ( building societies ) under the supervision of the Federal Banking Supervisory Office from January 1974 onwards, and confined them "to the contract saving business and related activities".

[ 115 ] The Animal Protection Act, passed in 1972, introduced various safeguards for animals such as not permitting the causing of pain, injury, or suffering to an animal without justification, and limiting experiments to the minimum number of animals necessary.

[ 116 ] In 1971, rules were introduced making it possible for former guestworkers "to receive an unlimited residence permit after a five-year stay".

[ 117 ] Military [ edit ] A number of reforms were also carried out to the armed forces, [ 43 ] as characterised by a reduction in basic military training from 18 to 15 months, a reorganisation of education and training, and personnel and procurement procedures.

[ 63 ] Education for the troops was improved, [ 118 ] a personnel reshuffle of top management in the Bundeswehr was carried out, [ 119 ] academic education was mandated for officers beyond their basic military training, and a new recruiting policy for Bundeswehr personnel was introduced with the intention of building an army that reflected West Germany's pluralistic society. Defence Minister Helmut Schmidt led the development of the first Joint Service Regulation ZDv 10/1 (Assistance for Innere Fuehrung, classified: restricted), which revitalized the concept of Innere Fuehrung while also affirming the value of the "citizen in uniform". According to one study, as a result of this reform, "a strong civil mindset displaced the formerly dominant military mindset", and forced the Bundeswehr's elder generation to accept a new type of soldier envisioned by Schmidt.

[ 120 ] In addition, the Federal Cost of Moving Act increased the relocation allowance (with effect from 1 November 1973), with the basic allowances raised by DM 50 and DM 100 respectively, while extra allowances for families were raised to a uniform amount of 125 DM.

[ 121 ] In 1970, the Armed Forces Vocational Schools and the Vocational Advancement Organization extended their services for the first time to conscripts, "so far as military duty permitted".

[ 122 ] New enlistment bonuses were authorized and previous bonus schemes were improved, [ 123 ] and new pay regulations were introduced that improved the financial situation of military personnel and civil servants.

[ 124 ] In July 1973, the 3rd Amendment to the Civilian Service Act came into force; "a prerequisite for the creation of additional civilian service places for recognized conscientious objectors". The amendment provided that men recognized as conscientious objectors while performing military service should immediately be transferred to a civilian service assignment.

[ 125 ] The maximum amount for servicemen enlisting for at least 12 years was increased from DM 6,000 to DM 9,000, [ 126 ] and from October 1971 onwards, long-term personnel were paid grants towards the cost 'of attending educational institutes of the "second educational route" or participating in state-recognized general education courses provided by private correspondence schools and the "television college"'.

[ 127 ] In 1972, two Bundeswehr universities were established; [ 128 ] [ 129 ] a reform which, according to one historian, "fought against the closed nature of the military and guaranteed that officers would be better able to successfully interact with the civilian world".

[ 130 ] From April 1973, the general maintenance payments under the Law amending the Maintenance Security Act and the Workplace Protection Act were increased, while increases were also made in the special allowance (Christmas bonus) for conscripts, together with the dismissal allowance. The expense allowance for troops on duty-related absence from place of employment was improved, together with travel subsidies and provisions for military service-damaged soldiers and their families.

[ 131 ] In addition, the position of non-commissioned officers was improved.

[ 132 ] Consumers' and workers' rights [ edit ] Brandt visiting a coal mine in Dortmund - Eving , 1974 Legislation aimed at safeguarding consumers was also implemented under the Brandt Administration. The consumer's right of withdrawal in case of hire purchase was strengthened in March 1974, [ 133 ] and fixed prices for branded products were abolished by law in January that same year, which meant that manufacturers' recommended prices were not binding for retailers.

[ 133 ] In addition, a progressive anticartel law was passed.

[ 43 ] The Law on Compensation for Measures of Criminal Prosecution and Penalties, passed in March 1971, provided for standardized compensation in certain situations.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] In addition, the budget for communications was increased.

[ 65 ] In terms of working conditions, a number of reforms were introduced aimed at strengthening the rights of workers both at home and in the workplace. The Sickness Act of 1970 provided equal treatment of workers and employees in the event of incapacity for work, [ 85 ] while maternity leave was increased.

[ 137 ] Legislation was introduced in 1970 which ensured continued payment of wages for workers disabled by illness.

[ 78 ] In 1970 all employees unfit for work (with the exception of women in receipt of maternity benefits and temporarily and inconsiderably employed persons) were provided with an unconditional legal claim against their employer to continued payment of their gross wage for a period of 6 weeks, as also in the case of spa treatment approved by an Insurance Fund, the Fund bearing the full cost thereof. Previously, payment of the employer's supplement and sick pay were only made from the day on which the doctor certified unfitness for work.

[ 55 ] In 1972, an Act on Agency Work was passed, which sought to prevent work agencies from providing job placement services and aimed to provide minimum job protection for employees in agency work.

[ 138 ] A law on the hiring out of manpower, passed in October 1972, contained provisions to stipulate prior authorization for the hiring out of manpower, to draw a distinction between the system governing workers hired out and the placing of workers, to regulate and improve the rights of hired out workers pertaining to working conditions and social insurance, and provide for more severe penalties and fines to be imposed on offenders.

[ 61 ] Improvements were also made in income and work conditions for home workers, [ 139 ] accident insurance was extended to non-working adults, [ 47 ] and the Border Zone Assistance Act (1971) increased levels of assistance to the declining zonal peripheral area.

[ 140 ] The Occupational Safety Act (1973) required employers to provide company doctors and safety experts.

[ 141 ] A directive on protection against noise at the place of work was adopted in November 1970. If measurements showed or there was reason to assume that a noise level guide value of 90 dB( A) may be exceeded at the place of work, then the authority had to instruct the employer to arrange check-ups of the employees concerned, and these employees had to use personal noise protection devices.

[ 61 ] A matching fund program for 15 million employees was also introduced, which stimulated them to accumulate capital.

[ 43 ] A ministerial order of January 1970 extended protection in cases of partial unemployment to home workers, while an ordinance of August 1970 fixed the conditions of health necessary for service in the merchant navy. A general provision of October 1970 determined in detail the circumstances in which the competent authority must take action on the basis of the act on the technical means of work. The requirement also stipulated the extent to which the technical standards established by national and international organisations can be regarded as "rules of the art".

[ 98 ] In a directive of 10 November 1970, the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs recommended to the higher authorities for work protection of the "Lander" to bring in the directive published, in agreement with the Ministry of Labour, by the German Engineers' Association on the evaluation of work station noise in relation to loss of hearing, in order to improve safeguards for workers against the noises in question. In September 1971, an ordinance was published concerning dangerous working materials, safeguarding persons using these materials against the dangers involved.

By a decree of the Federal Minister for Labour and Social Order, the Federal Institute for Industrial Protection became the Federal Agency for Industrial Protection and Accident Research. Amongst its designated tasks were the promotion of industrial protection, accident prevention on the journey to and from work and accident prevention in the home and leisure activities, the encouragement of training and advanced training in the area of industrial protection, and the promotion and coordination of accident research. A regulation was issued in 1972 which permitted for the first time the employment of women as drivers of trams, omnibuses and lorries, while further regulations laid down new provisions for lifts and work with compressed air.

[ 61 ] The Factory Constitution Law (1971) strengthened the rights of individual employees "to be informed and to be heard on matters concerning their place of work". The Works Council was provided with greater authority while trade unions were given the right of entry into the factory "provided they informed the employer of their intention to do so", [ 35 ] while a law was passed to encourage wider share ownership by workers and other rank-and-file employees.

[ 35 ] The Industrial Relations Law (1972) and the Personnel Representation Act (1974) broadened the rights of employees in matters which immediately affected their places of work, while also improving the possibilities for codetermination on operations committees, together with access of trade unions to companies.

[ 78 ] The Works Constitution Act of 1972 required in cases of collective dismissal at an establishment normally employing more than twenty employees, that management and the works council must negotiate a social plan that stipulates compensation for workers who lose their jobs. In cases where the two parties could not agree on a social plan, the law provided for binding arbitration.

[ 142 ] In 1972, the rights of works councils to information from management were not only strengthened, but works councils were also provided with full codetermination rights on issues such as working time arrangements in the plant, the setting of piece rates, plant wage systems, the establishment of vacation times, work breaks, overtime, and short-time work.

[ 143 ] Legislation was passed which acknowledged for the first time the presence of trade unions in the workplace, expanded the means of action of the works councils, and improved their work basics as well as those of the youth councils.

[ 144 ] A law of January 1972 on the organization of labour in enterprises significantly extended the works council's right of cooperation and co-management in the matter of vocational training. That same year, the Safety Institute of the Federal Republic of Germany was transformed into a public Federal Agency (Bundesanstalt) with significantly enlarged powers, in the context of which special emphasis would be placed on its new task of promoting and coordinating research in the area of accident prevention.

[ 61 ] New provisions were introduced for the rehabilitation of severely disabled people ("Schwerbehinderte") and accident victims.

[ 83 ] The Severely Disabled Persons Act of April 1974 obliged all employers with more than fifteen employees to ensure that 6% of their workforce consisted of people officially recognised as being severely disabled. Employers who failed to do so were assessed 100 DM per month for every job falling below the required quota. These compensatory payments were used to "subsidise the adaptation of workplaces to the requirements of those who were severely handicapped".

[ 51 ] A law passed in January 1974, designed to protect members of the supervisory boards of companies who are undergoing training, was aimed at ensuring that the representatives of young workers and youthful members of works councils still undergoing training could perform their duties with greater independence and without fear of disadvantageous consequences for their future careers. On request, workers' representatives on completion of their training courses had to have an employment relationship of unlimited duration.

[ 72 ] In the field of transport, the Municipal Transportation Finance Law of 1971 established federal guidelines for subsidies to municipal governments, [ 145 ] while the Federal Transport Plan of 1973 provided a framework for all transport, including public transport.

[ 146 ] In addition, the Severely Handicapped Persons Act of April 1974 extended the welfare and promotional obligations of the employer and provided a right to extra holiday consisting of six working days.

[ 105 ] Environment [ edit ] A federal environmental programme was established in 1971, [ 147 ] and in 1972 laws were passed to regulate garbage elimination and air pollution via emission.

[ 148 ] Matching grants covering 90% of infrastructure development were allocated to local communities, which led to a dramatic increase in the number of public swimming pools and other facilities of consumptive infrastructure throughout West Germany.

[ 45 ] The federal crime-fighting apparatus was also modernised, [ 43 ] while a Foreign Tax Act was passed which limited the possibility of tax evasion.

[ 149 ] In addition, efforts were made to improve the railways and motorways.

[ 43 ] In 1971, a law was passed setting the maximum lead content at 0.4 grams per liter of gasoline, [ 150 ] and in 1972 DDT was banned.

[ 151 ] The Federal Emissions Control Law, passed in March 1974, provided protection from noxious gases, noise, and air-borne particulate matter.

[ 152 ] In August 1971, a law came into force directed at reducing atmospheric pollution from lead compounds in four-stroke engine fuels. As a safeguard against radiation, a decree on the system of authorisations for medicaments treated with ionizing radiation or containing radioactive substances, in its version of 8 August 1967, was remodelled by a new Decree of 10 May 1971 which added some radionuclides to the list of medicaments which doctors in private practice were authorized to use.

Taking into account the enormous high peaks of air traffic noise and its concentration at a limited number of airports, the Law for Protection against Aircraft Noise of 1971 sought to balance two conflicting demands, the first being the legitimate demand by industry, business and the public for an efficient air traffic system, and secondly, the understandable and by no means less legitimate claims of the affected people for protection and compensation. The legislation regulated the establishment of so-called "Lärmschutzzonen" (protection areas against aircraft noise) for all 11 international airports and for those 34 military airports used for jet aircraft, and the law also authorised the Federal Department of the Interior to decree protection areas for each of those mentioned airports with approval by the "Bundesrat", the representation of the German Federal States.

[ 153 ] Economy [ edit ] Under the Brandt Administration, West Germany attained a lower rate of inflation than in other industrialised countries at that time, [ 42 ] while a rise in the standard of living took place, helped by the floating and revaluation of the mark.

[ 42 ] This was characterised by the real incomes of employees increasing more sharply than incomes from entrepreneurial work, with the proportion of employees' incomes in the overall national income rising from 65% to 70% between 1969 and 1973, while the proportion of income from entrepreneurial work and property fell over that same period from just under 35% to 30%.

[ 63 ] In addition, the percentage of West Germans living in poverty (based on various definitions) fell between 1969 and 1973.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] According to one estimate, the percentage of West Germans living in poverty fell from 9.7% to 8.9% between 1969 and 1973, and from 20.2% to 14.0% according to another estimate.

[ 156 ] According to another estimate, the percentage of West Germans living in poverty during this period fell from 2.7% to 1.4%.

[ 157 ] 1972 crisis [ edit ] Brandt's Ostpolitik led to a meltdown of the narrow majority Brandt's coalition enjoyed in the Bundestag . In October 1970, FDP deputies Erich Mende , Heinz Starke, and Siegfried Zoglmann crossed the floor to join the CDU. On 23 February 1972, SPD deputy Herbert Hupka , who was also leader of the Bund der Vertriebenen , joined the CDU in disagreement with Brandt's reconciliatory efforts towards the east. On 23 April 1972, Wilhelm Helms (FDP) left the coalition. The FDP politicians Knud von Kühlmann-Stumm and Gerhard Kienbaum also declared that they would vote against Brandt, completing the loss of Brandt's majority. On 24 April 1972 a constructive vote of no confidence was proposed, to be voted on three days later. In the event this motion passed, CDU leader Rainer Barzel would have replaced Brandt as chancellor.

On paper, the opposition now had 250 votes; just one over the 249 needed to oust Brandt. Even Brandt himself believed he was finished, and a number of unions went on strike in anticipation of Brandt's expected defeat on the floor of the Bundestag. To everyone's surprise, the motion failed: Barzel got only 247 votes out of 260 votes cast, two short of what he needed to become Chancellor. There were also 10 votes against the motion and three invalid ballots. Most SPD and FDP deputies abstained, which had the same effect as voting for Brandt.

New elections [ edit ] See also: 1972 West German federal election Though Brandt remained chancellor, he had lost his majority. Subsequent initiatives in parliament, most notably on the budget, failed. Because of this stalemate, the Bundestag was dissolved, and new elections were called. During the 1972 campaign, many popular West German artists, intellectuals, writers, actors and professors supported Brandt and the SPD. Among them were Günter Grass , Walter Jens , and even the soccer player Paul Breitner . Brandt's Ostpolitik as well as his reformist domestic policies were popular with parts of the young generation, and he led the SPD to its best-ever federal election result in late 1972.

However, the Willy-Wahl , Brandt's landslide win, was the beginning of the end, and Brandt's role in government started to decline. Many of his reforms met with resistance from state governments, dominated by CDU/CSU. The spirit of reformist optimism was cut short by the 1973 oil crisis and the major public services strike of 1974, which gave Germany's trade unions, led by Heinz Kluncker , a big wage increase but reduced Brandt's financial leeway for further reforms. Brandt was said to be more a dreamer than a manager and was personally haunted by depression. To counter any notions about being sympathetic to Communism or soft on left-wing extremists, Brandt implemented tough legislation that barred "radicals" from public service ( Radikalenerlass ).

Guillaume affair [ edit ] Main article: Guillaume affair Brandt, photographed in 1974, with Günter Guillaume . This image was taken a month before Brandt's resignation as chancellor.

Around 1973, West German security organizations received information that one of Brandt's personal assistants, Günter Guillaume , was a spy for the East German intelligence services. Brandt was asked to continue working as usual, and he agreed to do so, even taking a private vacation with Guillaume. Guillaume was arrested on 24 April 1974 and later sentenced to 13 years in prison for treason.

[ 158 ] Brandt resigned from his position as chancellor on 6 May 1974, but he remained a member of the Bundestag and chairman of the Social Democrats until 1987.
This espionage affair is widely considered to have been just the trigger for Brandt's resignation, not the fundamental cause. As Brandt himself later said, "I was exhausted, for reasons which had nothing to do with the affair [the Guillaume espionage scandal] going on at the time." [ 159 ] Brandt was dogged by scandals about serial adultery and reportedly also struggled with alcohol and depression.

[ 160 ] There was also the economic fallout on West Germany of the 1973 oil crisis , which may seem to have given enough stress to finish off Brandt as the Chancellor.

[ citation needed ] Brandt, photographed at an SPD conference in Munich , with his successor Helmut Schmidt , 1982 Guillaume had been an espionage agent for East Germany , who was supervised by Markus Wolf , the head of the Main Directorate for Reconnaissance ( Hauptverwaltung Aufklärung or HVA—the foreign intelligence service) of the East German Ministry for State Security. Wolf stated after the reunification that the resignation of Brandt had never been intended, and that the planting and handling of Guillaume had been one of the biggest mistakes of the East German secret services.

Brandt was succeeded as the Chancellor of the Bundesrepublik by his fellow Social Democrat, Helmut Schmidt . For the rest of his life, Brandt remained suspicious that his fellow Social Democrat (and longtime rival) Herbert Wehner had been scheming for Brandt's downfall.

[ citation needed ] However, there is scant evidence to corroborate this suspicion.

Post-Chancellorship [ edit ] Brandt at a party rally in Münster , 1988 After his term as the Chancellor, Brandt retained his seat in the Bundestag , and he remained the Chairman of the Social Democratic Party through 1987. Beginning in 1987, Brandt stepped down to become the Honorary Chairman of the party. Brandt was also a member of the European Parliament from 1979 to 1983.

Socialist International [ edit ] Socialist International Congress 1983. Brandt with outgoing general secretary Bernt Carlsson (left) and new general secretary Pentti Väänänen (right).

For sixteen years (1976–92), Brandt was the president of the Socialist International . During that period, the number of Socialist International's mainly European member parties grew until there were more than a hundred socialist, social democratic, and labour political parties around the world. For the first seven years, this growth in SI membership had been prompted by the efforts of the Socialist International's Secretary-General, the Swede Bernt Carlsson . However, in early 1983, a dispute arose about what Carlsson perceived as the SI president's authoritarian approach. Carlsson then rebuked Brandt saying, "this is a Socialist International – not a German International".

Next, against some vocal opposition, Brandt decided to move the next Socialist International Congress from Sydney, Australia to Portugal . Following this SI Congress in April 1983, Brandt retaliated against Carlsson by forcing him to step down from his position. However, the Austrian Chancellor , Bruno Kreisky , argued on behalf of Brandt: "It is a question of whether it is better to be pure or to have greater numbers".

[ 161 ] Carlsson was succeeded by the Finn Pentti Väänänen as Secretary General of the Socialist International .

[ 162 ] During Brandt's presidency, the SI developed activities and dialogue on a number of International issues. This concerned the East–West conflict and arms race , on which the SI held high-level consultations with the leaderships of the United States and the Soviet Union, and on Afghanistan after 1979 .

[ 163 ] The SI met with President Jimmy Carter and Vice Presidents Walter Mondale and George Bush , and with the CPSU Secretaries General Leonid Brezhnev and Mikhail Gorbachev and Soviet Head of State Andrei Gromyko . The SI also developed active contacts to promote dialogue concerning regional conflicts. Those included the Middle East, where they helped to build contacts between Israel and the PLO , and also in Southern Africa and Central America.

[ 164 ] Brandt Report [ edit ] In 1977, Brandt was appointed as the chairman of the Independent Commission for International Developmental Issues. This produced a report in 1980, which called for drastic changes in the global attitude towards development in the Third World. This became known as the Brandt Report .

Further information: List of international trips made by Willy Brandt Reunification [ edit ] Brandt giving a speech in Wismar ahead of the 1990 East German general election (left) and in Dessau shortly before German reunification (right), 1990 In October 1979, Brandt met with the East German dissident, Rudolf Bahro , who had written The Alternative . Bahro and his supporters were attacked by the East German state security organization Stasi , headed by Erich Mielke , for his writings, which had laid the theoretical foundation of a left-wing opposition to the ruling SED party and its dependent allies, and which promoted new and changed parties. All of this is now described as "change from within". Brandt had asked for Bahro's release, and Brandt welcomed Bahro's theories, which advanced the debate within his own Social Democratic Party.

On 11 September 1988, Brandt described the hope for German reunification as a delusion.

[ 165 ] In late 1989, Brandt became one of the first leftwing leaders in West Germany to publicly favor a quick reunification of Germany, instead of some sort of two-state federation or other kind of interim arrangement. Brandt's public statement, "Now grows together what belongs together", was widely quoted in those days.

Hostages in Iraq [ edit ] One of Brandt's last public appearances was in flying to Baghdad , Iraq, to free Western hostages held by Saddam Hussein , following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Brandt secured the release of a large number of them, and on 9 November 1990, his airplane landed with 174 freed hostages on board at Frankfurt Airport .

[ 166 ] Death and legacy [ edit ] Willy Brandt Monument in Warsaw (left) and artist Josef Tabachnyk's memorial to Brandt in Nuremberg (right) Brandt died of colon cancer at his home in Unkel , a town on the River Rhine , on 8 October 1992, at the age of 78.

[ 167 ] He was given a state funeral and was buried at the cemetery at Zehlendorf in Berlin.

[ 168 ] The Federal Chancellor Willy Brandt Foundation was established in 1994. It serves to honour the memory of Brandt's political accomplishments and his commitment to peace, freedom and democracy. The foundation runs two permanent exhibitions: one in Berlin and the other in Lübeck, where Brandt was born. Other works of the foundation include oversight of Brandt's papers, speeches and letters (the Berlin Edition), historical research as well as organizing lectures and international conferences.

[ 169 ] In 1997, a park in Stockholm was named in Brandt's honor. It is close to where he lived during his exile in Sweden 1941–1945.

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] When the SPD moved its headquarters from Bonn back to Berlin in the mid-1990s, the new headquarters was named the "Willy Brandt Haus". One of the buildings of the European Parliament in Brussels was named after him in 2008.

On 6 December 2000, a memorial to Brandt and Warschauer Kniefall was unveiled in Warsaw , Poland.

German artist Johannes Heisig painted several portraits of Brandt, of which one was unveiled as part of an honoring event at the German Historical Institute Washington, DC on 18 March 2003. Spokesmen amongst others were former German Federal Minister Egon Bahr and former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.

[ 172 ] In 2009, the Willy-Brandt-Memorial was opened up in Nuremberg at the Willy-Brandt Square.

[ 173 ] It was created by the artist Josef Tabachnyk .

In 2009, the University of Erfurt renamed its graduate school of public administration as the Willy Brandt School of Public Policy . A private German-language secondary school in Warsaw , Poland, is also named after Brandt.

The main boulevard at the north entrance of the Montenegrin capital Podgorica was named Willy Brandt Boulevard in 2011.

[ 174 ] Brandt also has an unusual memorial in Hammersmith in London , United Kingdom. In 1963, when he was mayor of West Berlin, Brandt travelled to Hammersmith with a street lamp from West Berlin and presented it to the mayor of Hammersmith to mark its twinning with Neukölln . The lamp now stands on the wall of Westcott Lodge , facing Furnival Gardens , with a commemorative plaque below it.

[ 175 ] Although Brandt had only served five years in office as Chancellor of Germany , he remains as one of the most popular politicians in the history of the Federal Republic of Germany .

Berlin Brandenburg Airport , which opened in late 2020, is also named in his honor.

Brandt's family [ edit ] Peter Brandt (right) during the protests of 1968 From 1941 until 1948, Brandt was married to Anna Carlotta Thorkildsen (the daughter of a Norwegian father and a German-American mother). They had a daughter, Ninja Frahm (born in 1940).

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] After Brandt and Thorkildsen were divorced in 1948, Brandt married the Norwegian-born German writer Rut Hansen in the same year. Hansen and Brandt had three sons: Peter Brandt [ de ] (born in 1948), Lars Brandt [ de ] (born in 1951) and Matthias Brandt (born in 1961). After 32 years of marriage, Willy Brandt and Rut Hansen Brandt divorced in 1980, and from the day that they were divorced they never saw each other again.

[ 176 ] On 9 December 1983, Brandt married Brigitte Seebacher [ de ] (born in 1946).

[ 176 ] Honours [ edit ] Foreign honours [ edit ] Malaysia : Honorary Grand Commander of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia (S.S.M.) (1969) [ 178 ] Selected works [ edit ] 1960 Mein Weg nach Berlin ( My Path to Berlin ), autobiography written with Leo Lania 1966 Draußen. Schriften während der Emigration . ( Outside: Writings during the Emigration ) ISBN 3-8012-1094-4 1968 Friedenspolitik in Europa ( The Politics of Peace in Europe ) 1976 Begegnungen und Einsichten 1960–1975 ( Encounters and Insights 1960–1975 ) ISBN 3-455-08979-8 1982 Links und frei. Mein Weg 1930–1950 ( Left and Free: My Path 1930–1950 ) 1986 Der organisierte Wahnsinn ( Organized Lunacy ) 1989 Erinnerungen ( Memories ) ISBN 3-549-07353-4 2002 Berliner Ausgabe, Werkauswahl, ed. for Bundeskanzler Willy Brandt Stiftung by Helga Grebing , Gregor Schöllgen and Heinrich August Winkler, 10 volumes, Dietz Verlag, Bonn 2002f, Collected Writings, ISBN 3-8012-0305-0 Notes [ edit ] ^ Due to the division of Germany, Willy Brandt was only the Federal Chancellor in West Germany . The term West Germany is the common English name for the Federal Republic of Germany between its formation on 23 May 1949 and the German reunification through the accession of East Germany on 3 October 1990. The office of chancellor did not exist in East Germany.

References [ edit ] ^ a b "Willy Brandt | German Chancellor, Nobel Peace Prize Winner | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 12 April 2024 . Retrieved 13 May 2024 .

^ "The 1971 Nobel Prize – Presentation Speech" .

Nobelprize.org . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ Since Hermann Müller in 1930 ^ Marshall 1997 .

^ "Event – GHI Washington" .

Homepage – GHI Washington . 30 September 2015 . Retrieved 2 May 2024 .

^ "BRANDT AND PARTY MAKE PEACE APPEAL" .

The New York Times . 16 January 1973 . Retrieved 2 May 2024 .

^ Greve, Michael S.; Kriele, Martin (1986).

"Willy Brandt & the Sandinistas: The Neutralization of the SPD" .

The National Interest (4). Center for the National Interest: 100– 103.

ISSN 0884-9382 .

JSTOR 42894439 . Retrieved 2 May 2024 .

^ Jessup, John E. (1998).

An Encyclopedic Dictionary of Conflict and Conflict Resolution, 1945–1996 . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. p. 89. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 18 September 2017 .

^ "Martha Luise Wilhelmine Kuhlmann" .

geni_family_tree . 2 May 2022 . Retrieved 13 May 2024 .

^ Kilian, Dieter E. (2011).

Politik und Militär in Deutschland: Die Bundespräsidenten und Bundeskanzler und ihre Beziehung zu Soldatentum und Bundeswehr . BoD – Books on Demand.

ISBN 9783937885360 .

^ Marshall 1997 , p. 8.

^ "Working-class youngster in Lübeck" .

Willy Brandt Biografie . 1 June 2017 . Retrieved 13 May 2024 .

(source names F. H. Bertling) ^ Marshall 1997 , p. 9–16.

^ Bennett, Philip (14 January 2025).

"Wilhelm Reich's Early Writings on Work Democracy: A Theoretical Basis for Challenging Fascism Then and Now" (PDF) .

The International Journal of Psychoanalysis .

95 (2): 53– 73.

doi : 10.1080/10455751003655898 .

^ "The years of exile and the postwar period (1933–1947) - Willy Brandt and the unification of Europe - CVCE Website" .

www.cvce.eu . Retrieved 13 May 2024 .

^ Klaus Wiegrefe (17 December 2021), "Informant »O-35-VIII«: Willy Brandt war für den US-Geheimdienst aktiv" , Der Spiegel (in German), ISSN 2195-1349 , retrieved 18 December 2021 ^ Schlitt, Anna-Lena (18 December 2021).

"Willy Brandt war Informant für US-Militärgeheimdienst" .

Die Zeit .

^ Thomas Boghardt.

"Covert Legions: U.S. Army Intelligence in Germany, 1944-1949" (PDF) . U.S. Army Center of Military History. p. 378. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 April 2022 . Retrieved 5 July 2024 .

^ Noack, Hans-Joachim (2013).

Willy Brandt: Ein Leben, ein Jahrhundert . Berlin: Rowohlt.

ISBN 978-3871346453 .

^ "Washington unterstützte Willy Brandt mit geheimen Zahlungen" [Washington supported Willy Brandt with secret payments].

Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). 10 June 2016 . Retrieved 21 June 2020 .

^ United States Department of State (1993).

Foreign Relations of the United States, 1958–1960, Berlin Crisis, 1958–1959, Volume VIII (Report). United States Government Printing Office . Retrieved 8 March 2024 .

The election of Willy Brandt as Governing Mayor in October 1957 following the death of Otto Suhr infused new vigor into the administration of the city.

^ "Willy Brandt" .

BBC . 5 September 2006 . Retrieved 8 March 2024 .

^ "Willy Brandt : Biography" . Spartacus-Educational.com. Archived from the original on 9 October 2011 . Retrieved 27 February 2019 .

^ Kempe (2011) , p. 98 ^ Daum (2008) .

^ Kempe (2011) , p. 166 ^ Kempe (2011) , pp. 375–376 ^ Daum (2008) , pp. 27–28 ^ Daum (2008) , pp. 125–62.

^ Marshall 1997 , p. 42–65.

^ Frank W. Thackeray and John E. Findling, eds.

Statesmen Who Changed the World: A Bio-Bibliographical Dictionary of Diplomacy (Greenwood, 1993) pp 60-63 ^ "Man Of The Year: On the Road to a New Reality" .

Time . 4 January 1971 . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ Juneau (2011) ^ a b c d e f g h i j Radice & Radice (1986) ^ a b c Childs (1992) ^ a b c d e f Dönhoff (1982) ^ Adnan Yaseen Hussein, & Wisam Ali Thabet. (2021). Economic reforms of the Willy Brandt government 1969-1972. PalArch’s Journal of Archaeology of Egypt / Egyptology, 18(10), 3132-3145. Retrieved from https://archives.palarch.nl/index.php/jae/article/view/10324 ^ The Politics of the New Germany By Simon Green, Publisher: Taylor & Francis, 2013 ^ The Federal Republic of Germany: The End of an Era edited by Ewa Kolinsky, P.228-229 ^ a b Braunthal (1994) ^ "The Population of the Federal Republic of Germany" (PDF) .

Cicred.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 April 2017 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Prittie (1974) ^ a b c d e f g h Binder (1975) ^ Health Care Systems in Transition: Germany (PDF) . European Observatory on Health Care Systems, World Health Organization. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2011 . Retrieved 14 December 2012 .

^ a b c d e Sinn (2007) ^ Flacks, Richard; Lichtenstein, Nelson (3 February 2015).

The Port Huron Statement: Sources and Legacies of the New Left's Founding Manifesto . University of Pennsylvania Press. p.

187 .

ISBN 9780812246926 – via Internet Archive.

^ a b c "Dalton, Politics in Germany – Chapter 10" . Socsci.uci.edu . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ Callaghan (2000) ^ [1] [ dead link ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Flora (1986) ^ a b c d Walker, Lawson & Townsend (1984) ^ a b Wilsford (1995) ^ Potthoff & Miller (2006) ^ "GHDI – Document – Page" . Germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ a b c Schewe, Nordhorn & Schenke (1972) ^ a b c d Sozialdemokratischen Partei Deutschlands (1 January 1972).

"Wahlprogramm der SPD : mit Willy Brandt fur Frieden, Sicherheit und eine bessere Qualitat des Lebens" – via Internet Archive.

^ "IZA Discussion Paper No. 124" (PDF) .

Ftp.iza.org . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ Boss, Alfred (November 2008).

"Zur Entwicklung des Anspruchslohns in Deutschland" (PDF) .

Ifw-mewmbers.ifw-kiel.de .

Kiel Institute for the World Economy . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2016 . Retrieved 4 June 2017 .

^ "Table of Contents" (PDF) .

Ilo.org . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ Flora (1986) , p.

48 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Report on the Development of the Social Situation in the Community in 1972" (PDF) .

Aei.pitt.edu . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ Merkl, Peter H. (1 January 2012).

Small Town and Village in Bavaria: The Passing of a Way of Life . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 9780857453471 – via Google Books.

^ a b c d Schmidt (1982) ^ a b Kohler, Zacher & Partington (1982) ^ a b c The Velvet Chancellors: A History of Post-war Germany by Terence Prittie ^ "Information Bulletin on Social Policy" . Council of Europe, Documentation Section and Library. 1 January 1972 – via Google Books.

^ "Study of the European Communities re-adaptation aids in the coal and steel industries – Archive of European Integration" .

Aei.pitt.edu . 26 March 2013 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ Markovits, Andrei (14 April 2016).

The Politics of West German Trade Unions: Strategies of Class and Interest Representation in Growth and Crisis . Routledge.

ISBN 9781317230762 – via Google Books.

^ No[Ux00eb]l, Alain; Relations, Queen's University (Kingston, Ont ) Institute of Intergovernmental (1 January 2004).

Federalism and Labour Market Policy: Comparing Different Governance and Employment Strategies . IIGR, Queen's University.

ISBN 9781553390060 – via Google Books.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ [2] [ dead link ] ^ a b c d "Report on the Development of the Social Situation in the Community in 1973" (PDF) .

Aei.pitt.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ a b c "Report on the Development of the Social Situation in the Community in 1974" (PDF) .

Aei.pitt.edu . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ a b "DER SPIEGEL 16/1972 – Anders als zu Kaisers und zu Katzers Zeiten" .

Der Spiegel . 9 April 1972 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ a b c d "Report on the Development of the Social Situation in the Community in 1971" (PDF) .

Aei.pitt.edu . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ Tomka (2004) , p. 64 ^ Cocks, Geoffrey (1 January 1997).

Psychotherapy in the Third Reich: The GÃ¶ring Institute . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 9781412832366 – via Google Books.

^ a b "Innere Reformen" . Hdg.de . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ a b c "August 1970: The first policy statement" . Bundeskanzler-Willy-Brandt-Stiftung. 28 October 1969. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ a b Mares (2006) ^ Silvia & Stolpe (2007) ^ Williamson & Pampel (2002) ^ "The Politics of Pension Reform in Germany" (PDF) .

Lse.ac.uk . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 April 2017 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ a b c d Brandt (1992) ^ Blackburn (2003) ^ a b "Sozialliberale Koalition und innere Reformen | bpb" (in German). Bpb.de. 5 April 2002 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ Ebbinghaus, Bernhard (20 July 2006).

Reforming Early Retirement in Europe, Japan and the USA . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 9780199286119 – via Google Books.

^ Unemployment in Theory and Practice edited by Thomas Lange ^ Patricia, Lewicki, Maria (25 March 2014).

Sustainability of the German Pension Scheme: Employment at Higher Ages and Incentives for Delayed Retirement . KIT Scientific Publishing.

ISBN 9783731501718 – via Google Books.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Kumashiro, Masaharu (2 September 2003).

Aging and Work . CRC Press.

ISBN 9780203218556 – via Google Books.

^ a b Lane (1985) ^ Johnson, N. (22 October 2013).

State & Government in the Federal Republic of Germany: The Executive at Work . Elsevier.

ISBN 9781483293011 – via Google Books.

^ a b c d e f Winkler (2007) ^ GEW – Die Bildungsgewerkschaft (10 June 2015).

"The Introduction Of Tuition Fees In Germany And The International Covenant On Economic, Social And Cultural Rights" (PDF) .

gew.de . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 August 2013 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 .

^ Köllner, V. (February 1995). "[Education in Psychosomatic medicine and psychotherapy in the German Federal Republic]".

Ther Umsch (in German).

52 (2): 118– 122.

PMID 7892672 .

^ Dyro, Joseph F. (1 January 2004).

Clinical Engineering Handbook . Academic Press.

ISBN 9780122265709 – via Google Books.

^ Ardagh (1996) ^ Neuhaus, Rolf (1 January 1979).

"Social security, how it works in the Federal Republic of Germany" . Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung – via Google Books.

^ a b "Expose sur l'evolution de la situation sociale dans le Communaute en 1970 (joint au Quatrieme rapport general sur l'activite des Communautes) = Report on the development of the social situation in the Community in 1970 (annex to the Fourth general report on the activities of the Community). February 1971 – Archive of European Integration" .

Aei.pitt.edu . 1971 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ Patton (1999) ^ Bezelga & Brandon (1991) ^ "1971 – Frischer Wind durch innere Reformen der Bonner Koalition – chroniknet Artikel und private Fotos" . Chroniknet.de. 29 May 1977. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ Power (2002) ^ "Digitales Archiv Marburg – Das DigAM Projekt" . Digam.net. 28 October 1969. Archived from the original on 21 February 2013 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ Kommers (1997) , p. 93 ^ a b "Comparative study on the Rehabilitation of Handicapped Persons in the Countries of the Community" (PDF) .

Aei.pitt.edu . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck (11 April 2002).

Muslims in the West: From Sojourners to Citizens . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198033752 – via Google Books.

^ Pridham (1977) ^ Cooke & Gash (2007) ^ Kaplan (2012) , p.

123 ^ Transport, European Conference of Ministers of (1 February 1972).

Eighteenth Annual Report and Resolutions of the Council of Ministers . OECD Publishing.

ISBN 9789282106303 – via Google Books.

^ Huber & Stephens (2001) ^ Goodin, Robert E.; et al. (21 February 2008).

Discretionary Time .

Cambridge University Press . p. 174.

ISBN 9781139470773 .

Preview.

^ Paterson, Alan; Goriely, Tamara (1 January 1996).

A reader on resourcing civil justice . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198764618 – via Google Books.

^ The "Bauspar" System in Germany (PDF) . Brussels: European Office of the Verband der Privaten Bausparkassen e.V. January 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 September 2015 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 .

^ Boléat, Mark (1 January 1985).

National Housing Finance Systems: A Comparative Study . Mark Boleat.

ISBN 9780709932499 – via Google Books.

^ Phillips, Mary T.; Sechzer, Jeri A. (6 December 2012).

Animal Research and Ethical Conflict: An Analysis of the Scientific Literature: 1966–1986 . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 9781461236207 – via Google Books.

^ Larres, Klaus; Panayi, Panikos (27 August 2014).

The Federal Republic of Germany Since 1949: Politics, Society and Economy Before and After Unification . Routledge.

ISBN 9781317891741 – via Google Books.

^ "The Economist" . Economist Newspaper Limited. 1 January 1974 – via Google Books.

^ "Helmut Schmidt – Biografie Who's Who " .

Whoswho.de . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ "Citizen in Uniform: Democratic Germany and the Changing Bundeswehr" (PDF) .

Strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/p . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 December 2016 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ "White Paper 1973/1974: The Security of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Development of the Federal Armed Forces" . Federal Minister of Defence. 1 January 1974 – via Google Books.

^ Verteidigung, Germany (West) Bundesministerium der (1 January 1971).

"White Paper: the Security of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Development of the Federal Armed Forces" . Federal Minister of Defence. – via Google Books.

^ "White Paper: the Security of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Development of the Federal Armed Forces" . Federal Minister of Defence. 1 January 1973 – via Google Books.

^ "White Paper: the Security of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Development of the Federal Armed Forces" . Federal Minister of Defence. 1 January 1973 – via Google Books.

^ "White Paper 1973/1974: The Security of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Development of the Federal Armed Forces" . Federal Minister of Defence. 1 January 1974 – via Google Books.

^ "White Paper 1973/1974: The Security of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Development of the Federal Armed Forces" . Federal Minister of Defence. 1 January 1974 – via Google Books.

^ "White Paper 1973/1974: The Security of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Development of the Federal Armed Forces" . Federal Minister of Defence. 1 January 1974 – via Google Books.

^ Deichen, Michael.

"Studierendenbereich :: Beitrag aus dem IntranetBw anläßlich des 40 jährigen Bestehens der Universitäten der Bundeswehr" .

Hsu-hh.de . Archived from the original on 28 January 2017 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ Szabo, Stephen F. (1 January 1990).

The Bundeswehr and Western Security . Macmillan Publishers Limited.

ISBN 9780333498804 – via Google Books.

^ Herspring, Dale R. (27 March 2013).

Civil-Military Relations and Shared Responsibility: A Four-Nation Study . JHU Press.

ISBN 9781421409290 – via Google Books.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 October 2016 . Retrieved 30 October 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Helmut Schmidt, West German chancellor – obituary" .

Telegraph.co.uk . 10 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ a b "Germany'74 – Economy" . Sophienschule.de. 20 December 1974. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2015 . Retrieved 29 July 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Randelzhofer, Albrecht; Tomuschat, Christian (11 March 1999).

State Responsibility and the Individual: Reparation in Instances of Grave Violations of Human Rights . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 9041111476 – via Google Books.

^ David, René (1 January 1972).

International Encyclopedia of Comparative Law . Brill Archive.

ISBN 3166446176 – via Google Books.

^ "Digitales Archiv Marburg – Das DigAM Projekt" .

digam.net . Archived from the original on 6 October 2014.

^ Schiek (2006) ^ "GHDI – Document" . Germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org. 24 September 1973 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ Scheffer (2008) , pp.

555–556 ^ "Dezember 1973 – Regierung Uruguay Parteien Zeitungen "El Popular" "Cronica" Verband – chroniknet – Schlagzeilen, Ereignisse, Fotos mit Geschichte, Community" . Chroniknet.de. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ Abraham & Houseman (1994) ^ Thelen (1991) , p.

100 ^ "IZPB | bpb" (in German). Bpb.de . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ "When will Japan Choose Light Rail Transit?" .

jrtr.net . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ Banister (2002) ^ Schäfers (1998) ^ Glatzer, Wolfgang; Societies, International Research Group on the Comparative Charting of Social Change in Advanced Industrial (21 August 1992).

Recent Social Trends in West Germany, 1960–1990 . McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP. p. 230.

ISBN 9780773509092 – via Google Books.

^ "GHDI – Document" . Germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org. 17 May 1974 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ Katzenstein, Peter J. (1 January 1989).

Industry and Politics in West Germany: Toward the Third Republic . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 0801495954 – via Google Books.

^ Chaney, Sandra (15 July 2013).

Nature Of The Miracle Years: Conservation in West Germany, 1945–1975 . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 9780857458414 – via Google Books.

^ Federal Republic of Germany: Spatial Development and Problems by Peter Schöller, Willi Walter Puls, and Hanns Jürgen Buchholz ^ Theodor M. Johannsen.

"Automated cartography as an aid to decree protection areas against air traffic noise" (PDF) . pp.

138– 145. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 May 2014 . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ Flora (1986) , p.

54 .

^ "Germany – Chartbook of Economic Inequality" .

Chartbookofeconomicinequality.com\accessdate=2017-04-17 .

^ Blanke, B.; Smith, R. (18 August 1999).

Cities in Transition: New Challenges, New Responsibilities . Springer.

ISBN 9780333982273 – via Google Books.

^ Glatzer, Wolfgang; Societies, International Research Group on the Comparative Charting of Social Change in Advanced Industrial (21 August 1992).

Recent Social Trends in West Germany, 1960–1990 . McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP. p. 209.

ISBN 9780773509092 – via Google Books.

^ Winkler, Heinrich August (2006).

Germany: 1933-1990 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-926598-5 .

^ quoted in: Gregor Schöllgen.

Der Kanzler und sein Spion . In: Die Zeit 2003, Vol. 40, 25 September 2003 ^ Schöllgen (2001) ^ "Never at a Loss for Words" .

Time . 18 April 1983. Archived from the original on 14 January 2009 . Retrieved 9 July 2008 .

^ "Progressive Politics For A Fairer World" . Socialist International . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ Bukovsky Archives, CPSU Politburo "Information for Brandt and Sorsa about disarmament and Afghanistan", 1 February 1980* (Pb 182/2) .

^ Väänänen (2012) , pp. 258–259 ^ Michael Borchard (1 October 2008).

"Schlaglichter der deutschen Einheit. Eine kommentierte Chronik(1987-1990)" .

kas.de (in German).

Konrad Adenauer Foundation . p. 11.

^ "Mideast Tensions", TENSIONS; Buildup in Gulf Seen as a Signal On Use of Force , The New York Times , 9 November 1990. Retrieved 3 January 2008 ^ Binder, David (9 October 1992).

"Willy Brandt Dead at 78; Forged West Germany's Reconciliation With the East" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ MARSHALL, TYLER (18 October 1992).

"Germans Lay Beloved Statesman Brandt to Rest : Funeral: 'He shaped an era,' the country's president says of the former West Berlin mayor, foreign minister and chancellor" .

Los Angeles Times .

ISSN 0458-3035 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ "Bundeskanzler Willy Brandt Stiftung: The foundation" .

www.willy-brandt.de . Archived from the original on 5 May 2015 . Retrieved 15 September 2015 .

^ "Park får namn efter Willy Brandt" .

Dagens Nyheter . Dagens Nyheter. 18 March 1997 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 .

^ "Skylt på Willy Brandts hus i Hammarbyhöjden" .

Stockholmskällan . Stockholm Municipality. 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 .

^ "Honoring Willy Brandt" (PDF) . GHI Bulletin No. 33 (Fall 2003). Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2011.

^ "Enthüllung der Skulptur "Willy Brandt" " (PDF) .

Nuernberg.de . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 January 2015 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ "Dan online – Podgoricom: – 2011-06-10" .

dan.co.me .

^ "West Berlin Street Lamp" . londonremembers.com. Archived from the original on 16 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 April 2016 .

^ a b c "Obituary: Willy Brandt" .

The Independent . 10 October 1992 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ "In die Vergangenheit" .

Der Spiegel (in German). 2 July 1967 . Retrieved 15 July 2025 .

^ "Semakan Penerima Darjah Kebesaran, Bintang dan Pingat" . Archived from the original on 19 July 2019 . Retrieved 24 August 2018 .

Sources [ edit ] Keller, Andrei V. "'Masculine Friendship'?: Willy Brandt and Leonid Brezhnev in the Context of the Energy Dialogue between West Germany and the USSR, 1970–1973." The Soviet and post-Soviet Review 44.2 (2017): 99–132.

Kaplan, Gisela (2012).

Contemporary Western European Feminism . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415636810 .

Juneau, Jean-François (2011). "The limits of linkage: the Nixon administration and Willy Brandt's Ostpolitik , 1969–72".

International History Review .

33 (2): 277– 297.

doi : 10.1080/07075332.2011.555447 .

S2CID 154269345 .

Kempe, Frederick (2011).

Berlin 1961: Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Most Dangerous Place on Earth . Penguin Group.

ISBN 978-0-399-15729-5 .

Daum, Andreas (2008).

Kennedy in Berlin . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-85824-3 .

Cooke, Lynn Prince; Gash, Vanessa (2007).

"Panacea or Pitfall? Women's Part-time Employment and Marital Stability in West Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States" (PDF) .

GeNet Working Paper .

28 . Gender Equality Network. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 March 2012.

Winkler, Heinrich August (2007). Sager, Alexander (ed.).

Germany: the Long Road West, volume II: 1933–1990 .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-926598-5 .

Hofmann, Arne. "Small steps towards new frontiers? Ideas, concepts and the emergence of a détente strategy in the thinking of Willy Brandt and John F. Kennedy." Historical Research 79.205 (2006): 429–449.

Mares, Isabela (2006).

Taxation, Wage Bargaining, and Unemployment .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780511625688 .

Blackburn, Robin (2003).

Banking on Death: or, Investing in Life: the History and Future of Pensions . Verso Books.

ISBN 9781859844090 .

Banister, David (2002).

Transport Planning . Spon.

ISBN 9780415261715 .

Huber, Evelyne; Stephens, John D. (2001).

Development and Crisis of the Welfare State. Parties and Policies in Global Markets .

University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 9780226356471 .

Callaghan, John T. (2000).

The Retreat of Social Democracy .

Manchester University Press .

ISBN 9780719050312 .

Patton, David F. (1999).

Cold War Politics in Postwar Germany . New York: St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 9780312213619 .

Kommers, Donald P. (1997).

The Constitutional Jurisprudence of the Federal Republic of Germany .

Duke University Press .

ISBN 9780822318385 .

Marshall, Barbara (1997).

Willy Brandt: A Political Biography . London: Palgrave Macmillan UK.

doi : 10.1057/9780230390096 .

ISBN 978-1-349-39586-6 .

Marshall, Barbara.

Willy Brandt: A Political Biography (1996) 184pp Ardagh, John (1996).

Germany and the Germans . Penguin Books.

ISBN 9780140252668 .

Braunthal, Gerard (1994).

The German Social Democrats since 1969: a Party in Power and Opposition . Westview Press.

ISBN 9780813315355 .

Abraham, Katharine G.; Houseman, Susan N. (1994).

"Does employment protection inhibit labor market flexibility? Lessons from Germany, France, and Belgium" (PDF) . In Rebecca M. Blank (ed.).

Social Protection versus Economic Flexibility: Is There a Trade-Off?

.

University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 0-226-05678-3 .

Brandt, Willy (1992).

My Life in Politics . Viking.

ISBN 9780670844357 .

Childs, David (1992).

Germany in the Twentieth Century . Icon.

ISBN 9780064308625 .

Bezelga, Artur; Brandon, Peter S. (1991).

Management, Quality and Economics in Building . Spon.

ISBN 9780419174707 .

Flora, Peter (1986).

Growth to Limits: The Western European Welfare States Since World War II . Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 9783110111316 .

Lane, Peter (1985).

Europe Since 1945: an Introduction . Barnes & Noble.

ISBN 9780389205753 .

Dönhoff, Marion (1982).

Foe Into Friend: the Makers of the New Germany from Konrad Adenauer to Helmut Schmidt . translated by Gabriele Annan . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 9780312296926 .

Kohler, Peter A.; Zacher, Hans F.; Partington, Martin , eds. (1982).

The Evolution of Social Insurance 1881–1981: Studies of Germany, France, Great Britain, Austria, and Switzerland . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 9780312272852 .

Kellerman, Barbara. "Mentoring in political life: The case of Willy Brandt." American Political Science Review (1978): 422–433.

online Binder, David (1975).

The Other German: Willy Brandt's Life & Times . New Republic.

ISBN 9780915220090 .

Miard-Delacroix, Hélène .

Willy Brandt: Life of a statesman (Bloomsbury, 2016).

Potthoff, Heinrich; Miller, Susanne (2006).

The Social Democratic Party of Germany 1848–2005 . translated by Martin Kane. Dietz Verlag J. H. W. Nachf.

ISBN 9783801203658 .

Power, Anne (2002).

Hovels to High Rise: State Housing in Europe Since 1850 .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 9780415089357 .

Pridham, Geoffrey (1977).

Christian Democracy in Western Germany: the CDU/CSU in Government and Opposition 1945–1976 . Croom Helm.

ISBN 9780856645082 .

Prittie, Terence (1974).

Willy Brandt: Portrait of a Statesman . Schocken.

ISBN 9780805235616 .

Radice; Radice (1986).

Socialists in the Recession: the Search for Solidarity . Macmillan.

ISBN 9780333388464 .

Rother, Bernd, and Klaus Larres, eds.

Willy Brandt and International Relations: Europe, the USA and Latin America, 1974-1992 (Bloomsbury, 2018).

Schäfers, Bernhard (1998).

The State of Germany Atlas . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415188265 .

Scheffer (2008).

Burned Bridge: How East and West Germans Made the Iron Curtain .

ISBN 9781109097603 .

Schewe, Dieter; Nordhorn, Karlhugo; Schenke, Klaus (1972).

Survey of Social Security in the Federal Republic of Germany . Translated by Frank Kenny. Bonn: Federal Minister for Labour and Social Affairs.

Schiek, Dagmar (2006).

"Agency work – from marginalisation towards acceptance? Agency work in EU social and employment policy and the "implementation" of the draft directive on agency work into German law" (PDF) .

German Law Journal .

5 (10): 1233– 1257.

doi : 10.1017/S2071832200013195 .

S2CID 141058426 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 May 2013.

Schmidt, Helmut (1982). Wolfram F. Hanrieder (ed.).

Perspectives on Politics . Westview Press.

ISBN 9780865312050 .

Schöllgen, Gregor (2001).

Willy Brandt. Die Biographie . Berlin: Propyläen.

ISBN 3-549-07142-6 .

Schoenborn, Benedikt.

Reconciliation Road: Willy Brandt, Ostpolitik and the Quest for European Peace (Berghahn Books, 2020).

online review Silvia, Stephen J.; Stolpe, Michael (2007).

Health Care and Pension Refors (PDF) . AICGS Policy Report. Vol. 30. American Institute for Contemporary German Studies, Johns Hopkins University Press .

ISBN 978-1-933942-08-7 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 November 2008.

Sinn, Hans-Werner (2007).

Can Germany Be Saved? The Malaise of the World's First Welfare State .

Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

ISBN 9780262195584 .

Solsten, Eric (1999).

Germany: a Country Study . Diane.

ISBN 9780788181795 .

Thelen, Kathleen Ann (1991).

Union of Parts: Labor Politics in Postwar Germany .

Cornell University Press .

ISBN 9780801425868 .

Tomka, Béla (2004).

Welfare in East and West: Hungarian Social Security in an International Comparison, 1918–1990 . Akademie-Verlag.

ISBN 9783050038711 .

[ permanent dead link ] Väänänen, Pentti (2012).

Purppuraruusu ja samettinyrkki (in Finnish) (1st ed.). Kellastupa.

ISBN 9789525787115 .

Vivekanandan, Bhagavathi.

Global Visions of Olof Palme, Bruno Kreisky and Willy Brandt: International Peace and Security, Co-operation, and Development (Springer, 2016).

Walker, Robert; Lawson, Roger; Townsend, Peter, eds. (1984).

Responses to Poverty: Lessons from Europe . Associated University Presses.

ISBN 0-8386-3222-X .

Williamson, John B.; Pampel, Fred C. (2002).

Old-Age Security in Comparative Perspective .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195068597 .

Wilsford, David, ed. (1995).

Political Leaders of Contemporary Western Europe: a Biographical Dictionary . Greenwood Press.

ISBN 9780313286230 .

Further reading [ edit ] Helga Grebing, Willy Brandt. Der andere Deutsche . ( ISBN 978-3-7705-4710-4 ) (in German) Mandel, Ernest (November–December 1992).

"Willy Brandt and Petra Kelly" .

New Left Review .

I (196). New Left Review.

Barbara Marshall, Willy Brandt, A Political Biography ( ISBN 0-312-16438-6 ) Nestore di Meola, Willy Brandt raccontato da Klaus Lindenberg ( ISBN 88-7284-712-5 ) (in Italian) Hans-Joachim Noack, Willy Brandt, Ein Leben, Ein Jahrhundert ( ISBN 978-3-87134-645-3 ) (in German) The following titles are in German: Egon Bahr : "Das musst du erzählen". Erinnerungen an Willy Brandt . Propyläen, Berlin 2013, ISBN 978-3-549-07422-0 .

Lars Brandt: Andenken . Carl-Hanser-Verlag, München 2006, ISBN 3-446-20710-4 .

Brigitte Seebacher-Brandt: Willy Brandt . Piper-Verlag, München 2013, ISBN 978-3-492-30430-6 .

Helga Grebing: Willy Brandt. Der andere Deutsche . Wilhelm-Fink-Verlag, Paderborn 2008, ISBN 978-3-7705-4710-4 .

Peter Hoeres: Außenpolitik und Öffentlichkeit. Massenmedien, Meinungsforschung und Arkanpolitik in den deutsch-amerikanischen Beziehungen von Erhard bis Brandt . (Reihe: "Studien zur Internationalen Geschichte Bd. 32"), De Gruyter Oldenbourg, München 2013.

Gunter Hofmann: Willy Brandt und Helmut Schmidt. Geschichte einer schwierigen Freundschaft . Verlag C.H. Beck, München 2012, ISBN 978-3-406-63977-7 .

Torsten Körner: Die Familie Willy Brandt . S. Fischer, Frankfurt am Main 2013, ISBN 978-3-10-040407-7 .

Gertrud Lenz: Gertrud Meyer 1914–2002. Ein politisches Leben im Schatten Willy Brandts . Verlag Ferdinand Schöningh, Paderborn 2013, ISBN 978-3-506-77569-6 .

Einhart Lorenz: Willy Brandt. Deutscher – Europäer – Weltbürger .

Kohlhammer Verlag , Stuttgart 2012, ISBN 978-3-17-021245-9 .

Peter Merseburger : Willy Brandt, 1913–1992. Visionär und Realist . DVA, Stuttgart 2002, ISBN 3-423-34097-5 .(also on 6 CDs, 2004, ISBN 3-8291-1398-6 .) Judith Michel: Willy Brandts Amerikabild und -politik 1933–1993 . Bonn University Press im Verlag Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen 2010.

Horst Möller, Maurice Vaïsse (Hrsg.): Willy Brandt und Frankreich . Oldenbourg-Verlag, München 2005, ISBN 3-486-57649-6 (Schriftenreihe der Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte, Sondernummer).

Albrecht Müller: Brandt aktuell – Treibjagd auf einen Hoffnungsträger . Westend Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 2013, ISBN 978-3-86489-064-2 .

Hans-Joachim Noack: Willy Brandt. Ein Leben, ein Jahrhundert . Rowohlt Berlin Verlag, Berlin 2013, ISBN 978-3-87134-645-3 .

Steffen Raßloff (Hrsg.): "Willy Brandt ans Fenster!" Das Erfurter Gipfeltreffen 1970 und die Geschichte des "Erfurter Hofes" . Glaux-Verlag, Jena 2007, ISBN 978-3-940265-05-0 .

Bernd Rother (Hrsg.): Willy Brandts Außenpolitik . Springer VS Verlag, Wiesbaden 2014, ISBN 978-3-658-02918-0 .

Kai Schlüter: Günter Grass auf Tour für Willy Brandt. Die legendäre Wahlkampftour 1969 . Ch. Links Verlag, Berlin 2011, ISBN 978-3-86153-647-5 .

Jan Schönfelder; Rainer Erices: Willy Brandt in Erfurt. Das erste deutsch-deutsche Gipfeltreffen 1970 . Christoph-Links-Verlag, Berlin 2010, ISBN 978-3-86153-568-3 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Willy Brandt .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Willy Brandt .

The Federal Chancellor Willy Brandt Foundation Willy-Brandt-Forum in Unkel Official Biography of Willy Brandt by Chancellor Willy Brandt Foundation Adam Sneyd, "Brandt Commission" in Globalization and Autonomy Online Compendium, edited by William D. Coleman and Nancy Johnson Biography of Willy Brandt Willy Brandt and the unification of Europe from Center for European Studies collection Ubben Lecture at DePauw University Appearances on C-SPAN Willy Brandt on Nobelprize.org Political offices Preceded by Otto Suhr President of the West Berlin House of Representatives 1955–1957 Succeeded by Kurt Landsberg [ de ] Mayor of West Berlin 1957–1966 Succeeded by Heinrich Albertz Preceded by Kurt Sieveking President of the Bundesrat 1957–1958 Succeeded by Wilhelm Kaisen Preceded by Gerhard Schröder Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs 1966–1969 Succeeded by Walter Scheel Preceded by Hans-Christoph Seebohm Vice-Chancellor of Germany 1966–1969 Preceded by Kurt Georg Kiesinger Chancellor of Germany 1969–1974 Succeeded by Helmut Schmidt Party political offices Preceded by Erich Ollenhauer Leader of the Social Democratic Party 1964–1987 Succeeded by Hans-Jochen Vogel Preceded by Bruno Pittermann President of the Socialist International 1976–1992 Succeeded by Pierre Mauroy Willy Brandt navigational boxes v t e Chancellors of Germany (since 1867) North German Confederation Bundeskanzler (1867–1871) Otto von Bismarck German Empire Reichskanzler (1871–1918) Otto von Bismarck Leo von Caprivi Prince Chlodwig zu Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst Bernhard von Bülow Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg Georg Michaelis Georg von Hertling Prince Maximilian of Baden Weimar Republic Reichskanzler  (1919–1933) Friedrich Ebert Philipp Scheidemann (as Ministerpräsident) Gustav Bauer (as Ministerpräsident, later Chancellor) Hermann Müller Constantin Fehrenbach Joseph Wirth Wilhelm Cuno Gustav Stresemann Wilhelm Marx Hans Luther Wilhelm Marx Hermann Müller Heinrich Brüning Franz von Papen Kurt von Schleicher Adolf Hitler Nazi Germany Reichskanzler (1933–1945) Adolf Hitler Joseph Goebbels (de facto) Count Schwerin von Krosigk (de facto) Federal Republic Bundeskanzler (1949–present) Konrad Adenauer Ludwig Erhard Kurt Georg Kiesinger Willy Brandt Helmut Schmidt Helmut Kohl Gerhard Schröder Angela Merkel Olaf Scholz Friedrich Merz List of chancellors v t e First Brandt cabinet (1969–1972) Willy Brandt (SPD) Walter Scheel (FDP) Hans-Dietrich Genscher (FDP) Gerhard Jahn (SPD) Alex Möller (SPD) Karl Schiller (SPD) Helmut Schmidt (SPD) Josef Ertl (FDP) Walter Arendt (SPD) Georg Leber (SPD) Käte Strobel (SPD) Lauritz Lauritzen (SPD) Egon Franke (SPD) Hans Leussink (none) Klaus von Dohnanyi (SPD) Erhard Eppler (SPD) Horst Ehmke (SPD) v t e Second Brandt cabinet (1972–1974) Willy Brandt (SPD) Walter Scheel (FDP) Hans-Dietrich Genscher (FDP) Gerhard Jahn (SPD) Helmut Schmidt (SPD) Hans Friderichs (FDP) Josef Ertl (FDP) Walter Arendt (SPD) Georg Leber (SPD) Katharina Focke (SPD) Lauritz Lauritzen (SPD) Egon Franke (SPD) Hans-Jochen Vogel (SPD) Klaus von Dohnanyi (SPD) Erhard Eppler (SPD) Horst Ehmke (SPD) Egon Bahr (SPD) Werner Maihofer (FDP) v t e Chancellor candidates of Germany For CDU/CSU Konrad Adenauer ( 1949 , 1953 , 1957 , 1961 ) Ludwig Erhard ( 1965 ) Kurt Georg Kiesinger ( 1969 ) Rainer Barzel ( 1972 ) Helmut Kohl ( 1976 , 1983 , 1987 , 1990 , 1994 , 1998 ) Franz Josef Strauß ( 1980 ) Edmund Stoiber ( 2002 ) Angela Merkel ( 2005 , 2009 , 2013 , 2017 ) Armin Laschet ( 2021 ) Friedrich Merz ( 2025 ) For SPD Kurt Schumacher ( 1949 ) Erich Ollenhauer ( 1953 , 1957 ) Willy Brandt ( 1961 , 1965 , 1969 , 1972 ) Helmut Schmidt ( 1976 , 1980 ) Hans-Jochen Vogel ( 1983 ) Johannes Rau ( 1987 ) Oskar Lafontaine ( 1990 ) Rudolf Scharping ( 1994 ) Gerhard Schröder ( 1998 , 2002 , 2005 ) Frank-Walter Steinmeier ( 2009 ) Peer Steinbrück ( 2013 ) Martin Schulz ( 2017 ) Olaf Scholz ( 2021 , 2025 ) For FDP Guido Westerwelle ( 2002 ) For Greens Annalena Baerbock ( 2021 ) For AfD Alice Weidel ( 2025 ) For BSW Sahra Wagenknecht ( 2025 ) Note: The candidate became chancellor in the marked election years.

v t e Presidents of the German Bundesrat Karl Arnold Hans Ehard Hinrich Wilhelm Kopf Reinhold Maier Georg August Zinn Peter Altmeier Kai-Uwe von Hassel Kurt Sieveking Willy Brandt Wilhelm Kaisen Franz-Josef Röder Franz Meyers Kurt Georg Kiesinger Georg Diederichs Helmut Lemke Klaus Schütz Herbert Weichmann Franz-Josef Röder Hans Koschnick Heinz Kühn Alfons Goppel Hans Filbinger Alfred Kubel Albert Osswald Bernhard Vogel Gerhard Stoltenberg Dietrich Stobbe Hans-Ulrich Klose Werner Zeyer Johannes Rau Franz Josef Strauss Lothar Späth Ernst Albrecht Holger Börner Walter Wallmann Björn Engholm Walter Momper Henning Voscherau Alfred Gomolka Berndt Seite Oskar Lafontaine Klaus Wedemeier Edmund Stoiber Erwin Teufel Gerhard Schröder Hans Eichel Roland Koch Kurt Biedenkopf Kurt Beck Klaus Wowereit Wolfgang Böhmer Dieter Althaus Matthias Platzeck Peter Harry Carstensen Harald Ringstorff Ole von Beust Peter Müller Jens Böhrnsen Hannelore Kraft Horst Seehofer Winfried Kretschmann Stephan Weil Volker Bouffier Stanislaw Tillich Malu Dreyer Michael Müller Daniel Günther Dietmar Woidke Reiner Haseloff Bodo Ramelow Peter Tschentscher Manuela Schwesig Anke Rehlinger v t e Governing mayors of Berlin West Berlin (1951–1990) Ernst Reuter Walther Schreiber Otto Suhr Willy Brandt Heinrich Albertz Klaus Schütz Dietrich Stobbe Hans-Jochen Vogel Richard von Weizsäcker Eberhard Diepgen Walter Momper Berlin (1990–present) Walter Momper Eberhard Diepgen Klaus Wowereit Michael Müller Franziska Giffey Kai Wegner v t e Mayors of Berlin Berlin 1 (1809–1948) Leopold von Gerlach Johann Büsching Friedrich von Bärensprung Heinrich Wilhelm Krausnick Franz Christian Naunyn Heinrich Wilhelm Krausnick Karl Theodor Seydel Arthur Hobrecht Max von Forckenbeck Robert Zelle Martin Kirschner Adolf Wermuth Gustav Böß Arthur Scholz Heinrich Sahm Oskar Maretzky 2 Julius Lippert 2 Ludwig Steeg 2 Arthur Werner Otto Ostrowski Louise Schroeder Ferdinand Friedensburg Ernst Reuter East Berlin 1 (1948–90) Friedrich Ebert Herbert Fechner Erhard Krack Ingrid Pankraz Christian Hartenhauer Tino Schwierzina Thomas Krüger West Berlin 3 (1948–90) Ernst Reuter Walther Schreiber Otto Suhr Willy Brandt Heinrich Albertz Klaus Schütz Dietrich Stobbe Hans-Jochen Vogel Richard von Weizsäcker Eberhard Diepgen Walter Momper Berlin 3 (1990–present) Walter Momper Eberhard Diepgen Klaus Wowereit Michael Müller Franziska Giffey Kai Wegner 1 Oberbürgermeister ( Lord Mayor ) 2 Stadtpräsident (City President) 3 Regierender Bürgermeister (Governing Mayor) v t e Social Democratic Party of Germany President of Germany Weimar Republic (1918–1933) Friedrich Ebert Federal Republic (1949–present) Gustav Heinemann Johannes Rau Jens Böhrnsen ( Acting ) Frank-Walter Steinmeier Chancellor of Germany Weimar Republic (1918–1933) Friedrich Ebert ( de facto ) Philipp Scheidemann (as Reich Minister President) Gustav Bauer Hermann Müller Federal Republic (1949–present) Willy Brandt Helmut Schmidt Gerhard Schröder Olaf Scholz Federal chairmen (since 1946) Kurt Schumacher Erich Ollenhauer Willy Brandt Hans-Jochen Vogel Björn Engholm Rudolf Scharping Oskar Lafontaine Gerhard Schröder Franz Müntefering Matthias Platzeck Kurt Beck Franz Müntefering Sigmar Gabriel Martin Schulz Andrea Nahles Saskia Esken & Norbert Walter-Borjans Saskia Esken & Lars Klingbeil Leaders in the Bundestag Kurt Schumacher Erich Ollenhauer Fritz Erler Helmut Schmidt Herbert Wehner Hans-Jochen Vogel Hans-Ulrich Klose Rudolf Scharping Peter Struck Ludwig Stiegler Franz Müntefering Peter Struck Frank-Walter Steinmeier Thomas Oppermann Andrea Nahles Rolf Mützenich General Secretaries (since 1999) Franz Müntefering Olaf Scholz Klaus Uwe Benneter Hubertus Heil Andrea Nahles Yasmin Fahimi Katarina Barley Hubertus Heil Lars Klingbeil Kevin Kühnert Governments Scheidemann Bauer Müller ( I II ) Wirth ( I II ) Kiesinger Brandt ( I II ) Schmidt ( I II III ) Schröder ( I II ) Merkel ( I III IV ) Scholz Merz Affiliated organisations Friedrich Ebert Foundation Jusos German Trade Union Confederation Arbeiter-Samariter-Bund Parlamentarische Linke Seeheimer Kreis Related articles Grand coalition Social–liberal coalition Red–green coalition Red–red–green coalition Kenya coalition Category v t e Chairmen of the Social Democratic Party of Germany SPD (1890–1933) Paul Singer & Alwin Gerisch (1890–92) Paul Singer & August Bebel (1892–1911) August Bebel & Hugo Haase (1911–13) Hugo Haase & Friedrich Ebert (1913–16) Friedrich Ebert / Philipp Scheidemann (1917–19) Otto Wels & Herman Müller (1919–22) Otto Wels & Herman Müller & Arthur Crispien (1922–28) Otto Wels & Arthur Crispien (1928–31) Arthur Crispien & Otto Wels & Hans Vogel (1931–33) SPD-in-exile (1933–1945) Otto Wels & Hans Vogel (1933–39) Hans Vogel (1939–45) SPD (since 1945) Kurt Schumacher (1945–52) Erich Ollenhauer (1953–63) Willy Brandt (1964–87) Hans-Jochen Vogel (1987–91) Björn Engholm (1991–93 Rudolf Scharping (1993–95) Oskar Lafontaine (1995–99) Gerhard Schröder (1999–2004) Franz Müntefering (2004–05) Matthias Platzeck (2005–06) Kurt Beck (2006–08) Franz Müntefering (2008–09) Sigmar Gabriel (2009–17) Martin Schulz (2017–18) Andrea Nahles (2018–19) Saskia Esken & Norbert Walter-Borjans (2019–21) Saskia Esken & Lars Klingbeil (2021–present) v t e Foreign ministers of Germany German Empire (1871–1918) Thile Balan B. E. von Bülow Radowitz Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst Limburg-Stirum Busch Hatzfeldt-Wildenburg Bismarck Marschall B. von Bülow Richthofen Tschirschky-Bögendorff Schoen Kiderlen-Waechter Jagow Zimmermann Kühlmann Hintze Solf Brockdorff-Rantzau Weimar Republic (1918–33) Brockdorff-Rantzau Müller Köster Simons Rosen Wirth Rathenau Rosenberg Stresemann Curtius Brüning Neurath Nazi Germany (1933–45) Neurath Ribbentrop Seyss-Inquart Schwerin von Krosigk German Democratic Republic 1 (1949–90) Dertinger Ackermann Bolz Winzer O. Fischer Meckel de Maizière Federal Republic of Germany (1949–present) Adenauer von Brentano Schröder Brandt Scheel Genscher Schmidt Genscher Kinkel J. Fischer Steinmeier Westerwelle Steinmeier Gabriel Maas Baerbock Wadephul 1 East Germany v t e Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize 1901–1925 1901 : Henry Dunant / Frédéric Passy 1902: Élie Ducommun / Charles Gobat 1903: Randal Cremer 1904: Institut de Droit International 1905: Bertha von Suttner 1906: Theodore Roosevelt 1907: Ernesto Moneta / Louis Renault 1908: Klas Arnoldson / Fredrik Bajer 1909: A. M. F. Beernaert / Paul Estournelles de Constant 1910: International Peace Bureau 1911: Tobias Asser / Alfred Fried 1912: Elihu Root 1913: Henri La Fontaine 1914 1915 1916 1917: International Committee of the Red Cross 1918 1919: Woodrow Wilson 1920: Léon Bourgeois 1921: Hjalmar Branting / Christian Lange 1922: Fridtjof Nansen 1923 1924 1925: Austen Chamberlain / Charles Dawes 1926–1950 1926: Aristide Briand / Gustav Stresemann 1927: Ferdinand Buisson / Ludwig Quidde 1928 1929: Frank B. Kellogg 1930: Nathan Söderblom 1931: Jane Addams / Nicholas Butler 1932 1933: Norman Angell 1934: Arthur Henderson 1935: Carl von Ossietzky 1936: Carlos Saavedra Lamas 1937: Robert Cecil 1938: Nansen International Office for Refugees 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944: International Committee of the Red Cross 1945: Cordell Hull 1946: Emily Balch / John Mott 1947: Friends Service Council / American Friends Service Committee 1948 1949: John Boyd Orr 1950: Ralph Bunche 1951–1975 1951: Léon Jouhaux 1952: Albert Schweitzer 1953: George C. Marshall 1954: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1955 1956 1957: Lester B. Pearson 1958: Georges Pire 1959: Philip Noel-Baker 1960: Albert Luthuli 1961: Dag Hammarskjöld 1962: Linus Pauling 1963: International Committee of the Red Cross / League of Red Cross Societies 1964 : Martin Luther King Jr.

1965 : UNICEF 1966 1967 1968 : René Cassin 1969 : International Labour Organization 1970 : Norman Borlaug 1971 : Willy Brandt 1972 1973 : Lê Đức Thọ (declined award) / Henry Kissinger 1974: Seán MacBride / Eisaku Satō 1975: Andrei Sakharov 1976–2000 1976: Betty Williams / Mairead Corrigan 1977: Amnesty International 1978: Anwar Sadat / Menachem Begin 1979: Mother Teresa 1980: Adolfo Pérez Esquivel 1981: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1982: Alva Myrdal / Alfonso García Robles 1983: Lech Wałęsa 1984: Desmond Tutu 1985: International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War 1986: Elie Wiesel 1987: Óscar Arias 1988: UN Peacekeeping Forces 1989: Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama) 1990: Mikhail Gorbachev 1991: Aung San Suu Kyi 1992: Rigoberta Menchú 1993: Nelson Mandela / F. W. de Klerk 1994: Shimon Peres / Yitzhak Rabin / Yasser Arafat 1995: Pugwash Conferences / Joseph Rotblat 1996: Carlos Belo / José Ramos-Horta 1997: International Campaign to Ban Landmines / Jody Williams 1998: John Hume / David Trimble 1999: Médecins Sans Frontières 2000: Kim Dae-jung 2001–present 2001 : United Nations / Kofi Annan 2002 : Jimmy Carter 2003 : Shirin Ebadi 2004 : Wangari Maathai 2005 : International Atomic Energy Agency / Mohamed ElBaradei 2006 : Grameen Bank / Muhammad Yunus 2007 : Al Gore / Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2008 : Martti Ahtisaari 2009 : Barack Obama 2010 : Liu Xiaobo 2011 : Ellen Johnson Sirleaf / Leymah Gbowee / Tawakkol Karman 2012 : European Union 2013 : Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 2014 : Kailash Satyarthi / Malala Yousafzai 2015 : Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet 2016 : Juan Manuel Santos 2017 : International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons 2018 : Denis Mukwege / Nadia Murad 2019 : Abiy Ahmed 2020 : World Food Programme 2021 : Maria Ressa / Dmitry Muratov 2022 : Ales Bialiatski / Memorial / Center for Civil Liberties 2023 : Narges Mohammadi 2024 : Nihon Hidankyo v t e 1971 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry Gerhard Herzberg (Canada) Literature ( 1971 ) Pablo Neruda (Chile) Peace ( 1971 ) Willy Brandt (Germany) Physics Dennis Gabor (United Kingdom) Physiology or Medicine Earl Wilbur Sutherland Jr.

(United States) Economic Sciences Simon Kuznets (United States) Nobel Prize recipients 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 v t e Time Persons of the Year 1927–1950 Charles Lindbergh (1927) Walter Chrysler (1928) Owen D. Young (1929) Mohandas Gandhi (1930) Pierre Laval (1931) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) Hugh S. Johnson (1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Haile Selassie (1935) Wallis Simpson (1936) Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937) Adolf Hitler (1938) Joseph Stalin (1939) Winston Churchill (1940) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Joseph Stalin (1942) George Marshall (1943) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Harry S. Truman (1945) James F. Byrnes (1946) George Marshall (1947) Harry S. Truman (1948) Winston Churchill (1949) The American Fighting-Man (1950) 1951–1975 Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King Jr.

(1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975) 1976–2000 Jimmy Carter (1976) Anwar Sadat (1977) Deng Xiaoping (1978) Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) Ronald Reagan (1980) Lech Wałęsa (1981) The Computer (1982) Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Peter Ueberroth (1984) Deng Xiaoping (1985) Corazon Aquino (1986) Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) The Endangered Earth (1988) Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) George H. W. Bush (1990) Ted Turner (1991) Bill Clinton (1992) The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Pope John Paul II (1994) Newt Gingrich (1995) David Ho (1996) Andrew Grove (1997) Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998) Jeff Bezos (1999) George W. Bush (2000) 2001–present Rudolph Giuliani (2001) The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) The American Soldier (2003) George W. Bush (2004) The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) You (2006) Vladimir Putin (2007) Barack Obama (2008) Ben Bernanke (2009) Mark Zuckerberg (2010) The Protester (2011) Barack Obama (2012) Pope Francis (2013) Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr.

Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014) Angela Merkel (2015) Donald Trump (2016) The Silence Breakers (2017) The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital (2018) Greta Thunberg (2019) Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020) Elon Musk (2021) Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022) Taylor Swift (2023) Donald Trump (2024) v t e Freedom Award laureates Willy Brandt (1957) Winston Churchill (1958) William Joseph Donovan (1959) Richard Evelyn Byrd (1960) George Meany (1965) David Dubinsky (1966) David Sarnoff (1967) Lucius D. Clay (1969) Jacob K. Javits (1970) Bruno Kreisky (1975) Leo Cherne (1976) Hubert Humphrey (1977) Joseph Buttinger (1978) Mary Pillsbury Lord (1979) Lane Kirkland , Irena Kirkland (1981) Elie Wiesel , John C. Whitehead (1987) Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan , Lech Wałęsa (1989) Fang Lizhi , Li Shuxian (1991) Cyrus Vance (1992) George Soros , Dwayne Andreas (1993) Theodore J. Forstmann , Felix Rohatyn (1994) Aung San Suu Kyi , Sadako Ogata , Richard Holbrooke (1995) Robert P. De Vecchi (1997) Madeleine Albright (1999) John McCain (2001) Reynold Levy , Hamid Karzai (2002) Václav Havel (2003) Roméo Dallaire (2004) George H.W. Bush , Bill Clinton (2005) Ellen Johnson Sirleaf (2006) António Guterres , Angelina Jolie (2007) Kofi Annan (2008) Brokaw family (2011) John C. Whitehead (2012) George Soros (2013) The humanitarian aid worker (2014) Shimon Peres (2015) Spyros Galinos (2016) v t e Grand Commanders of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia Grand Commanders 1966: Ismail Abdul Rahman 1967: Tan Siew Sin 1967: V. T. Sambanthan 1968: Syed Sheh Barakbah 1970: Mohamed Azmi Mohamed 1973: Mohamed Salleh Ismael 1975: Mohamed Suffian Mohamed Hashim 1976: Rahah Noah 1979: Omar Yoke Lin Ong 1980: Ismail Mohd Ali 1981: Jugah Barieng 1982: Syed Nasir Ismail 1983: Raja Azlan Shah 1985: Salleh Abas 1987: Ahmad Zaidi Adruce 1987: Syed Ahmad Shahabuddin 1989: Abdul Hamid Omar 1990: Suhailah Noah 1991: Daim Zainuddin 1991: Lim Chong Eu 1992: Raja Mohar 1993: Mohammed Hanif Omar 1995: Ghafar Baba 1997: Eusoff Chin 1998: Mohamed Zahir Ismail 2000: Ibrahim Ismail 2001: Sulaiman Ninam Shah 2002: Mohamed Dzaiddin Abdullah 2003: Abdullah Mohd Salleh 2003: Fatimah Hashim 2003: Siti Hasmah Mohamad Ali 2004: Ling Liong Sik 2005: Ahmad Fairuz Abdul Halim 2005: Ghazali Shafie 2006: Musa Hitam 2008: Abdul Hamid Mohamad 2008: Ahmad Sarji Abdul Hamid 2008: Lim Keng Yaik 2009: Endon Mahmood 2009: Jeanne Abdullah 2009: Zaki Azmi 2010: Azizan Zainul Abidin 2011: Abdullah Ayub 2012: Arifin Zakaria 2017: Michael Chen Wing Sum 2017: Md Raus Sharif 2017: Samy Vellu 2020: Tengku Maimun Tuan Mat 2020: Arshad Ayub 2020: Richard Malanjum 2021: Raja Muhammad Alias Raja Muhammad Ali 2022: Mohamed Hashim Mohd Ali Honorary Grand Commanders 1966: Lee Tong Won 1967: Dawee Chullasapya 1968: Ardeshir Zahedi 1969: Habib Bourguiba 1969: Willy Brandt 1971: Maraden Panggabean 1972: Hamengkubuwono IX 1972: Martin Charteris 1972: Prasert Ruchirawongse 1973: Bhanubandhu Yugala 1973: Chatichai Choonhavan 1973: George David Woods 1973: Kris Sivara 1973: Swaeng Senanarong 1979: Serm Na Nakorn 1982: Abdullah Abdulaziz Al Saud 2003: Antonio Puri Purini 2003: Franco Frattini 2003: Gaetano Gifuni 2009: Sirindhorn v t e German members of the European Parliament (1979–1984) Social Democratic Party Rudi Arndt Willy Brandt Ludwig Fellermaier Katharina Focke Bruno Friedrich Volkmar Gabert Klaus Hänsch Karl Hauenschild Luise Herklotz Magdalene Hoff Jan Klinkenborg Heinz Kühn Erwin Lange Erdmann Linde Rolf Linkohr Eugen Loderer Heinke Salisch Rudolf Schieler Dieter Schinzel Gerhard Schmid Heinz Schmitt Karl Schön Olaf Schwencke Horst Seefeld Hans-Joachim Seeler Lieselotte Seibel-Emmerling Hellmut Sieglerschmidt Heinz Oskar Vetter Thomas von der Vring Manfred Wagner Gerd Walter Beate Weber Klaus Wettig Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul Christian Democratic Union Jochen van Aerssen Siegbert Alber Philipp von Bismarck Erik Blumenfeld Isidor Früh Wilhelm Hahn Kai-Uwe von Hassel Wilhelm Helms Karl-Heinz Hoffmann Hans Katzer Egon Klepsch Herbert Köhler Horst Langes Gerd Lemmer Marlene Lenz Rudolf Luster Ernst Majonica Kurt Malangré Meinholf Mertens Ernst Müller-Hermann Franz-Josef Nordlohne Gero Pfennig Hans-Gert Pöttering Albert Pürtsen Renate-Charlotte Rabbethge Günter Rinsche Bernhard Sälzer Casimir Johannes, Prince of Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg Wolfgang Schall Paul Schnitker Konrad Schön Hanna Walz Kurt Wawrzik Karl von Wogau Joachim Wuermeling Christian Social Union in Bavaria Heinrich Aigner Reinhold Bocklet Ingo Friedrich Karl Fuchs Alfons Goppel Otto von Habsburg Hans August Lücker Ursula Schleicher Free Democratic Party Mechthild von Alemann Martin Bangemann Ulrich Irmer Heinrich Jürgens v t e Members of the 1st Bundestag (1949–1953) President : Erich Köhler until 18 October 1950; Hermann Ehlers from 19 October 1950 (CDU) CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Konrad Adenauer until 21 September 1949; Heinrich von Brentano from 30 September 1949 CDU: Adenauer Albers Arndgen Bartram (from 13 May 1952) Bauknecht Baur Bausch Becker Blank Brauksiepe Brentano Brese Brökelschen Brönner Brookmann Bucerius Degener (until 31 December 1951) Dietz Dresbach Eckstein Ehlers Ehren Eplée (from 16 January 1953) Erhard Etzel (until 4 January 1953) Etzenbach Even Feldmann Frey Friedensburg (from 1 February 1952) Gengler Gerns Gerstenmaier Gibbert Giencke Glüsing Gockeln Götz Gröwel Günther Hagge (from 24 June 1953 FDP) Handschumacher (from 21 January 1953) Heiler Heix Henle Hilbert Hilpert (until 10 October 1949) Höfler Hohl (from 3 November 1949) Holzapfel (until 20 January 1953) Hoogen Hoppe Horn (from 10 June 1950) Huth Junglas Kaiser Kather Kemper Kern Kiesinger Köhler Kopf Krone Kühling Kuntscher Kunze Lehr Leibfried Lemmer (from 1 February 1952) Lenz Leonhard Lübke (until 30 September 1950) Lücke Majonica (from 19 November 1950) Massoth Maxsein (from 1 February 1952) Mayer Mehs Mensing Morgenthaler Muckermann Mühlenberg Müller Müller-Hermann (from 1 January 1952) Naegel Neber Nellen Neuburger Niggemeyer Oetzel (from 24 January 1953) Orth Pelster Pfender Pferdmenges (from 12 January 1950) Povel (until 21 October 1952) Pünder Raestrup Rehling Rösch Rümmele Sabel Scharnberg Schill Schlange-Schöningen (until 9 June 1950) Schmitt Schmitz Schmücker Schröder Schröter (until 25 February 1952) Schuler Schulze-Pellengahr Schüttler Serres Sewald (until 25 November 1949) Siebel Stauch Steinbiß Storch Struve Tillmanns Vogel Wacker Wackerzapp Wahl Weber Weber Weiß Winkelheide Wuermeling CSU: Bauereisen Bodensteiner (from 14 November 1952 Non-attached (GVP)) Fuchs Fugger Funk Horlacher Jaeger Kahn Karpf Kemmer Kleindinst Laforet Loibl (until 16 April 1951) Nickl Niklas (from 30 May 1951) Oesterle Probst Schäffer Schatz Schütz Semler (from 14 May 1950) Solleder Spies Spreti Strauss Stücklen SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Kurt Schumacher until 20 August 1952; Erich Ollenhauer from 7 October 1952 Members: Albertz Albrecht Altmaier Ansorge (from 17 November 1951) Arndt Arnholz Baade Bärsch Baur Bazille Behrisch Bergmann Bergsträsser Berlin Bettgenhäuser Bielig Birkelbach Blachstein Bleiß Böhm Brandt Brill Bromme Brünen Brunner (until 13 November 1951) Cramer Dannebom Diel Döhring Eichler Ekstrand Erler Faller (from 4 December 1951) Fischer (until 21 October 1951) Franke (from 17 May 1951) Freidhof Freitag Geritzmann Gleisner Görlinger Graf Greve Gülich Happe Heiland Heinen (from 24 July 1953) Hennig Henßler Herbig (until 1 December 1951) Herrmann Höcker Höhne Hubert Imig Jacobi Jacobs Jahn Kalbfell Kalbitzer Keilhack Keuning Kinat Kipp-Kaule Klabunde (until 21 November 1950) Knoeringen (until 3 April 1951) Knothe (until 20 February 1952) Koch Königswarter (from 1 February 1952) Korspeter Krahnstöver Kreyssig (from 4 April 1951) Kriedemann Kurlbaum Lange Lausen Leddin (until 25 March 1951) Löbe Lockmann (from 28 November 1950) Lohmüller (until 2 March 1952) Ludwig Lütkens Marx Matzner Mayer Meitmann Mellies Menzel Merten (from 23 April 1951) Mertins Meyer Meyer Meyer-Laule Missmahl Mommer Moosdorf (from 4 May 1952) Mücke Müller Müller Nadig Neubauer (from 1 February 1952) Neumann Nölting (until 15 July 1953) Nowack Odenthal (from 28 September 1951) Ohlig Ollenhauer Paul Peters Pohle Preller (from 16 March 1951) Priebe Reitzner Richter Ritzel Roth (until 14 May 1951) Ruhnke Runge Sander Sassnick Schanzenbach Schellenberg (from 1 February 1952) Schmid Schmidt Schoettle Schönauer (until 2 April 1950) Schöne Schroeder Schröter (from 1 February 1952) Schumacher (until 20 August 1952) Segitz (from 4 December 1951) Seuffert Stech Steinhörster Stierle Stopperich (until 6 January 1952) Striebeck Strobel Suhr (until 31 January 1952) Temmen Tenhagen Troppenz Veit Wagner Wehner Wehr (from 21 May 1952) Weinhold Welke Weltner Wenzel Winter (from 9 November 1952) Wolff (from 1 February 1952) Wönner Zinn (until 21 January 1951) Zühlke FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Theodor Heuss until 12 September 1949; Hermann Schäfer until 10 January 1951; August-Martin Euler until 6 May 1952; Hermann Schäfer from 6 May 1952 Members: Atzenroth Becker Blank Blücher Dannemann Dehler Dirscherl Eberhard (from 3 October 1952) Euler Fassbender Friedrich (from 5 October 1950 Non-attached, from 16 November 1950 BHE/DG, from 2 April 1952 FDP-Gast) Frühwald Funcke (from 14 September 1951) Gaul Golitschek Grundmann Hammer Hasemann Henn (from 1 February 1952) Heuss (until 15 September 1949) Hoffmann (from 15 June 1951) Hoffmann Höpker-Aschoff (until 9 September 1951) Hübner (from 1 February 1952) Hütter (from 15 September 1949) Ilk (from 3 November 1949) Jaeger (from 22 January 1953) Juncker Kneipp Kohl (until 31 January 1952) Kühn Langer (from 10 June 1952 Non-attached, from 29 March 1953 WAV) Leuchtgens (from 21 January 1950 DRP, from 5 October 1950 Non-attached (DRP), from 6 December 1950 DP, from 27 July 1953 partei- und Non-attached) Leuze (from 21 March 1952) Linnert (until 27 October 1949) Luchtenberg (from 30 October 1950) Margulies Mauk (from 7 April 1952) Mayer (until 18 December 1952) Mende Middelhauve (until 17 October 1950) Mulert (from 1 February 1952) Neumayer Nöll Nowack (until 30 September 1952) Oellers (until 5 June 1951) Onnen Pfleiderer Preiß Preusker Rademacher Rath Rechenberg (until 19 January 1953) Reif Revenstorff Rüdiger (until 20 February 1951) Schäfer Schneider Stahl Stegner Trischler Vries (from 5 January 1953) Wellhausen Wildermuth (until 9 March 1952) Will (from 1 February 1952) Wirths Zawadil (from 26 November 1952 DP) DP v t e DP Speaker: Heinrich Hellwege until 2 November 1949; Friedrich Klinge until 21 December 1949; Hans Mühlenfeld until 15 March 1953; Hans-Joachim von Merkatz from 17 March 1953 Members: Ahrens Bahlburg (from 13 September 1951 Non-attached, from 24 January 1952 DP-Gast, from 10 September 1952 Non-attached) Campe (from 23 January 1950, until 8 January 1952) Eickhoff Ewers Farke Fricke (from 22 March 1952) Hedler (from 19 January 1950 Non-attached, from 28 March 1950 DRP-Gast, from 16 September 1950 Non-attached, from 29 April 1953 WAV) Hellwege Jaffé (from 9 January 1952) Kalinke Klinge (until 21 December 1949) Kuhlemann Matthes Merkatz Mühlenfeld (until 15 May 1953) Seebohm Tobaben Walter Wittenburg Woltje (from 30 May 1953) BP v t e BP Speaker: Gebhard Seelos until 25 September 1951; Hugo Decker from 25 September 1951 Members: Aretin (from 14 December 1951 FU) Aumer (from 8 September 1950 Non-attached) Baumgartner (until 1 January 1951) Besold (from 14 December 1951 FU) Decker Donhauser (from 8 September 1950 Non-attached, from 17 September 1952 CSU) Eichner (from 14 December 1951 FU) Etzel (from 14 December 1951 FU, from 3 December 1952 Non-attached (GVP)) Falkner (until 27 October 1950) Fink (from 14 December 1951 FU, from 5 January 1952 CSU) Fürstenberg (from 7 November 1950 Non-attached, from 19 January 1951 CSU) Lampl (from 10 November 1950, from 14 December 1951 FU) Maerkl (from 1 September 1952) Mayerhofer (from 14 December 1951 FU) Meitinger (from 26 September 1951, from 14 December 1951 FU) Oettingen-Wallerstein (from 8 January 1951, from 14 December 1951 FU, until 1 September 1952) Parzinger (from 14 December 1951 FU) Rahn (from 14 January 1950, from 8 September 1950 Non-attached, from 17 October 1950 WAV-Gast, from 14 February 1951 CSU) Seelos (until 25 September 1951) Volkholz (from 14 December 1951 FU) Wartner (from 14 December 1951 FU) Ziegler (until 30 December 1949) KPD v t e KPD Speaker: Max Reimann Members: Agatz Fisch Gundelach Harig Kohl (from 26 January 1950) Leibbrand (until 26 January 1950) Müller (from 10 May 1950 Non-attached) Müller Niebergall Niebes (from 10 July 1952) Nuding (until 20 April 1951) Paul Reimann Renner Rische Strohbach (from 16 May 1951) Thiele Vesper (until 30 June 1952) WAV v t e WAV Speaker: Alfred Loritz Members: Bieganowski (from 21 March 1952, from 23 April 1952 DP/DPB, from 9 December 1952 Non-attached) Fröhlich (from 13 October 1950 BHE/DG, from 21 March 1952 Non-attached) Goetzendorff (from 29 March 1950 DRP-Gast, from 5 October 1950 Non-attached (DRP), from 29 April 1953 WAV) Keller (from 24 April 1952, from 6 December 1951 DP, Non-attached) Löfflad (from 6 December 1951 DP) Loritz (from 6 December 1951 Non-attached, from 29 April 1953 WAV) Paschek (from 29 March 1950 DRP-Gast, from 5 October 1950 Non-attached, from 30 January 1951 WAV, from 6 December 1951 DP, until 22 April 1952) Reindl (from 6 December 1951 DP/DPB, from 9 December 1952 Non-attached, from 29 April 1953 WAV) Schmidt (from 6 December 1951 DP/DPB, from 9 December 1952 Non-attached) Schuster (from 6 December 1951 DP) Tichi (from 13 October 1950 BHE/DG, from 21 March 1952 Non-attached) Wallner (from 6 December 1951 DP/DPB, from 9 December 1952 Non-attached) Weickert (from 13 October 1950 BHE/DG, until 16 March 1952) Wittmann (from 6 December 1951 DP, from 9 May 1952 Non-attached, from 5 July 1952 CDU/CSU-Gast) ZENTRUM v t e ZENTRUM Speaker: Helene Wessel Members: Amelunxen (until 7 October 1949) Arnold (from 14 December 1951 FU, from 9 December 1952 Non-attached (GVP)) Bertram (from 3 November 1949, from 14 December 1951 FU) Determann (from 14 December 1951 FU) Glasmeyer (from 23 November 1951 CDU) Hamacher (until 29 July 1951) Hoffmann (, from 14 December 1951 FU) Krause (until 18 October 1950) Pannenbecker (from 14 December 1951 FU) Reismann (from 14 December 1951 FU) Ribbeheger (from 14 December 1951 FU) Wessel (from 14 December 1951 FU, from 13 November 1952 Non-attached (GVP)) Willenberg (from 26 October 1950, from 14 December 1951 FU) DRP v t e DRP Members: Dorls (from 13 December 1950 WAV-Gast, from 17 January 1951 WAV, from 26 September 1951 Non-attached, am 23 October 1952 Mandatsaberkennung) Frommhold (from 7 September 1949 Nationale Rechte, from 5 October 1950 Non-attached (DRP), from 26 March 1952 DP-Gast, from 11 February 1953 Non-attached) Jaeger (from 29 February 1952) Miessner (from 5 October 1950 FDP-Gast, from 20 December 1950 FDP) Rößler (from 15 September 1949 Nationale Rechte, from 6 September 1950 Non-attached, from 13 December 1950 WAV-Gast, from 17 January 1951 WAV, from 26 September 1951 Non-attached, until 21 February 1952) Thadden (from 15 September 1949 Nationale Rechte; 1950 DRP, from 20 April 1950 Non-attached) OTHER v t e OTHER Members: Clausen (from 23 January 1952 FU-Gast, from 3 July 1953 Non-attached) Edert (CDU/CSU-Gast) Freudenberg (from 5 December 1952 Non-attached) Ott (Non-attached, from 4 May 1950 WAV-Gast, from 13 October 1950 BHE/DG, from 21 March 1952 Non-attached, from 26 March 1952 DP/DPB-Gast, from 26 June 1952 Non-attached) List of members of the 1st Bundestag v t e Members of the 2nd Bundestag (1953–1957) President : Eugen Gerstenmaier (CDU) CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Heinrich von Brentano until 7 June 1955; Heinrich Krone from 15 June 1955]] CDU: Ackermann Adenauer Albers Albrecht (from 11 May 1956) Arndgen Baier (from 26 June 1956) Barlage Bartram Bauknecht Bausch Becker Berendsen Bergmeyer Bismarck Blank Bleyler Blöcker (from 8 November 1954) Bock Bodelschwingh Böhm Brand Brauksiepe Brenner (from 5 May 1957) Brentano Brese Brökelschen Brönner Brookmann (until 31 August 1957) Brück (until 17 September 1957) Bucerius Buchka Burgemeister Bürkel Caspers Cillien Conring Czaja Diedrichsen Dietz Dresbach Eckstein Ehlers (until 29 October 1954) Ehren Engelbrecht-Greve Erhard Etzenbach Even Farny (until 11 November 1953) Feldmann Finckh Franzen Friedensburg Friese Furler Ganswindt (from 9 November 1955) Gantenberg (from 8 October 1956) Gedat Gengler Gerns Gerstenmaier Gibbert Giencke Glasmeyer Glüsing Gockeln Goldhagen Gontrum Götz Grantze (from 17 November 1955) Griem (until 7 November 1955) Günther Hahn Harnischfeger Hassel (until 4 November 1954) Häussler Hellwig Hesberg Heye Hilbert Höck Höfler Holla Hoogen Horn Huth Illerhaus Jahn Jochmus Josten Kaiser (from 17 September 1956) Kaiser Kather (from 15 June 1954 GB/BHE) Kemper Kiesinger Kirchhoff Kliesing Knapp Knobloch Köhler Kolbe (until 25 December 1953) Koops Kopf Kortmann Krammig Kratz (from 4 January 1957, until 11 April 1957) Kroll Krone Kühlthau Kuntscher Kunze Leibfried (until 21 June 1956) Leibing (from 8 August 1955) Leiske Lemmer Lenz (until 2 May 1957) Lenz Lenze Leonhard Leverkuehn Lindenberg Lindrath Löhr Lotze (from 1 November 1954) Lübke Lücke Lulay Majonica Massoth Maucher (until 16 September 1956) Maxsein Mayer (from 20 November 1953) Mayer Menke Mensing Moerchel Morgenthaler Muckermann Mühlenberg Müller (until 11 November 1953) Müller Müller-Hermann Müser Naegel (until 24 May 1956) Nellen Neuburger Niggemeyer Oetzel Orth (until 7 October 1956) Pelster Pferdmenges Pitz-Savelsberg Platner (from 12 December 1956 DP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Pohle Praetorius Pünder Raestrup Rasner Rehling Richarts Röder (from 4 January 1957) Rösch Ruf Rümmele Sabel Schäfer (from 4 January 1957) Scharnberg Scheppmann Schill Schlick Schmidt-Wittmack (from 22 April 1954 Non-attached, Loss of mandate 23 February 1956) Schmücker Schneider Schrader Schröder Schuler (until 30 July 1955) Schulze-Pellengahr Schüttler Schwarz Schwarzhaupt Seffrin Serres Sfromaß Sfromel (until 16 September 1957) Siebel Siemer Solke Spies Stauch Steinbiß Steinhauer (from 12 April 1957) Stingl Storch Storm Struve Teriete Thies (from 30 May 1956) Tillmanns (until 12 November 1955) Varelmann Vietje Vogel Voß Wacker Wahl Walz Weber Weber Wehking Welskop Welter (from 4 January 1954) Werber Wiedeck Willeke Windelen (from 28 September 1957) Winkelheide Wolf (from 13 November 1953) Wuermeling Wullenhaupt CSU: Bauer Bauereisen Demmelmeier Dittrich Dollinger Donhauser Franz Fuchs Funk Geiger Geisendörfer Gleissner Graf (from 26 October 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Gumrum (from 26 October 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Henckel Höcherl Horlacher Jaeger Kahn Karpf Kemmer Kihn Klausner Kleindinst Kramel Kuchtner Lang Lermer Leukert Lücker Manteuffel-Szoege Meyer Miller Niederalt Oesterle Probst Riederer Rinke Schäffer Schuberth Schütz Seidl Spies Spörl Spreti (until 5 March 1956) Stiller Strauss Stücklen Unertl Wacher Wieninger Winter (from 6 March 1956) Wittmann CVP: Ruland (from 4 January 1957, from 23 May 1957 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion) Schneider (from 4 January 1957, Non-attached, from 23 May 1957 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion) SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Erich Ollenhauer Members: Albertz Albrecht Altmaier Arndt Arnholz Baade Bals Banse Bärsch Bauer Baur Bazille Behrisch Bennemann Bergmann Berlin Bettgenhäuser Beyer Birkelbach Blachstein Bleiß Böhm (until 18 July 1957) Brandt Bruse Corterier Dannebom Daum Deist Dewald Diekmann Diel Döhring Dopatka (from 21 November 1955) Erler Eschmann Faller Franke Frehsee Freidhof Frenzel Gefeller Geiger (from 1 January 1954) Geritzmann Gleisner Görlinger (until 10 February 1954) Greve Grunner (from 11 June 1957, until 21 June 1957) Gülich Hansen Hansing Hauffe Heide Heiland Heinrich Heise Hellenbrock Herklotz (from 24 September 1956) Hermsdorf Herold Höcker Höhne Hörauf Hubert Hufnagel Jacobi Jacobs Jahn Jaksch Kahn-Ackermann Kalbitzer Keilhack Kettig Keuning Kinat Kipp-Kaule Klingelhöfer Koenen Könen Königswarter Korspeter Kreyssig Kriedemann Kühn Kurlbaum Ladebeck Lange Leitow (from 3 August 1956) Lockmann Ludwig Lütkens (until 17 November 1955) Marx Mattick Matzner Mayer Meitmann Mellies Menzel Merten Metzger Meyer Meyer Meyer-Laule Missmahl (from 1 September 1954) Moll Mommer Müller Müller Nadig Neubauer Neumann Odenthal Ohlig Ollenhauer Op Paul Peter (from 24 July 1957) Peters Pohle Pöhler Preller Prennel (from 9 November 1955) Priebe Pusch Putzig (from 13 February 1954) Rasch Ratzel (from 15 September 1955) Regling Rehs Reitz Reitzner Renger Richter Ritzel Rudoll Ruhnke Runge Sassnick (until 6 November 1955) Schanzenbach Schellenberg Scheuren Schmid Schmidt Schmidt Schmitt Schoettle Schöne Schreiner (from 4 January 1957) Schroeder (until 4 June 1957) Schröter Seidel Seither Seuffert Stierle Sträter Strobel Stümer (from 30 March 1954) Tausch-Treml (from 25 June 1957) Tenhagen (until 22 August 1954) Thieme Traub [ de ] (until 8 September 1955) Trittelvitz (until 12 September 1956) Veit (until 10 December 1953) Wagner Wagner Wehner Wehr Welke Weltner Wenzel Wienand Will (from 4 January 1957) Winter (until 7 March 1954) Wittrock Wolff Ziegler (until 27 July 1956) Zühlke FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Erich Mende Members: Atzenroth Becker Berg (from 27 June 1955, from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Blank (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Blücher (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Bucher Dannemann (until 1 July 1955) Dehler Drechsel Eberhard Euler (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Fassbender (from 18 November 1955 DP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Friese-Korn Frühwald Gaul Golitschek (from 18 April 1956) Graaff (from 4 July 1955) Hammer Held (from 13 September 1954) Henn (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Hepp (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Hoffmann Hübner (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Hütter (from 29 September 1955) Ilk Jentzsch Kühn Lahr (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Lenz Löwenstein-Wertheim-Freudenberg (from 6 June 1957 Non-attached, from 25 June 1957 DP/FVP) Luchtenberg (from 18 September 1954, until 9 April 1956) Lüders Manteuffel (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Margulies Mauk Mayer (until 14 May 1956) Mende Middelhauve (until 10 September 1954) Miessner Neumayer (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Onnen Pfleiderer (until 20 September 1955) Preiß (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Preusker (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Rademacher Reif Schäfer (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Scheel Schloß Schneider (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Schwann Stahl Stammberger Starke Stegner (from 13 January 1954 Non-attached, from 6 February 1957 GB/BHE) Weber (from 15 May 1956) Wellhausen (from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 23 June 1956 CDU/CSU) Weyer (until 17 September 1954) Will Wirths (until 16 June 1955) DPS: Schneider (from 4 January 1957, Guest of FDP-Fraktion) Schwertner (from 4 January 1957, from 8 January 1957 Guest of FDP-Fraktion) Wedel (from 4 January 1957, Non-attached, from 8 January 1957 Guest of FDP-Fraktion) GB/BHE v t e GB/BHE Speaker: Horst Haasler until 15 March 1955; Karl Mocker 15 March 1955 till 26 April 1956; Erwin Feller from 26 April 1956]] Members: Bender (from 12 July 1955 Non-attached, from 14 July 1955 Group Kraft/Oberländer, from 15 July 1955 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion, from 20 March 1956 CDU/CSU) Czermak (from 14 July 1955 FDP) Eckhardt (from 12 July 1955 Non-attached, from 14 July 1955 Group Kraft/Oberländer, from 15 July 1955 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion, from 20 March 1956 CDU/CSU) Elsner Engell Feller Fiedler (until 13 October 1953) Finck (from 12 July 1955 Non-attached, from 14 July 1955 Group Kraft/Oberländer, from 15 July 1955 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion, from 20 March 1956 CDU/CSU) Finselberger Gemein Gille Haasler (from 12 July 1955 Non-attached, from 14 July 1955 Group Kraft/Oberländer, from 15 July 1955 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion, from 20 March 1956 CDU/CSU) Keller Klötzer Körner (from 12 July 1955 Non-attached, from 14 July 1955 FDP, from 23 February 1956 Non-attached, from 15 March 1956 Demokratische Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DA), from 26 June 1956 FVP, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Kraft (from 12 July 1955 Non-attached, from 14 July 1955 Group Kraft/Oberländer, from 15 July 1955 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion, from 20 March 1956 CDU/CSU) Kunz Kutschera Meyer-Ronnenberg (from 20 August 1954 CDU/CSU) Mocker Oberländer (from 12 July 1955 Non-attached, from 14 July 1955 Group Kraft/Oberländer, from 15 July 1955 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion, from 20 March 1956 CDU/CSU) Petersen Reichstein Samwer (from 15 October 1953, from 12 July 1955 Non-attached, from 14 July 1955 Group Kraft/Oberländer, from 15 July 1955 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion, from 20 March 1956 CDU/CSU) Seiboth Sornik Srock Strosche DP v t e DP Speaker: Hans-Joachim von Merkatz until 11 September 1955; Ernst-Christoph Brühler from 11 September 1955]] Members: Becker (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Brühler (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Eickhoff (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Elbrächter (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Hellwege (until 27 May 1955) Kalinke (from 3 June 1955, from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Matthes (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Merkatz (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Müller (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Schild (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Schneider (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Schranz (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Seebohm (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Walter (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Wittenburg (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) Zimmermann (from 14 March 1957 DP/FVP) OTHER v t e Independent Members: Böhner (Non-attached, until 8 January 1954) Brockmann (Non-attached) Heix (from 23 September 1953 CDU/CSU) Rösing (from 14 January 1954, Non-attached, from 25 June 1954 Guest of CDU/CSU-Fraktion, from 6 June 1955 CDU/CSU) List of members of the 2nd Bundestag v t e Members of the 4th Bundestag (1961–1965) President : Eugen Gerstenmaier (CDU) CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Heinrich von Brentano until 14 November 1964; Rainer Barzel from 1 December 1964 CDU: Ackermann (from 16 January 1965) Adenauer Adorno Arndgen Arnold Artzinger Baier Baldauf Balkenhol Barzel Bauknecht Bausch Becker (from 11 June 1964) Becker Benda Berberich Berger (from 22 December 1964) Bewerunge Biechele Bieringer Birrenbach Bismarck Blank Bleyler Blöcker Blohm Blumenfeld Bodelschwingh Böhm Böhme Brand Brauksiepe Brentano (until 14 November 1964) Brese Brück Bucerius (until 22 March 1962) Bühler Burgbacher Burgemeister Conring Czaja Delden Deringer Dichgans Diebäcker Draeger Dresbach Ehren (from 4 October 1962 until 30 November 1964) Eichelbaum Elbrächter Engelbrecht-Greve (until 7 December 1962) Engländer (from 1 August 1962) Erhard Etzel Even (until 24 November 1964) Even Exner (from 30 November 1964) Falke Finckh (until 28 April 1962) Franzen (until 8 October 1965) Frey Friedensburg Fritz (until 5 January 1965) Furler Gaßmann Gedat Gehring Gerlich (from 24 August 1963) Gerns (until 20 August 1963) Gerstenmaier Gewandt Gibbert Giencke Glüsing Goldhagen (until 7 January 1964) Gossel Gottesleben Götz Gradl Griesinger (from 23 November 1964) Güde Günther Haase Hagen (from 20 January 1964) Hahn (from 9 May 1962 until 16 November 1964) Hahn Harnischfeger Härzschel (from 28 October 1963) Hauser Häussler (from 20 April 1964) Heck Heix Hesberg Hesemann Hilbert Höchst Höfler (until 21 October 1963) Holkenbrink Hoogen (until 11 December 1964) Horn Hörnemann Hübner Huthmacher (until 13 February 1962) Huys Illerhaus Jacobi Josten Jungmann Kalinke Kanka Katzer Klee Klein Kliesing Klinker (from 10 December 1962) Knobloch Kopf Krone Krüger Kühn Kuntscher Kurtz (from 12 October 1964) Leicht Lemmer Lenz Lenze Leonhard Löhr Lücke Luda Majonica Martin Maucher Maxsein Mayer Meis Mengelkamp Menke Merkatz Mick Missbach Müller Müller Müller Müller-Hermann Müser Neumann Nieberg Oberländer (from 9 May 1963) Oetzel Pannhoff Pferdmenges (until 28 September 1962) Pflaumbaum Philipp Pitz-Savelsberg Poepke Porten Preiß (from 24 November 1964) Rasner Rauhaus Rehling (until 29 May 1964) Reinhard Richarts Riedel Rollmann Rommerskirchen Rösing (from 30 June 1965) Ruf Ruland (from 19 February 1962 until 28 September 1964) Scheppmann Schlick Schmidt Schmücker Schneider (from 27 March 1962) Schröder Schroeder Schulhoff Schwarz Schwarzhaupt Schwörer Seebohm Seffrin Serres Siemer Sinn Stauch Stecker Stein Steinmetz Stingl Stoltenberg Stommel (from 4 December 1964) Stooß Storch Storm Struve Süsterhenn Teriete Tobaben Toussaint Varelmann Verhoeven Vietje (until 2 May 1963) Vittinghoff-Schell Vogel (until 15 April 1964) Wahl Weber (until 25 July 1962) Weber Wehking Welter Wendelborn Werner Wilhelmi Willeke (until 24 June 1965) Windelen Winkelheide Wittmer-Eigenbrodt Wuermeling Wullenhaupt Zimmer CSU: Aigner Althammer Balke Bauer Besold Brenck Dittrich Dollinger Drachsler Eckhardt (from 21 July 1964) Ehnes Franz Funk (until 5 August 1963) Geiger (from 8 June 1965) Geisendörfer Gleissner Guttenberg Haas (from 9 August 1963) Haniel-Niethammer Höcherl Hösl Jaeger Kemmer (until 7 October 1964) Kempfler Knorr Krug Kuchtner Lang (until 1 June 1965) Lemmrich Lermer (until 15 July 1964) Leukert (from 27 June 1962) Lücker Manteuffel-Szoege (until 8 June 1962) Memmel Meyer (until 29 January 1962) Niederalt Probst Ramminger Schlee (from 15 February 1963) Schütz (until 5 February 1963) Seidl Spies Stiller Strauss Stücklen Sühler Unertl Vogt Wacher (until 26 March 1963) Wagner Weigl Weinkamm Weinzierl Wieninger Winter (from 2 February 1962) Wittmann (from 26 October 1964) Ziegler (from 1 April 1963) Zimmermann SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Erich Ollenhauer until 14 December 1963; Fritz Erler from 3 March 1964 Members: Albertz Altmaier (until 8 February 1963) Anders (from 17 April 1963) Arendt Arndt Auge Baade Bading Bals Bartsch (from 23 October 1963) Bauer Bäuerle (from 31 May 1963) Bäumer Bazille Bechert Behrendt Berger-Heise Bergmann Berkhan Berlin Beuster Beyer Biegler Biermann Birkelbach (until 30 September 1964) Blachstein Bleiß Börner Brandt (until 27 December 1961) Brauer Braun Brecht (until 10 July 1962) Brünen Bruse (from 16 July 1962) Buchstaller Busch (from 26 January 1962) Büttner Corterier Cramer Deist (until 7 March 1964) Diekmann Döhring Dopatka Dröscher Eilers Elsner Eppler Erler Eschmann Faller Felder Figgen Flämig (from 15 February 1963) Folger Franke Frede Frehsee Freyh (from 22 December 1961) Fritsch Geiger Gerlach Glombig (from 25 January 1962) Gscheidle Haage Haase (from 10 November 1961) Hamacher Hansing Harm (until 10 August 1964) Hauffe Heide Heiland (until 6 May 1965) Heinemann Hellenbrock Herberts (from 12 March 1964) Herklotz Hermsdorf Herold Hirsch Hoegner (until 4 January 1962) Höhmann Höhne Hörauf Hörmann Hubert Hübner (from 13 May 1965) Hufnagel Hussong Iven Jacobi Jacobs Jahn Jaksch Junghans Junker Jürgensen Kaffka Kahn-Ackermann (from 10 January 1962) Kalbitzer Keilhack (until 19 January 1962) Kettig Killat Kipp-Kaule Klein (until 22 October 1963) Kleinert (from 13 November 1964) Koch Koenen Kohlberger Könen Korspeter Krappe Kraus Kreyssig Kriedemann Kübler Kühn (until 9 April 1963) Kulawig Kurlbaum Lange Langebeck Lautenschlager Leber Lemper Lenz Liehr (from 11 January 1962) Lohmar Lösche (from 18 April 1963) Lücke Ludwig (from 6 January 1962 until 18 February 1962) Lünenstraß (until 16 May 1963) Marquardt Marx Matthöfer Mattick Matzner Maybaum (from 22 May 1963) Meermann Menzel (until 24 September 1963) Merten Metter Metzger Meyer Meyer Michels Möller Mommer Morgenstern Müller Müller Müller Müller Müller-Emmert Nellen Neubauer (until 16 April 1963) Neumann Nissen (until 1 October 1964) Ohlemeyer (from 14 June 1965) Ollenhauer (until 14 December 1963) Paul Peiter (from 22 February 1962) Peters Pohle (until 3 November 1961) Pohlenz (from 30 September 1963 until 10 June 1965) Pöhler Porzner (from 21 May 1962) Priebe Ravens Regling Rehs Reichhardt (from 5 October 1964) Reischl Reitz Reitzner (until 11 May 1962) Renger Riegel Rinderspacher Ritzel Roesch Rohde Ross (from 18 August 1964) Rudoll Sänger Saxowski Schäfer Schanzenbach Schellenberg Scheuren Schlüter (from 11 September 1964) Schmid Schmidt (until 19 January 1962) Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmitt-Vockenhausen Schoettle Schröder (until 6 September 1964) Schütz (until 9 January 1962) Schwabe Seibert Seidel Seifriz Seither Seppi Seuffert Seume Stammberger Steinhoff Stephan Striebeck Strobel Strohmayr Tamblé Theis Urban Wagner (until 19 December 1961) Wegener Wehner Welke Wellmann (from 1 January 1962) Welslau Weltner Wessel Wienand Wilhelm Winterstein (from 26 October 1964 until 2 November 1964) Wischnewski Wittrock (until 8 May 1963) Wolf (from 19 December 1963) Zimmermann Zinn (until 13 December 1961) Zühlke FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Erich Mende until 17 October 1963; Knut von Kühlmann-Stumm from 5 November 1963 Members: Achenbach Aschoff Atzenroth Bucher Burckardt Busse Dahlgrün Danz Dehler Deneke (from 26 July 1963) Diemer-Nicolaus Döring (until 17 January 1963) Dörinkel Dorn Dürr Effertz Eisenmann Emde Ertl Flitz Funcke Hamm Hammersen Hellige Heuser (from 6 December 1962) Hoven Imle Keller (until 21 July 1963) Kiep-Altenloh Kohut Kreitmeyer Krümmer (from 24 January 1963) Kubitza Kühlmann-Stumm Kühn (until 4 December 1962) Lenz Löbe Logemann Mälzig Margulies (until 27 August 1964) Mauk Mende Menne Mertes Miessner Mischnick Moersch (from 1 September 1964) Mühlen Murr Ollesch Opitz Peters Rademacher Ramms Reichmann Rieger Rutschke Sander Scheel Schmidt Schneider Schultz Soetebier Spitzmüller Starke Supf Wächter Walter Weber Zoglmann OTHER v t e Independent Members: Gontrum List of members of the 4th Bundestag v t e Members of the 5th Bundestag (1965–1969) President : Eugen Gerstenmaier (CDU) until 31 January 1969; Kai-Uwe von Hassel (CDU) from 5 February 1969 CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Rainer Barzel CDU: Abelein Adenauer (until 19 April 1967) Adorno Arnold Artzinger Baier Balkenhol Barzel Bauknecht Becker Benda Berberich Berendsen Berger Bewerunge Biechele Birrenbach Blank Blöcker Blohm Blumenfeld Brand Brauksiepe Bremer Brese Brück Budde Bühler Burgbacher Burgemeister Burger Conring Czaja Damm Delden Deringer Dichgans Diebäcker Draeger Eckardt Elbrächter Enk Enseling (from 28 April 1966) Erhard Erhard Ernesti (from 9 July 1967) Erpenbeck Even Exner Falke (from 27 July 1967) Franke Franzen Freiwald Frerichs Frey Frieler Fritz Furler Geißler (until 11 October 1967) Gerstenmaier Gewandt Gibbert (until 30 December 1967) Giulini Glüsing Gottesleben Götz Gradl Griesinger Güde Haase Häfele Hahn Hammans Hanz Härzschel (from 19 October 1967) Hassel Hauser Hauser Häussler Heck Hesberg Hilbert Hofmann Holkenbrink (until 17 July 1967) Holzmeister (from 5 February 1968) Hörnemann Horstmeier Horten Huys Illerhaus Jacobi Jahn Josten Jungmann Kalinke Katzer Kiep Klee Klein Klepsch Kliesing Klinker Knobloch (from 24 July 1967) Kopf Köppler Krammig Krampe (from 11 October 1966) Kraske Krone Kühn Kuntscher Lampersbach Leicht Lemmer Lenz Lenz Lenze Lindenberg (from 29 September 1967) Löhr Lücke Luda Majonica Martin Marx Maucher Maxsein Meis Meister Mengelkamp (until 21 July 1967) Merkatz Mick Missbach Mönikes (from 12 October 1967) Müller Müller Müller Müller-Hermann Müser Nordenskjöld Orgaß Petersen Philipp (until 20 April 1966) Picard Pieser (from 26 June 1968) Pitz-Savelsberg Porten Prassler Preiß Rasner Rawe Reinhard Reinholz (from 24 July 1967) Richarts (until 16 September 1969) Riedel Rinsche Ritgen Ritz Rock Rollmann Rommerskirchen Rösing Rösler (from 24 September 1969) Ruf Russe Sayn-Wittgenstein-Hohenstein Schmid-Burgk Schmidt Schmitt Schmücker Schober Schröder Schröder Schroeder Schulhoff Schwarzhaupt Schwörer Seebohm (until 17 September 1967) Serres Siemer Sinn Springorum Stahlberg Stark Stecker Stein Steinmetz Stingl (until 15 June 1968) Stoltenberg Stommel Stooß Storm Struve Süsterhenn Teriete Tobaben Toussaint Varelmann Verbeek (until 13 December 1966) Vittinghoff-Schell Vogel (until 6 October 1966) Vogel (until 17 July 1967) Wahl Weiland (from 14 December 1966) Weimer Wendelborn Wex (from 28 April 1967) Wilhelmi Wilper (until 3 July 1967) Windelen Winkelheide Wolf Wörner Wrangel Wuermeling Wullenhaupt Zink CSU: Aigner Althammer Balke Bauer Besold Brenck Dittrich Dollinger Eckhardt Ehnes Franz Geisendörfer Geisenhofer (from 3 May 1967) Gierenstein Gleissner Guttenberg Höcherl Hösl Hudak Jaeger Kempfler Krug Kuchtner Lemmrich Leukert Lücker Memmel Niederalt Ott Pohle Prinz (until 30 July 1969) Probst (until 1 May 1967) Rainer Röhner Schlager Schlee Schmidhuber Schulze-Vorberg Spies (from 4 August 1969) Stiller Strauss Stücklen Unertl Vogt Wagner Weigl Wieninger Ziegler Zimmermann (until 15 October 1969) CSU (GDP): Becher Prochazka SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Fritz Erler until 22 February 1967; Helmut Schmidt from 14 March 1967 Members: Adams (from 8 December 1966) Albertz Apel Arendt Arndt (from 4 June 1968) Arndt Arndt Auge Bading Bals Baltes (from 15 December 1967) Barche (from 14 April 1967) Bardens Bartsch Bauer Bäuerle Bayerl (from 27 October 1967) Bazille Bechert Behrendt Berger-Heise Bergmann Berkhan Berlin Beuster Biermann Blachstein (until 31 May 1968) Blume Böhm Börner Braun (until 17 July 1966) Brück Brünen Buchstaller Bühling Buschfort Büttner Collet Corterier Cramer Diekmann Dortans (from 30 June 1969) Dröscher Eckerland Eilers Elsner Enders (from 9 May 1967) Eppler Erler (until 22 February 1967) Eschmann Esters (from 15 January 1969) Faller Felder FellerMayer Feuring (from 2 January 1967) Figgen (until 6 December 1966) Flämig Folger Franke Frede (until 23 November 1967) Frehsee Freyh Fritsch Fritz Geiger Gerlach Gertzen Glombig Gscheidle Haage Haar Haase Haehser Hamacher Hansing Hauck Hauffe Hein (until 22 December 1966) Heinemann (until 24 June 1969) Hellenbrock Herberts Herklotz Hermsdorf Herold Hirsch Hofmann Höhmann Höhne Hölzle (from 20 February 1967) Hörauf Hörmann Hubert Hübner (from 6 December 1966 until 14 January 1969) Hufnagel Hussong (until 10 December 1967) Ils Iven Jacobi Jahn Jaksch (until 27 November 1966) Jaschke Josef Junghans Junker Jürgensen Kaffka Kahn-Ackermann Karius (from 18 August 1969) Kern (from 27 February 1967) Killat Kleinert (from 14 December 1967) Koch Koenen Kohlberger Könen Korspeter Krappe Kriedemann Krips (until 31 January 1969) Kübler (until 9 August 1969) Kulawig Kunze Kurlbaum Kurlbaum-Beyer Lange Langebeck Lautenschlager Leber Lemp (from 29 November 1967) Lemper Lenders Liedtke Liehr Löbbert Lohmar Lösche (from 29 July 1966) Lotze Marquardt Marx Matthes Matthöfer Mattick Maybaum Meermann Meinecke Merten (until 12 December 1967) Metzger Michels Möller Mommer Morgenstern (until 14 September 1966) Müller Müller Müller Müller Müller-Emmert Müthling Nann (from 17 February 1969) Neemann Nellen Neumann Neumann Paul Peiter (from 19 September 1967) Peters Pöhler Porzner Raffert Rau Ravens Regling Rehs Reischl Reitz Renger Richter Riegel Rinderspacher Rohde Ross (from 21 September 1966) Rudoll Sänger Saxowski Schäfer (until 14 February 1967) Schanzenbach Schellenberg Schiller Schimschok Schlüter (until 7 April 1967) Schmid Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmitt-Vockenhausen Schoettle Schonhofen Schulte Schulz Schwabe Seibert Seidel Seifriz Seither Seppi Seuffert (until 18 October 1967) Seume Sieglerschmidt (from 4 June 1969) Spillecke Stammberger Stein (until 14 September 1967) Steinhoff Stephan Strobel Strohmayr Tallert Tamblé Tönjes Urban Vit Wehner Welke Wellmann (until 30 May 1969) Welslau Wendt Wessel (until 13 October 1969) Westphal Wiefel Wienand Wilhelm Wischnewski Wolf Wuwer Zerbe (until 2 May 1967) SPD (GDP): Ahrens Kreutzmann FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Knut von Kühlmann-Stumm until 23 January 1968; Wolfgang Mischnick from 23 January 1968 Members: Achenbach Borm Bucher Busse Dahlgrün Dehler (until 21 July 1967) Diemer-Nicolaus Dorn Effertz (until 4 July 1968) Eisenmann (until 1 June 1967) Emde Ertl Friderichs Funcke Geldner Gemmingen-Hornberg (from 11 October 1967) Genscher Graaff Haas Hamm (until 12 May 1966) Hellige Heuser (from 11 July 1968) Imle (from 2 June 1967) Jung (from 17 May 1966) Kubitza Kühlmann-Stumm Lenz (until 5 October 1967) Logemann Mauk Mende Menne Mertes Miessner Mischnick Moersch Mühlhan Ollesch Opitz Peters Porsch (from 27 July 1967) Ramms Reichmann Rutschke Saam Sander Scheel Schmidt Schultz Spitzmüller Staratzke Starke Wächter Walter Wurbs Zoglmann List of members of the 5th Bundestag v t e Members of the 6th Bundestag (1969–1972) President : Kai-Uwe von Hassel (CDU) CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Rainer Barzel CDU: Abelein Adorno (until 21 August 1972) Alber Alten-Nordheim Amrehn Arnold Artzinger Bach Baier Balkenhol Barzel Becker Becker Benda (until 8 December 1971) Berberich Berding Berger (from 26 August 1971) Berger Bewerunge Biechele Birrenbach Bismarck Bittelmann Blank (until 21 April 1972) Blumenfeld Bockelberg Böhme Brandes (until 29 October 1969) Brauksiepe Breidbach Bremer Bremm Brück (from 14 August 1970) Burgbacher Burgemeister (until 23 April 1970) Burger Czaja Damm Delden Dichgans Draeger Eckardt Erhard Erhard Ernesti Erpenbeck Evers Eyrich Fircks Franke Freiwald Frerichs Früh Furler Gatzen Gewandt Giulini Glüsing Gölter Gottesleben Götz Gradl Griesinger (until 6 September 1972) Gruhl Haase Häfele Hallstein Hammans Hanz Hartnack (from 14 September 1972) Härzschel Hassel Hauser Hauser Häussler Heck Hein (from 27 April 1970 until 18 April 1971) Hellige (from 19 April 1971) Helms Henze (until 10 April 1972) Hermesdorf Horstmeier Horten Hubrig Hupka Hussing Huys Jacobi Jahn Jenninger Josten Jungmann Kalinke Katzer Kiep Kiesinger Klee Klepsch Kliesing Klinker Köppler (until 8 August 1970) Köster Kotowski Krammig Krampe Kraske Kunz (from 13 December 1971) Lampersbach Leicht Lemmer (until 18 August 1970) Lensing Lenz Lenze Lenzer Link Löher (from 23 April 1972) Löhr Looft (from 15 October 1971) Lücke Luda Majonica Martin Marx Maucher Meister Mende Mick Mikat Miltner Müller Müller Müller Müller Müller Müller-Hermann Mursch Nordenskjöld Orgaß Petersen Pfeifer Picard Pieroth Pieser Pinger Pohlmann (from 4 November 1969) Prassler Preiß Rasner (until 15 October 1971) Rawe Reddemann Reinhard Richarts Riedel Rinsche Ritgen Ritz Rock Rollmann Rommerskirchen Rönn (from 17 April 1972) Rösing Ruf Russe Sauter (from 29 August 1972) Sayn-Wittgenstein-Hohenstein Schmid-Burgk Schmidt Schmitt Schmitz (from 20 August 1970 until 25 August 1971) Schmücker Schneider Schober Schröder (until 12 September 1972) Schröder Schröder Schroeder Schulhoff Schulte Schulz Schwörer Seiters Seume Siemer Solke Springorum Sprung Stahlberg Stark Starke Stehle (from 7 September 1972) Stein Steiner Stoltenberg (until 3 June 1971) Stommel Storm Struve Susset Thadden Tobaben Tübler Unland Varelmann Vehar Vogel Vogt Volmer Wagner Walz Wawrzik Weber Weizsäcker Wendelborn (from 11 June 1971) Werner Windelen Winkelheide Wissebach Wohlrabe Wolf Wörner Wrangel Wulff Zink Zoglmann CSU: Aigner Althammer Becher Biehle Cantzler (from 7 June 1972) Dasch (until 15 September 1972) Dittrich Dollinger Ehnes (until 19 September 1972) Engelsberger Franz Fuchs Geisendörfer Geisenhofer Gerlach Gierenstein Gleissner Guttenberg (until 6 June 1972) Höcherl Hösl Jaeger Jobst Kempfler Kiechle Kley Kreile Kuchtner Lemmrich Lücker Memmel Menth (from 19 September 1972) Niegel Ott Pohle (until 27 August 1971) Probst Prochazka (from 18 September 1972) Rainer Riedl Röhner Roser Schedl (from 7 January 1971) Schlee Schneider Schulze-Vorberg Spilker Strauss Stücklen Unertl (until 31 December 1970) Wagner Warnke Weigl Wittmann (from 6 September 1971) Ziegler Zimmermann SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Herbert Wehner Members: Adams Ahrens Anbuhl (from 3 November 1970) Apel Arendt Arndt Arndt Baack Baeuchle Bals Barche Bardens Bartsch Batz Bauer Bäuerle Bay Bayerl Bechert Becker Beermann Behrendt Bergmann Berkhan Berlin Biermann Böhm Börner Bothmer Brand (until 3 November 1970) Brandt Brandt Bredl Brück Brünen Büchler (from 9 December 1971) Büchner (from 12 October 1971) Buchstaller Bühling Bülow Buschfort Bußmann Collet Corterier Cramer Dohmann (until 20 February 1970) Dohnanyi Dröscher (until 12 October 1971) Dübber (from 16 July 1971) Dürr Eckerland Ehmke Eilers Elsner (until 14 May 1970) Enders Engholm Eppler Esters Faller Farthmann (from 26 June 1971) FellerMayer Fiebig Fischer Flämig Focke Folger Franke Frehsee Freyh Fritsch Geiger Gerlach Gertzen Geßner Glombig Gnädinger Grobecker (from 8 January 1970) Gscheidle (until 7 November 1969) Haack Haage (until 21 December 1970) Haar Haase Haehser Halfmeier Hansen Hansing Hauck Hauff Hein (until 19 January 1971) Henke Herklotz Hermsdorf Herold Heyen Hirsch (until 8 December 1971) Hofmann Höhmann Hörmann Horn Huber Jacobi (until 5 March 1970) Jahn Jaschke Junghans Junker Kaffka Kahn-Ackermann (from 28 December 1970) Kater Kern Killat Koch Koenig Kohlberger Konrad Krappe Kreutzmann Kriedemann Krockert Kulawig Lange Langebeck Lauritzen Lautenschlager Lauterbach Leber Lemp Lemper Lenders Liedtke Liehr (until 16 July 1971) Löbbert Löffler Lohmar Lotze (until 17 October 1971) Marquardt Marx Matthes Matthöfer Mattick Maybaum Meermann Meinecke Meinike Metzger Michels Möhring Möller Müller Müller Müller-Emmert Müthling Neemann Neumann Nölling Oetting (from 19 October 1971) Offergeld Orth Ostman Pawelczyk Peiter Pensky Peters Pöhler Porzner Raffert Ravens Reischl Renger Richter Rinderspacher Rohde Rosenthal Ross Säckl (from 10 November 1969) Sander Saxowski Schachtschabel Schäfer Schanzenbach Schellenberg Scheu Schiller Schiller Schimschok Schirmer Schlaga Schlei Schmid Schmidt (until 3 November 1969) Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmitt-Vockenhausen Schmude Schoettle Schollmeyer Schonhofen Schulte Schwabe Seefeld Seibert Seidel Seifriz (until 6 January 1970) Seppi Sieglerschmidt Simon Slotta Sperling Spillecke Staak (from 21 May 1970) Strobel Strohmayr Suck Tallert Tamblé Timm Tönjes Urbaniak (from 9 March 1970) Vit Walkhoff Weber Wehner Welslau (from 26 February 1970) Wende Wendt Westphal Wichert Wiefel Wienand Wilhelm Wischnewski With Wittmann Wolf Wolfram Wrede Würtz Wüster Wuttke Wuwer Zander (from 3 November 1969) Zebisch FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Wolfgang Mischnick Members: Achenbach Borm Dahrendorf (until 25 August 1970) Diemer-Nicolaus Dorn Ertl Funcke Gallus (from 10 September 1970) Geldner (from 26 January 1970) Genscher Graaff Grüner Haas (until 20 January 1970) Jung Kienbaum (until 2 May 1972) Kirst Kleinert Krall (from 16 March 1970) Kühlmann-Stumm (until 30 May 1972) Logemann Menne (from 31 May 1972) Mertes Mischnick Moersch Ollesch Opitz (from 2 May 1972) Peters Rutschke (until 7 January 1971) Scheel Schmidt Schultz (until 11 March 1970) Spitzmüller (from 12 January 1971) Wurbs List of members of the 6th Bundestag v t e Members of the 7th Bundestag (1972–1976) President : Annemarie Renger (SPD) SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Herbert Wehner Members: Adams Ahlers Ahrens Amling Anbuhl Apel Arendt Arndt (until 29 January 1974) Arndt (from 20 May 1974) Augstein Baack Bahr Barche Bardens Batz Bäuerle Bayerl Becker Beermann (until 24 November 1975) Behrendt Berkhan (until 19 March 1975) Biermann Blank Böhme Börner (until 22 October 1976) Bothmer Brandt Brandt Bredl Brück Büchler Büchner Buchstaller Bühling Bülow Buschfort Bußmann Collet Conradi Coppik Corterier Däubler-Gmelin Dohnanyi Dübber Dürr Eckerland Egert Ehmke Ehrenberg Eilers Elchlepp (from 4 June 1976) Emmerlich Enders Engholm Eppler (until 3 June 1976) Esters Ewen Farthmann (until 5 June 1975) FellerMayer Fiebig Fischer Flämig Focke Franke Frehsee Friedrich Gansel Geiger Gerlach Gerstl Gertzen Geßner Glombig Glotz Gnädinger Grimming (from 18 June 1975) Grobecker Grunenberg Grützmann (from 2 February 1974) Haack Haar Haase Haase Haehser Haenschke Halfmeier Hansen Hauck Hauff Henke Herbers (from 12 May 1976) Hermsdorf (until 30 May 1974) Herold Heyen (until 5 June 1975) Hofmann Höhmann Holtz Horn Huber Huonker Immer Jahn Jaschke Jaunich Jens Junghans Junker Kaffka Kahn-Ackermann (until 18 September 1974) Kater Kern Koblitz Konrad Kratz Kreutzmann Krockert Kulawig Lambinus Lange Lattmann Lauritzen Lautenschlager Leber Lemp Lenders Lepsius Liedtke Löbbert Löffler Lohmar Lutz Mahne Männing (from 19 June 1975) Marquardt Marschall Martiny-Glotz Matthöfer Mattick Meermann Meinecke Meinike Metzger Möhring Möller Müller Müller Müller Müller Müller-Emmert Müntefering (from 10 June 1975) Nagel Neumann Nölling (until 20 May 1974) Oetting Offergeld Orth (until 10 May 1976) Ostman Pawelczyk Peiter Penner Pensky Peter (from 10 June 1974) Polkehn Porzner Rapp Rappe Ravens Rehlen (from 14 November 1974) Reiser Renger Reuschenbach Richter Rohde Röhlig (from 19 March 1975) Rosenthal Sander Saxowski Schachtschabel Schäfer Schäfer Scheffler Schellenberg Scheu Schimschok Schinzel Schirmer Schlaga Schlei Schluckebier Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmitt-Vockenhausen Schmude Schöfberger Schonhofen Schreiber Schulte Schwabe Schwedler Schweitzer Schwencke Schwenk (from 3 June 1974) Seefeld Seibert Sieglerschmidt Simon Simpfendörfer Slotta (until 9 June 1974) Sperling Spillecke Staak (until 13 November 1974) Stahl Steinhauer (from 9 December 1974) Suck Sund Tietjen (from 12 September 1974) Timm Tönjes Urbaniak Vahlberg Vit Vogel Vogelsang Voigt (from 28 October 1976) Walkhoff Waltemathe Walther Weber Wehner Wende Wendt Wernitz Westphal Wichert (until 10 September 1974) Wiefel Wienand (until 3 December 1974) Wilhelm Wimmer (from 18 September 1974) Wischnewski With Wittmann Wolf Wolfram Wrede Wurche (until 3 June 1975) Würtz Wüster Wuttke Wuwer Zander Zebisch Zeitler CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Rainer Barzel until 9 May 1973; Karl Carstens from 17 May 1973 CDU: Abelein Alber Alten-Nordheim Amrehn Arnold Artzinger Baier Barzel Becker Benedix Benz Berger Berger Bewerunge Biechele Birrenbach Bismarck Blüm Blumenfeld Bockelberg Böhm Braun Breidbach Bremer Bremm Burgbacher Burger Carstens Carstens Czaja Damm Delden Dregger Dreyer Eigen Eilers Entrup Erhard Erhard Ernesti Evers Ey Eyrich Ferrang (until 31 May 1974) Fircks Franke Freiwald (until 26 October 1974) Frerichs (until 15 January 1975) Früh Geier (from 5 March 1976) Gerster Gewandt Gölter Götz Gradl Graß (from 13 April 1976) Gruhl Haase Häckel (from 28 September 1976) Häfele Hammans Härzschel (until 23 September 1976) Hassel Hauser Hauser Hauser Heck Hornhues Horstmeier Hupka Hürland Hussing (from 16 November 1973) Jäger Jahn Jahn Jenninger Josten Katzer Kiep (until 24 February 1976) Kiesinger Klein Klein Klepsch Kliesing Köhler Köhler Köster Krampe Kraske Kroll-Schlüter Kühlmann-Stumm Kunz Lagershausen Lampersbach Leicht Lenz Lenzer Link Löher Luda Martin (until 12 November 1973) Marx Maucher Mende Mertes Mick Mikat Miltner Milz Möller Müller Müller Müller-Hermann Mursch Narjes Neumeister Nordlohne Oldenstädt Orgaß Pack (from 1 June 1974) Pfeffermann Pfeifer Picard Pieroth Pieser Pohlmann Prassler (until 3 November 1975) Rawe Reddemann Riede Ritgen Ritz Rollmann Rommerskirchen Russe Sauer Sauter Sayn-Wittgenstein-Hohenstein Schäuble Schetter (from 3 November 1975) Schmidt (from 17 January 1975) Schmitt Schmitz Schmöle Schröder Schröder Schröder Schroeder Schulte Schulz Schwörer Seiters Sick Solke Spies Springorum Sprung Stahlberg (from 1 November 1974) Stark Stavenhagen Stommel Straßmeir Susset Terra Thürk Tillmann Todenhöfer Tübler Unland Vehar Verhülsdonk Vogel Vogt Volmer Waffenschmidt Wagner (until 8 April 1976) Wallmann Walz Wawrzik Weber Weizsäcker Werner Wex Will-Feld Windelen Wissebach Wohlrabe Wolf Wörner Wrangel Wulff Zeitel Zeyer Zink CSU: Aigner Althammer Becher Biehle Dollinger Engelsberger Franz Fuchs Geisenhofer Gerlach Gierenstein Handlos Höcherl Hösl Jaeger Jobst Kempfler Kiechle Kreile Kunz Lemmrich Lücker Memmel Müller Niegel Probst Rainer Riedl Röhner Roser Schedl Schenk Schleicher Schmidhuber Schneider Schulze-Vorberg Spilker Spranger Starke Strauss Stücklen Wagner Waigel Warnke Wittmann Ziegler Zimmermann Zoglmann FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Wolfgang Mischnick Members: Achenbach Augstein (until 24 January 1973) Bangemann Baum Böger (from 25 January 1973) Christ Engelhard Ertl Flach (until 25 August 1973) Funcke Gallus Geldner Genscher Graaff (until 9 December 1975) Groß (until 5 July 1974) Grüner Hirsch (until 5 June 1975) Hoffie Hölscher Hoppe Jung Kirst Kleinert Krall Kreibaum (from 15 December 1975) Laermann (from 28 June 1974) Lambsdorff Logemann Lüdemann (from 4 September 1973) Mayhofer Mertes Mischnick Moersch Möllemann Ollesch Opitz Peters (from 13 June 1975) Ronneburger (until 12 June 1975) Scheel (until 27 June 1974) Schleifenbaum (from 5 June 1975) Schmidt Schoeler Schuchardt Spitzmüller Vohrer Wendig Wolfgramm (from 5 July 1974) Wurbs Zywietz OTHER v t e Independent Members: Emeis (from 8 December 1975) Stienen List of members of the 7th Bundestag v t e Members of the 8th Bundestag (1976–1980) President : Karl Carstens (CDU) until 31 May 1979; Richard Stücklen (CSU) from 31 May 1979 CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Helmut Kohl CDU: Abelein Aerssen Alber Amrehn Arnold Bahner (from 12 September 1979) Barzel Bayha Becker Benedix Benz Berger (from 25 October 1977) Berger Berger Besch (from 3 July 1979) Biechele Biedenkopf Bismarck (until 6 September 1979) Blügel (from 20 July 1979) Blüm Blumenfeld Böhm Braun Breidbach Broll Bühler Burger Carstens (until 29 June 1979) Carstens Conrad Czaja Damm Daweke Dregger Dreyer Erhard (until 5 May 1977) Erhard Ernesti Erpenbeck (from 10 September 1979) Evers Ey Eymer Eyrich (until 16 October 1978) Feinendegen Fischer Francke Franke Friedmann Früh Geier Geldern George Gerstein Gerster (from 13 July 1977) Gölter (until 8 July 1977) Gradl Haase Häfele Hammans Hanz Hasinger Hassel Hauser Hauser Helmrich Hennig Heydt Hoffacker Hoffmann Hornhues Horstmeier Hubrig Hupka Hürland Hüsch Jäger Jahn Jahn Jenninger Jentsch Josten Karwatzki Katzer Kiesinger Kittelmann Klein Klepsch Klinker Kohl Köhler Köhler Kolb (from 10 June 1977) Köster Krampe Kraske Krey Kroll-Schlüter Künstler (from 11 September 1980) Kunz Lagershausen Lampersbach Landré Langguth Langner Laufs Leicht (until 24 October 1977) Lenz Lenzer Link Löher Lorenz (until 23 February 1977) Luda Luster Marx Mende Mertes Metz Meyer Mikat Miltner Milz Möller Müller Müller Müller Müller-Hermann Narjes Neuhaus Neumeister Nordlohne (until 4 September 1979) Nothhelfer (until 6 June 1977) Oldenstädt (from 11 September 1979) Pack Petersen Pfeffermann Pfeifer Pfennig (from 24 February 1977) Picard Pieroth Pieser Pinger Pohlmann Prangenberg Rawe Reddemann Reimers Riede (from 9 May 1977) Riesenhuber Ritz Rühe Russe Sauer Sauter Sayn-Wittgenstein-Hohenstein Schartz Schäuble Schetter (from 17 October 1978) Schmidt Schmitz Schmöle Schröder Schröder Schröder Schulte Schwarz Schwarz-Schilling Schwörer Seiters Sick Spies Sprung Stahlberg Stark Stavenhagen Stercken Stommel Straßmeir Stutzer Susset Terra Tillmann Todenhöfer Tübler Unland Verhülsdonk Vogel Vogt Volmer Waffenschmidt Wallmann (until 14 June 1977) Walz Wartenberg Wawrzik Weber Weiskirch Weizsäcker Werner Wex Will-Feld Wilms Wimmer Windelen Wisniewski Wissebach (from 15 June 1977) Wissmann Wohlrabe (until 11 September 1979) Wörner Wrangel Wulff Würzbach Zeitel (until 3 September 1980) Zeyer (until 10 July 1979) Zink CSU: Aigner Althammer Becher Biehle Bötsch Dollinger Engelsberger Fuchs Geisenhofer Gerlach Gierenstein Glos Haberl Handlos Hartmann Höffkes Höpfinger Hösl (until 20 March 1977) Huyn Jaeger Jobst Kiechle Klein Kraus Kreile Krone-Appuhn Kunz Lemmrich Lintner Lücker Männle (from 4 October 1979) Müller Niegel Probst Rainer Regenspurger Reichold (from 4 December 1978 until 2 October 1979) Riedl Röhner Rose (from 24 March 1977) Schedl Schenk Schleicher Schmidhuber (until 6 December 1978) Schneider Spilker Spranger Starke Strauss (until 29 November 1978) Stücklen Voigt (from 8 December 1978) Voss Waigel Warnke Wittmann Ziegler Zimmermann SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Herbert Wehner Members: Adams Ahlers (until 7 March 1980) Ahrens Amling Apel Arendt Augstein Baack Bahr Balser (from 14 August 1979) Bardens Batz Bayerl Becker Biermann Bindig Blank (until 23 May 1978) Böhme Bothmer Brandt Brandt Brück Büchler Büchner Buchstaller Bühling Bülow Buschfort Bußmann Collet Conradi Coppik Corterier Curdt Czempiel (from 22 January 1979) Daubertshäuser Däubler-Gmelin Diederich Dohnanyi Dübber Dürr Egert Ehmke Ehrenberg Eickmeyer (from 23 May 1977) Eilers Emmerlich Enders Engholm Erler Esters Ewen FellerMayer Fiebig Fischer Flämig Focke Franke Friedrich Gansel Gerstl Gertzen Geßner Glombig Glotz (until 16 May 1977) Gobrecht Grobecker Grunenberg Gscheidle Haack Haar Haase Haehser Hansen Hartenstein Hauck Hauff Henke Heyenn Hoffmann Hofmann Höhmann (until 19 January 1979) Holtz Horn Huber Huonker Ibrügger Immer Jahn Jaunich Jens Junghans Jungmann Junker Kaffka Kirschner Klein Koblitz (until 13 October 1979) Konrad Kratz Kretkowski Kreutzmann Krockert Kühbacher Kuhlwein Lambinus (from 20 May 1977) Lange Lattmann Lauritzen (until 5 June 1980) Leber Lemp Lenders Lepsius Leuschner (from 9 June 1980) Liedtke Linde Löffler Lutz Mahne Männing Marquardt Marschall Martiny-Glotz Matthöfer Mattick Meinecke Meinike Meininghaus Menzel Möhring Müller Müller Müller Müller Müller-Emmert Müntefering Nagel Nehm (from 13 September 1978) Neumann (from 20 June 1978) Neumann Nöbel Offergeld Oostergetelo Paterna Pawelczyk Peiter Penner Pensky Peter Polkehn Porzner Rapp Rappe Ravens (until 15 June 1978) Renger Reuschenbach Rohde Rosenthal Roth Sander (from 26 May 1978) Saxowski Schachtschabel Schäfer Schäfer Scheffler Scheu (until 20 December 1978) Schinzel (from 5 May 1980) Schirmer Schlaga Schlei Schluckebier Schmidt (from 9 January 1978) Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmitt-Vockenhausen (until 2 August 1979) Schmude Schöfberger Schreiber Schulte Schulze Schwabe (until 4 January 1978) Schweitzer (from 11 March 1980) Schwencke Schwenk Seefeld Sieglerschmidt Sieler Simonis Simpfendörfer Sperling Spillecke (until 5 May 1977) Spöri Stahl Staudt (until 11 September 1978) Steger Steinhauer Stöckl Stockleben Sund (until 17 May 1977) Sybertz Thüsing (from 9 May 1977) Timm Tönjes (until 25 April 1980) Topmann Traupe Ueberhorst Urbaniak Vogel Vogelsang Voigt Vosen (from 18 October 1979) Walkhoff (from 31 December 1978) Waltemathe Walther Weber Wehner Weisskirchen Wendt Wernitz Westphal Wiefel Wilhelm Wimmer Wischnewski With Wittmann Wolfram Wrede Würtz Wüster Wuttke Wuwer Zander Zebisch Zeitler FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Wolfgang Mischnick Members: Angermeyer Bangemann Baum Cronenberg Eimer Engelhard Ertl Friderichs (until 8 November 1977) Funcke (until 23 November 1979) Gallus Gärtner Gattermann Genscher Grüner Hamm-Brücher Haussmann Hoffie Hölscher Hoppe Jung Kleinert Laermann Lambsdorff Ludewig Matthäus-Mayer Mayhofer Merker (from 20 April 1978) Mischnick Möllemann Ollesch (until 16 April 1978) Paintner Peters (until 8 April 1979) Schäfer (from 9 November 1977) Schleifenbaum (from 26 November 1979) Schmidt Schoeler Schuchardt Spitzmüller Vohrer Wendig Wolfgramm Wurbs Zumpfort (from 30 April 1979) Zywietz OTHER v t e Independent Members: Gruhl List of members of the 8th Bundestag v t e Members of the 9th Bundestag (1980–1983) President : Richard Stücklen (CSU) CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Helmut Kohl until 4 October 1982; Alfred Dregger from 4 October 1982 CDU: Abelein Aerssen Amrehn (until 4 October 1981) Arnold Austermann (from 16 April 1982) Bahner Barzel Bayha Becker (from 13 September 1982) Benedix-Engler Berger (from 19 June 1981) Berger Blüm (until 15 June 1981) Bohl Böhm Borchert Boroffka (from 6 October 1981) Braun Breuer Broll Bugl Bühler Burger (until 10 October 1981) Buschbom (from 16 June 1981) Carstens Clemens Conrad Czaja Dallmeyer Daweke Deres Diepgen (until 3 February 1981) Dolata (from 16 June 1981) Dörflinger Doss (from 20 July 1981) Dregger Echternach Eigen Erhard Eymer (from 14 January 1981) Feinendegen Fischer Fischer Francke Franke Friedmann Funk (from 16 October 1981) Ganz Geier Geißler Geldern George Gerstein Gerster Günther Haase Hackel Häfele Hanz Hauser Hauser Hellwig Helmrich Hennig Herkenrath Heydt Hoffacker (from 21 December 1982) Hoffmann Hornhues Horstmeier Hubrig (until 25 March 1982) Hupka Hürland-Büning Hüsch Jäger Jagoda Jahn Jenninger Jentsch (until 8 September 1982) Jung Kalisch Kansy Karwatzki Kiep (until 26 April 1982) Kittelmann Klein Kohl Köhler Köhler Kolb Köster Krey Kroll-Schlüter Kunz (until 15 June 1981) Lagershausen (from 29 March 1982) Lamers Lammert Lampersbach (until 16 December 1982) Landré Langner Lattmann (from 27 April 1982) Laufs Lenz Lenzer Link Löher Lorenz Louven Maaß Magin Marx Mertes Metz Meyer Michels Mikat Miltner Milz Möller Müller Müller Müller Narjes (until 9 January 1981) Nelle Neuhaus Neumeister Oldenstädt (from 5 December 1980) Olderog Pack Petersen Pfeffermann Pfeifer Picard Pieroth (until 16 July 1981) Pinger Pohlmann Pohlmeier Prangenberg Rawe Reddemann Repnik Riesenhuber Ritz (until 2 December 1980) Roitzsch Ruf Rühe Sauer Sauer Sauter Schartz Schäuble Schmitz Schmöle Schorlemer Schröder Schröder Schroeder Schulte Schulze (from 4 February 1981) Schwarz Schwarz-Schilling Schwörer Seiters Sick Spies Sprung Stark Stavenhagen Stercken Straßmeir Stutzer Susset Tillmann Todenhöfer Unland Verhülsdonk Vogel Vogt Volmer Waffenschmidt Waldburg-Zeil Wartenberg Weirich Weiskirch Weiß Weizsäcker (until 15 June 1981) Werner Wex Will-Feld Wilms Wimmer Windelen Wisniewski Wissmann Wörner Wrangel (until 3 April 1982) Wulff Würzbach Zink CSU: Althammer Biehle Bötsch Brunner Dollinger Engelsberger Faltlhauser Fellner Geiger Gerlach Glos Götz (until 8 March 1983) Handlos Hartmann Hinsken Höffkes Höpfinger Huyn Jobst Keller Kiechle Klein Kraus Kreile Krone-Appuhn Kunz Lemmrich Linsmeier Lintner Lowack Männle (from 17 March 1983) Müller Niegel Probst Rainer Regenspurger Riedl Röhner (until 11 May 1982) Rose Rossmanith Sauter Schenk Schneider Seehofer Spilker Spranger Stücklen Voigt (from 14 May 1982) Voss Waigel Warnke Wittmann Zierer Zimmermann SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Herbert Wehner Members: Ahrens Amling Antretter Apel Assmann (from 24 February 1983) Auch Baack Bahr Bamberg (from 2 February 1981) Bardens Becker Bernrath Berschkeit Biermann Bindig Blunck (from 30 January 1981) Böhme (until 2 December 1982) Börnsen Brandt Brandt Brück Büchler Büchner Bühling (from 6 July 1981) Bülow Buschfort Catenhusen Collet Conradi Corterier Curdt Daubertshäuser Däubler-Gmelin Diederich Dohnanyi (until 26 June 1981) Dreßler Dübber Duve Egert Ehmke Ehrenberg Eickmeyer Emmerlich Enders Engholm Erler (from 6 December 1982) Esters Ewen Feile Fiebig Fischer Fischer Franke Fuchs Gansel Gerstl Geßner Gilges Ginnuttis Glombig (from 18 December 1980) Gnädinger Gobrecht Grobecker Grunenberg Haack Haar Haase Haehser Hartenstein Hauck Hauff Heistermann Herberholz Herterich Heyenn Hitzigrath (from 6 November 1981) Hoffmann Holtz Horn Huber Huonker Ibrügger Immer Jahn Jansen Jaunich Jens Junghans Jungmann Kiehm Kirschner Klein Klejdzinski Kolbow Korber (until 2 July 1981) Kretkowski Kreutzmann Kübler Kühbacher Kuhlwein Lambinus Leber Lennartz Leonhart Lepsius Leuschner Liedtke Linde Löffler Lutz Luuk Mahne Männing Marschall Martiny-Glotz Matthöfer Meinike Meininghaus Menzel Mertens Mitzscherling Möhring Müller Müller Müller-Emmert Müntefering Nagel Nehm Neumann Neumann Nöbel Offergeld Oostergetelo Osswald Paterna Pauli Pawelczyk (until 18 December 1980) Penner Pensky Peter Polkehn Porzner (until 28 January 1981) Poß Purps Rapp Rappe Rayer Renger Reschke Reuschenbach Reuter Rohde Rosenthal Roth Sander Schachtschabel Schäfer Schätz Scheer Schirmer Schlaga Schlatter Schlei (until 3 November 1981) Schluckebier Schmedt Schmidt (until 10 February 1983) Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmitt Schmude Schöfberger Schreiber Schreiner Schröder Schröer Schulte Schwenk Sielaff Sieler Simonis Skarpelis-Sperk Soell Sperling Spöri Stahl Steger Steiner Steinhauer Stiegler Stöckl Stockleben Struck Terborg Thüsing Tietjen Timm Topmann Traupe Ueberhorst (until 28 January 1981) Ueberschär (from 2 February 1981) Urbaniak Vogel (until 28 January 1981) Vogelsang Voigt Vosen Wallow (from 29 June 1981) Waltemathe Walther Wartenberg Wehner Weinhofer Weisskirchen Wernitz Westphal Weyel Wieczorek Wieczorek Wiefel Wiesche Wimmer Wimmer Wischnewski Witek With Wolfram Wrede Würtz Wuttke Zander Zeitler Zutt FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Wolfgang Mischnick Members: Adam-Schwaetzer Baum Beckmann Bergerowski Braun-Stützer Bredehorn Brunner (until 28 January 1981) Brunnstein (from 11 February 1983) Cronenberg Eimer Engel (from 26 June 1981) Engelhard Ertl Feldmann (from 29 January 1981) Fromm Funke Gallus Gärtner Gattermann Genscher Ginsberg (from 9 December 1982) Grüner Hamm-Brücher Haussmann Hirsch Hoffie (until 25 June 1981) Holsteg Hoppe Jung Kleinert Laermann Lambsdorff Matthäus-Maier (until 2 December 1982) Merker Mischnick Möllemann Neuhausen Noth Paintner Popp Rentrop Riebensahm (from 13 December 1982) Riemer Ronneburger Rösch Rumpf Schäfer Schmidt Schoeler (until 8 December 1982) Schuchardt (until 10 February 1983) Solms Timm Vohrer Wendig Wolfgramm Wurbs Zumpfort Zywietz OTHER v t e Independent Members: Coppik Hansen Hofmann Hölscher List of members of the 9th Bundestag v t e Members of the 10th Bundestag (1983–1987) President : Rainer Barzel until 25 October 1984; Philipp Jenninger from 5 November 1984 ( CDU ) CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Alfred Dregger CDU: Abelein Augustin (from 13 January 1984) Austermann Barzel Bayha Becker Berger Berger Berners (from 17 January 1986) Blank Blens Blüm Bohl Bohlsen Böhm Borchert Boroffka Braun Breuer Broll Bugl Bühler Buschbom Carstens Carstensen Clemens Conrad (until 12 September 1985) Czaja Dallmeyer (until 11 April 1983) Daniels Daweke Dempwolf (from 22 March 1984) Deres Dolata Dörflinger Doss Dregger Echternach Ehrbar Eigen Erhard Eylmann Feilcke Fischer Fischer Francke Franke (until 9 April 1984) Friedmann Funk (from 14 October 1985) Ganz Geißler Geldern George (until 5 October 1985) Gerstein Gerster Göhner Günther Haase (until 5 December 1983) Hackel (until 1 December 1985) Häfele Hammerstein (from 9 April 1984) Hanz Haungs Hauser Hauser Hedrich Heereman Hellwig Helmrich Hennig Herkenrath Hinrichs Hoffacker Hoffmann Hornhues Hornung Horstmeier (from 3 December 1986) Hupka Hürland-Büning Hüsch Jäger Jagoda Jahn Jenninger Jung Kalisch Kansy Karwatzki Kittelmann Klein (until 20 December 1983) Kohl Köhler Köhler Kolb Krey Kroll-Schlüter Kronenberg Lamers Lammert Landré Langner Lattmann Laufs Lenz (until 13 January 1984) Lenzer Link Link Lippold Löher Lohmann Lorenz Louven Maaß Magin Marschewski Marx (until 12 July 1985) Mertes (until 16 June 1985) Metz Meyer Michels Mikat Miltner Milz (until 26 November 1986) Möller Müller Müller Müller Nelle Neumeister Oldenstädt Olderog Pack (from 1 October 1985) Pesch Petersen Pfeffermann Pfeifer Pfennig (from 2 December 1985) Pinger Pohlmann Pohlmeier Rawe Reddemann Repnik Riesenhuber Rode Roitzsch Rönsch Roth Ruf Rühe Sauer Sauer Saurin (from 19 April 1983) Sauter Scharrenbroich (from 19 June 1985) Schartz Schäuble Schemken Schlottmann Schmidbauer Schmitz Schmude Schneider Schorlemer Schreiber Schröder (until 22 March 1984) Schroeder Schulhoff Schulte Schultz (from 22 July 1985) Schulze Schwarz Schwarz-Schilling Schwörer Seesing Seiters Spies Sprung Stark Stavenhagen Stercken Stockhausen (from 6 December 1983) Stoltenberg Stommel (from 21 March 1985) Straßmeir Strube Stutzer Susset Tillmann Todenhöfer Uldall Unland Verhülsdonk Vogel Vogt Voigt (from 21 December 1983) Waffenschmidt Waldburg-Zeil Warrikoff Wartenberg Weirich Weiskirch (until 20 March 1985) Weiß Werner Wex (until 9 January 1986) Will-Feld Wilms Wilz Wimmer Windelen Wisniewski Wissmann Wörner Wulff Würzbach Zink CSU: Althammer (until 14 April 1985) Biehle Bötsch Brunner Dollinger Engelsberger Faltlhauser Fellner Geiger Gerlach Glos Götz Götzer (from 4 June 1984) Hartmann (until 4 June 1984) Hinsken Höffkes Höpfinger Huyn Jobst Keller Kiechle Klein Kraus Kreile Krone-Appuhn Kunz Lemmrich Linsmeier Lintner Lowack Männle Müller Niegel Pöppl (from 15 April 1985) Probst Regenspurger Riedl Rose Rossmanith Sauter Schenk (until 20 November 1984) Scheu Schneider Seehofer Spilker Spranger Stücklen Voss Waigel Warnke Wittmann (from 20 November 1984) Wittmann Zierer Zimmermann SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Hans-Jochen Vogel Members: Ahrens Amling Antretter Apel Bachmaier Bahr Bamberg Becker Bernrath Berschkeit Bindig Blunck Brandt Brosi (until 3 April 1984) Brück Büchler Büchner Buckpesch Bülow Buschfort Catenhusen Collet Conradi Corterier (from 13 June 1984) Curdt Czempiel (until 5 July 1984) Daubertshäuser Däubler-Gmelin Delorme Diederich Dreßler Duve Egert Ehmke Ehrenberg Emmerlich Enders Esters Ewen Fiebig Fischer Fischer Franke Fuchs Fuchs Gansel Gerstl Gilges Glombig Glotz Gobrecht (until 29 June 1984) Grobecker (until 14 November 1983) Grunenberg Haack Haar Haase Haehser Hansen (from 29 June 1984) Hartenstein Hauchler Hauck Hauff Heimann Heistermann Herterich Hettling (from 15 November 1983) Heyenn Hiller Hoffmann (until 11 April 1985) Holtz Horn Huber Huonker Ibrügger Immer Jahn Jansen Jaunich Jens Jung Junghans Jungmann Kastning Kiehm Kirschner Kisslinger Klein Klejdzinski Klose Kolbow Kretkowski Kübler Kühbacher Kuhlwein Lahnstein (until 31 August 1983) Lambinus Lennartz Leonhart Lepsius (from 12 April 1984) Liedtke Linde (until 10 November 1983) Löffler Lohmann Lutz Luuk Martiny-Glotz Matthäus-Maier Matthöfer Meininghaus Menzel Mertens Mitzscherling Möhring (from 8 July 1986) Müller Müller Müller-Emmert Müntefering Nagel Nehm Neumann (from 11 November 1983) Nöbel Odendahl Offergeld (until 1 June 1984) Oostergetelo Paterna Pauli Penner Peter Pfuhl Polkehn (until 16 August 1985) Porzner Poß Purps Ranker (from 11 April 1985) Rapp Rappe Reimann Renger Reschke Reuschenbach Reuter Rohde Roth Sander Schäfer Schanz Scheer Schlaga Schlatter Schluckebier Schmedt (from 1 September 1983) Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmitt Schmude Schöfberger Schreiner Schröder (until 1 July 1986) Schröer Schulte Schwenk Sielaff Sieler Simonis Skarpelis-Sperk Soell Sperling Spöri Stahl Steger (until 9 July 1984) Steiner Steinhauer Stiegler Stobbe Stockleben Struck Terborg Tietjen Timm Toetemeyer Traupe Urbaniak Vahlberg Verheugen Vogel Vogelsang Voigt Vosen Waltemathe Walther Wartenberg Weinhofer Weisskirchen Wernitz Westphal Weyel Wieczorek (from 11 July 1984) Wieczorek Wiefel Wiesche Wimmer Wischnewski Witek (from 16 July 1984) With Wolfram Würtz Zander Zeitler Zutt FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Wolfgang Mischnick Members: Adam-Schwaetzer Baum Beckmann Bredehorn Cronenberg Eimer Engelhard Ertl Feldmann Gallus Gattermann Genscher Grünbeck Grüner Hamm-Brücher Haussmann Hirsch Hoffie Hoppe Kleinert Kohn Laermann Lambsdorff Mischnick Möllemann Neuhausen Paintner Ronneburger Rumpf Schäfer Segall (from 13 December 1984) Seiler-Albring Solms Weng Wolfgramm Wurbs (until 13 December 1984) GRÜNE v t e GRUENE Speaker: Marieluise Beck-Oberdorf , Petra Kelly , Otto Schily until 3 April 1984; Annemarie Borgmann , Waltraud Schoppe , Antje Vollmer until 30./31. January 1985; Sabine Bard , Hannegret Hönes , Christian Schmidt until 1 February 1986; Annemarie Borgmann , Hannegret Hönes , Ludger Volmer until 18 July 1986); Willi Hoss (8 September 1986) Die Grünen: Auhagen (from 17 April 1985) Bard (until 31 March 1985) Bastian Beck-Oberdorf (until 14 April 1985) Borgmann (from 1 April 1985) Bueb (from 1 April 1985) Burgmann (until 15 March 1985) Dann (from 2 March 1985) Drabiniok (until 31 March 1985) Ehmke (until 28 March 1985) Eid (from 17 April 1985) Fischer (until 31 March 1985) Fischer (from 20 January 1986) Fritsch (from 14 March 1986) Gottwald (until 31 March 1985) Hecker (until 31 August 1983) Hickel (until 9 March 1985) Hönes (from 13 April 1985) Horácek (from 2 September 1983 until 3 October 1985) Hoss (until 12 April 1985) Jannsen (until 1 March 1985) Kelly Kleinert (until 19 January 1986) Krizsan (until 13 March 1985) Lange (from 17 April 1985) Mann (from 1 April 1985) Müller (from 13 March 1985) Nickels (until 30 March 1985) Potthast (until 3 April 1985) Reents (until 19 March 1985) Reetz (until 16 April 1985) Rusche (from 4 October 1985) Sauermilch (until 16 April 1985) Schierholz (from 14 March 1985) Schily (until 13 March 1986) Schmidt (from 22 March 1985) Schneider (until 30 March 1985) Schoppe (until 31 March 1985) Schulte (from 13 April 1985) Schwenninger (until 16 April 1985) Senfft (from 3 April 1985) Stratmann (until 31 March 1985) Ströbele (from 31 March 1985) Suhr (from 1 April 1985) Tatge (from 18 June 1985) Verheyen (until 30 March 1985) Vogel (from 16 March 1985) Vogt (until 18 June 1985) Vollmer (until 2 April 1985) Volmer (from 10 April 1985) Wagner (from 3 April 1985) Werner (from 2 April 1985) Werner (from 16 April 1985) Zeitler (from 3 April 1985) OTHER v t e Independent Members: Eickmeyer (from 23 August 1985) Handlos Tischer (from 3 April 1985) Voigt List of members of the 10th Bundestag v t e Members of the 11th Bundestag (1987–1990) President : Philipp Jenninger until 11 November 1988; Rita Süssmuth from 11 November 1988 ( CDU ) CDU/CSU v t e CDU and CSU Speaker: Alfred Dregger CDU: Abelein Ackermann (from 3 October 1990) Albrecht (from 3 October 1990) Augustin (from 6 December 1989) Austermann Barthel (from 3 October 1990) Bauer (from 3 October 1990) Bauer Bayha Becker (from 3 October 1990) Becker Berger (until 26 September 1989) Bergmann-Pohl (from 3 October 1990) Biedenkopf (until 9 November 1990) Blank Blens Blüm Bohl Bohlsen Böhm Borchert Börnsen Breuer Brudlewsky (from 3 October 1990) Bühler Buschbom Carstens Carstensen Clemens Creter (from 3 October 1990) Czaja Daniels Daweke Dehnel (from 3 October 1990) Dempwolf Deres Dewitz (from 20 February 1990) Dorendorf (from 3 October 1990) Dörflinger Doss Dregger Echternach Ehlers (from 3 October 1990) Ehrbar Eigen Eylmann Feilcke Fell Fiedler (from 3 October 1990) Fischer (from 3 October 1990) Fischer Fischer Francke Friedmann (until 5 February 1990) Fuchtel Funk (from 20 May 1988 until 24 August 1989) Ganz Geisler (from 3 October 1990) Geißler Geldern Gerstein Gerster Göhner Goldhahn (from 3 October 1990) Göttsching (from 3 October 1990) Gries (from 3 October 1990) Grünewald Günther Häfele Harries Haschke (from 3 October 1990) Haschke (from 3 October 1990) Haungs Hauser Hauser Hedrich Hellwig Helmrich Hennig Herkenrath Hinrichs Hoffacker Hoffmann Holz (from 3 October 1990) Hönicke (from 3 October 1990) Hornhues Hornung (from 6 February 1990) Hörster Hürland-Büning Hüsch Jaffke (from 3 October 1990) Jäger (from 1 July 1988) Jahn Jenninger Jork (from 3 October 1990) Jung Jung Kalisch Kansy Kappes Karwatzki Kittelmann Kleditzsch (from 3 October 1990) Klinkert (from 3 October 1990) Koch (from 3 October 1990) Kohl Köhler (from 3 October 1990) Köhler Kolb Koslowski (from 3 October 1990) Kossendey Krause (from 3 October 1990) Krause (from 3 October 1990) Krey Kroll-Schlüter Kronenberg Krüger (from 3 October 1990) Lamers Lammert Landgraf (from 3 October 1990) Langner Lattmann Laufs Leja (from 3 October 1990) Lenzer Limbach Link Link Lippold Lohmann (from 12 November 1990) Lorenz (until 6 December 1987) Louven Lummer Maaß Magin Mahlo (from 9 December 1987) Maizière (from 3 October 1990) Marschewski Martini (from 3 October 1990) Meyer Michalk (from 3 October 1990) Michels Miltner (until 20 May 1988) Möller Müller Müller Nelle Neuling Neumann Nitsch (from 3 October 1990) Nolte (from 3 October 1990) Nowack (from 3 October 1990) Olderog Paar (from 3 October 1990) Pack (until 8 September 1989) Patzig (from 3 October 1990) Pesch Petersen Pfeffermann Pfeifer Pfeiffer (from 3 October 1990) Pfennig Pinger Pohlmeier Priebus (from 3 October 1990) Rau (from 3 October 1990) Rauber (from 3 October 1990) Rauen Rawe Reddemann Rehm (from 3 October 1990) Reichenbach (from 3 October 1990) Repnik Riesenhuber Roitzsch Rönsch Rost (from 26 September 1989 until 16 February 1990) Roth Rother (from 3 October 1990) Ruf Rühe Rüttgers Sauer Sauer Sauter Scharf (from 3 October 1990) Scharrenbroich Schartz Schätzle (from 25 August 1989) Schäuble Schemken Schmidbauer Schmidt (from 3 October 1990) Schmidt (from 3 October 1990) Schmidt (from 9 September 1989) Schmitz Schmude Schneider (from 3 October 1990) Schneider (from 8 February 1990) Schorlemer Schreiber Schroeder Schulhoff Schulte Schulze Schwalbe (from 3 October 1990) Schwarz Schwarz-Schilling Schwörer Seesing Seiters Selke (from 3 October 1990) Sprung Stark Stavenhagen Stercken Stoltenberg Straßmeir Strube Susset Süssmuth Tamm (from 3 October 1990) Thees (from 3 October 1990) Tillmann Todenhöfer Toscher (from 3 October 1990) Uelhoff Uldall Unger (from 3 October 1990) Unland Verhülsdonk Vogel Vogt Voigt Vondran Waffenschmidt Wagner (from 3 October 1990) Waldburg-Zeil Wallmann (until 29 April 1987) Warrikoff Wartenberg Weirich (from 29 April 1987 until 6 December 1989) Weiß (until 6 February 1990) Werner Wetzel (from 3 October 1990) Wieczorek (from 3 October 1990) Will-Feld Wilms Wilz Wimmer Windelen Wisniewski Wissmann Wonneberger (from 3 October 1990) Wörner (until 30 June 1988) Wulff Würzbach Zimmermann (from 3 October 1990) Zink Zuydtwyck CSU: Biehle (until 27 April 1990) Bötsch Brunner (from 5 May 1990) Dollinger Engelsberger Faltlhauser Fellner Friedrich Geiger Geis Glos Götz Gröbl Hasselfeldt (from 24 March 1987) Hinsken Höffkes Höpfinger Huyn (from 2 August 1988) Jobst Kalb Keller (from 23 February 1990) Kiechle Klein Kraus Kreile (from 11 July 1988 until 22 February 1990) Kunz Lemmrich (until 28 July 1988) Linsmeier Lintner Lowack Männle Müller Niegel Oswald Probst Regenspurger Riedl Rose Rossmanith Sauter (until 6 July 1988) Scheu Schneider Seehofer Spilker Spranger Strauss (until 19 March 1987) Stücklen Voss Waigel Warnke Wittmann Zeitlmann Zierer Zimmermann DSU: Gottschall (from 3 October 1994) Haschke (from 3 October 1991) Landgraf (from 3 October 1993) Schmidt (from 3 October 1990) Schmiele (from 3 October 1995) Steiner (from 3 October 1992) Tiesler (from 3 October 1996) Walther (from 3 October 1997) SPD v t e SPD Speaker: Hans-Jochen Vogel Members: Adler Ahrens Amende (from 3 October 1990) Amling Andres Antretter Apel Bachmaier Bahr Bamberg Barbe (from 3 October 1990) Becker Becker-Inglau Bernrath Bindig Blunck Bogisch (from 3 October 1990) Böhme Börnsen Botz (from 3 October 1990) Brandt Brück Büchler Büchner Bulmahn Bülow Buschfort Catenhusen Conrad (until 31 May 1990) Conradi Daubertshäuser Däubler-Gmelin Diederich (from 12 May 1989) Diller Dobberthien (from 1 July 1987 until 29 August 1988) Dräger (from 3 October 1990) Dreßler Duve Egert Ehmke Ehrenberg Elmer (from 3 October 1990) Emmerlich Erler Esters Ewen Faße Fischer Fritsch (from 3 October 1990) Fuchs Fuchs Ganseforth Gansel Gautier Gerster Gilges Glotz Götte Graf Großmann Grunenberg Gutzeit (from 3 October 1990) Haack Haack Haar Hacker (from 3 October 1990) Hämmerle Hartenstein Hasenfratz Hauchler Hauff (until 14 June 1989) Häuser (from 2 January 1990) Heimann Heistermann Heltzig (from 3 October 1989) Herberholz (from 1 September 1990) Heyenn Hiller Hilsberg (from 3 October 1990) Holtz Horn Huonker Ibrügger Jahn Jansen (until 16 June 1988) Jaunich Jens Jung Jungmann Kalz (from 3 October 1990) Kamilli (from 3 October 1990) Kastner (from 22 May 1989) Kastning Kiehm Kirschner Kisslinger Klein (until 18 December 1989) Klejdzinski Klose Kolbow Koltzsch Koschnick Krehl (from 3 October 1990) Kretkowski Kübler (from 15 June 1989) Kuessner (from 3 October 1990) Kugler (from 1 June 1990) Kühbacher Kuhlwein Lambinus Leidinger Lennartz Leonhart Lohmann Lucyga (from 3 October 1990) Lutz Luuk Martiny-Glotz (until 22 May 1989) Matthäus-Maier Menzel Mertens Meyer Misselwitz (from 3 October 1990) Mitzscherling (until 10 May 1989) Morgenstern (from 3 October 1990) Müller Müller Müller Müntefering Nagel Nehm Niehuis Niese Niggemeier Nöbel Odendahl Oesinghaus Oostergetelo Opel (from 20 June 1988) Osswald (from 6 June 1988) Paterna Pauli Penner Peter Pfuhl Pick Porzner (until 2 October 1990) Poß Purps Rappe Reimann Renger Reschke Reuschenbach Reuter Richter (from 3 October 1990) Rixe Roth Schäfer Schanz Scheer Schemmel (from 3 October 1990) Scherrer (until 31 August 1990) Schluckebier Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmude Schnell (from 3 October 1990) Schöfberger Schreiner Schröder (from 3 October 1990) Schröer Schultze (from 3 October 1990) Schütz Schwanitz (from 3 October 1990) Seeger (from 3 October 1990) Seidenthal Seuster Sielaff Sieler Simonis (until 8 June 1988) Singer Skarpelis-Sperk Soell Sonntag-Wolgast (from 14 June 1988) Sorge (from 3 October 1990) Sperling Spöri (until 5 June 1988) Stahl Steiner Steinhauer Stephan (from 3 October 1990) Stiegler Stobbe Stockmann (from 3 October 1990) Struck Terborg Thierse (from 3 October 1990) Tietjen Timm Toetemeyer Traupe Uecker (from 3 October 1990) Urbaniak Vahlberg Verheugen Vogel Voigt Voigtländer (from 3 October 1990) Vosen Waltemathe Walther Wartenberg Wegner (from 31 August 1988) Weiermann Weiler Weinhofer (from 3 October 1990) Weis (from 3 October 1990) Weißgerber (from 3 October 1990) Weisskirchen Wernitz Westphal Weyel Wieczorek Wieczorek Wieczorek-Zeul Wiefelspütz Wiesche Wimmer Wischnewski With Wittich Würtz Zander Zeitler Zumkley Zutt (until 29 June 1987) FDP v t e FDP Speaker: Wolfgang Mischnick Members: Adam-Schwaetzer Annies (from 3 October 1990) Bangemann (until 5 January 1989) Baum Beckmann Bohn (from 3 October 1990) Bredehorn Cronenberg Eimer Engelhard Felber (from 3 October 1990) Feldmann Folz-Steinacker Funke Gallus Gattermann Genscher Gries Grünbeck Grüner Hamm-Brücher Haussmann Heinrich Hirsch Hitschler (from 7 August 1987) Hoppe Hoyer Irmer Kleinert Kley (from 3 October 1990) Kohn Laermann Lambsdorff Lehment (from 3 October 1990) Lüder Mischnick Möllemann Neuhausen Nolting Ortleb (from 3 October 1990) Paintner Richter Rind Ronneburger Rumpf (until 6 August 1987) Schäfer Segall Seiler-Albring Solms Thomae Timm Walz (from 6 January 1989) Weng Wolfgramm Wöstenberg (from 3 October 1990) Würfel Zirkler (from 3 October 1990) Zschornack (from 3 October 1990) Zywietz GRÜNE v t e GRUENE Speaker: Thomas Ebermann , Bärbel Rust , Waltraud Schoppe until 26 January 1988; Helmut Lippelt , Regula Schmidt-Bott , Christa Vennegerts until 30 January 1989, Helmut Lippelt , Jutta Oesterle-Schwerin , Antje Vollmer until 15 January 1990; Willi Hoss , Waltraud Schoppe (until 21 June 1990), Marianne Birthler (from 4 October 1990), Antje Vollmer AL: Frieß (from 21 February 1989) Olms (until 20 February 1989) Sellin (until 20 February 1989) Vogl (from 21 February 1989) Bündnis 90: Birthler (from 3 October 1990) Gauck (from 3 October 1990 until 4 October 1990) Schulz (from 3 October 1990) Tschiche (from 3 October 1990) Ullmann (from 3 October 1990) Die Grünen: Beck-Oberdorf Beer Brahmst-Rock Brauer Daniels Ebermann (until 18 February 1989) Eich (from 20 February 1989) Eid Flinner Garbe Häfner Hensel Hillerich Hoss Hüser Kelly Kleinert Knabe Kottwitz (from 8 November 1989) Kreuzeder Krieger (until 4 April 1989) Lippelt Mechtersheimer Nickels Oesterle-Schwerin Roske (from 22 June 1990) Rust Saibold Schilling Schily (until 7 November 1989) Schmidt (from 20 February 1989) Schmidt-Bott (until 18 February 1989) Schoppe (until 21 June 1990) Stratmann Such (from 4 April 1989) Teubner Trenz Vennegerts Vollmer Volmer Weiss Wetzel Wilms-Kegel Wollny Grüne DDR: Dörfler (from 3 October 1990) Platzeck (from 3 October 1990) Wollenberger (from 5 October 1990) PDS v t e PDS Speaker: Gregor Gysi Members: Bittner (from 3 October 1990) Deneke (from 3 October 1990) Enkelmann (from 3 October 1990) Fache (from 3 October 1990) Fischer (from 3 October 1990) Friedrich (from 3 October 1990) Fuchs (from 3 October 1990) Gysi (from 3 October 1990) Heuer (from 3 October 1990) Kaufmann (from 3 October 1990) Keller (from 3 October 1990) Kertscher (from 3 October 1990) Klein (from 3 October 1990) Modrow (from 3 October 1990) Morgenstern (from 3 October 1990) Ostrowski (from 3 October 1990) Riege (from 3 October 1990) Schönebeck (from 3 October 1990) Schumann (from 3 October 1990) Schumann (from 3 October 1990) Seifert (from 3 October 1990) Steinitz (from 3 October 1990) Stolfa (from 3 October 1990) Wegener (from 3 October 1990) OTHER v t e Independent Members: Briefs Unruh Wüppesahl List of members of the 11th Bundestag v t e Members of the 12th Bundestag (1990–1994) President : Rita Süssmuth ( CDU ) CDU/CSU CDU and CSU Speaker: Alfred Dregger until 25 November 1991; Wolfgang Schäuble from 25 November 1991 CDU: Ackermann (from 22 October 1991) Adam Altherr Augustin Augustinowitz Austermann Bargfrede Bauer Baumeister Bayha (until 3 November 1993) Belle Bentrup Bergmann-Pohl Bierling Blank Blens Bleser Blüm Bohl Bohlsen Böhm Böhmer Borchert Börnsen Brähmig Breuer Brudlewsky Brunnhuber Bühler Büttner Buwitt Carstens Carstensen Clemens Dehnel Dempwolf Deres Diemers Doppmeier (until 8 March 1992) Dörflinger Doss Dregger Echternach Ehlers Ehrbar Engelmann Eppelmann Erler (from 6 September 1993) Eylmann Eymer Falk Feilcke Fell Fischer Fischer Fockenberg Francke Fritz Fuchtel Ganz Geiger (from 29 September 1992) Geisler (until 12 February 1991) Geißler Geldern Gerster Gibtner Göhner Göttsching Götz Gres Grochtmann Grotz Grünewald Günther Hammerstein Handschack (from 1 July 1994) Harries Haschke Haschke Haungs Hauser Hedrich Heise Hellwig Helmrich (until 21 May 1992) Hennig (until 31 May 1992) Herkenrath Herr (from 11 November 1993) Hiebing (from 8 December 1993) Hintze Hoffacker Hornhues Hornung Hörsken Hörster Hüppe (from 1 February 1991) Jaffke Jäger Jagoda (until 7 February 1993) Jahn Janovsky Jeltsch Jork Jung Junghanns Jüttner Kahl Kampeter Kansy Kappes (until 24 August 1992) Karwatzki Kauder Kittelmann Klein Klinkert Kohl Köhler Köhler Kolbe Kors Kossendey Krause Krause Krey Kriedner Kronberg Krüger Krziskewitz Lamers Lammert Lamp Lattmann Laufs Laumann Lehne (from 12 March 1992) Lehr Lenzer Lieberoth Limbach Link Lippold Lischewski Lohmann Louven Löwisch (from 12 October 1991) Lummer Luther Maaß Magin Mahlo Maizière (until 15 October 1991) Marienfeld Marschewski Marten Meckelburg Meinl Merkel Meseke (until 6 December 1993) Michalk (from 13 February 1991) Michels Mildner Möller Molnar Müller Müller Müller Nelle Neuling Neumann Niedenthal (from 8 February 1993) Nitsch Nolte Olderog Ost Otto Päselt Paziorek Pesch Petzold Pfeffermann (until 6 September 1993) Pfeifer Pfeiffer Pfennig Pflüger Pinger Pofalla Pohler Priebus Pützhofen Rahardt-Vahldieck Rau Rauen Rawe Reddemann Reichenbach Reinartz Reinhardt Repnik Rieder Riegert (from 10 June 1992) Riesenhuber Ringkamp (from 1 June 1992) Rode Roitzsch Romer Rönsch Roth Rother Rühe Rüttgers Sauer Sauer Scharrenbroich (until 23 March 1994) Schartz Schätzle Schäuble Schell (from 22 July 1993) Schemken Schmalz Schmidbauer Schmidt (from 1 February 1994) Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmitz Schmude Schockenhoff Scholz Schönburg-Glauchau (until 30 June 1994) Schorlemer Schreiber (until 30 June 1993) Schroeder (until 20 October 1991) Schulhoff Schulte Schulz Schwalbe Schwarz Schwarz-Schilling Schwörer Seesing Seibel Seiters Sikora (from 22 May 1992) Skowron Sopart (until 3 January 1993) Sothmann Sprung Stavenhagen (until 31 May 1992) Steinbach-Hermann Stercken Stetten Stockhausen Stoltenberg Strube Stübgen Susset Süssmuth Szwed (from 24 March 1994) Tillmann Töpfer Uelhoff Uldall Verhülsdonk Vogel Vogt Voigt Vondran Waffenschmidt Waldburg-Zeil Warrikoff Werner Wetzel Wiechatzek Wieczorek (until 31 January 1994) Wilms Wilz Wimmer Wisniewski Wissmann Wohlrabe (from 5 January 1993) Wonneberger Worms (until 31 January 1991) Wülfing Würzbach Yzer CSU: Blank Bötsch Dess Eichhorn Faltlhauser Frankenhauser Friedrich Geiger Geis Glos Götzer Gröbl Hasselfeldt Hauser Hinsken Hollerith Jobst Kalb Keller Kiechle Klein Koschyk Kraus Lintner Männle Mayer Müller Oswald Probst Protzner Raidel Ramsauer Regenspurger Riedl Rose Rossmanith Ruck Scheu Schmidt Schneider Seehofer Spilker Spranger Waigel Warnke Wittmann Wittmann Zeitlmann Zierer Zöller SPD SPD Speaker: Hans-Jochen Vogel until 12 November 1991; Hans-Ulrich Klose from 12 November 1991 Members: Adler Alltschekow (from 3 August 1994) Andres Antretter Bachmaier Barbe Bartsch Becker Becker-Inglau Berger Bernrath Bersch (from 22 August 1994) Beucher Bindig Blunck Bock (from 4 July 1991) Böhme Börnsen Brandt (until 8 October 1992) Brandt-Elsweier Brecht Büchler Büchner (from 10 June 1991) Bulmahn Bülow Burchardt Bury Büttner Caspers-Merk Catenhusen Conradi Daubertshäuser Däubler-Gmelin Dehm (from 16 August 1994) Diederich Diller Dobberthien Dreßler Duve Ebert Eckardt Ehmke Eich Elmer Erler Esters Ewen Ferner Fischer Fischer Formanski Fuchs Fuchs Fuhrmann Ganseforth Gansel Gautier Gerster (until 7 June 1991) Gilges Gleicke Glotz Götte (until 7 June 1991) Graf Großmann Haack Hacker Hämmerle (until 31 July 1994) Hampel Hanewinckel Hartenstein Hasenfratz Hauchler Heistermann Heyenn Hiller Hilsberg Holtz Horn Huonker Ibrügger Iwersen Jäger Janz Janzen Jaunich Jens Jung Jungmann Kastner Kastning Kemper (from 3 May 1993) Kirschner Klappert Klejdzinski (from 30 October 1992) Klemmer Klose Knaape Kolbe Kolbow Koltzsch Körper Koschnick Kretkowski Kubatschka Kübler Kuessner Kuhlwein Küster Lambinus Lange Larcher Leidinger Lennartz Leonhard Lohmann Lörcher (from 3 September 1993) Lucyga Maaß Marx Mascher Matschie Matterne Matthäus-Maier Mattischeck Meckel Mehl Meißner Mertens Meyer Mosdorf Müller Müller Müller Müller Müller Müntefering (until 8 December 1992) Neumann Neumann Niehuis Niese Niggemeier Niggemeyer (from 22 October 1992 until 29 October 1992) Odendahl Oesinghaus Oostergetelo Opel Ostertag Otto Palis (from 12 July 1993) Paterna Penner Peter Pfaff Pfuhl Pick Poß Purps Rappe Reimann Rempe (until 22 April 1993) Renesse Rennebach Reschke Reuschenbach Reuter Rixe Roth (until 2 September 1992) Schäfer (until 27 June 1992) Schaich-Walch Schanz Scheer Scheffler Schily Schloten Schluckebier Schmidbauer Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt Schmidt-Zadel Schmude Schnell Schöfberger Schöler (from 8 December 1992) Schreiner Schröter Schröter Schulte Schuster Schütz Schwanhold Schwanitz Seidenthal Seuster Sielaff Simm Singer Skarpelis-Sperk Soell Sonntag-Wolgast Sorge Sperling Steen Steiner Stiegler Struck Tappe Terborg Thalheim Thierse Tietjen (until 7 July 1993) Titze-Stecher Toetemeyer Urbaniak Vergin Verheugen Vogel Voigt Vosen Wagner Wallow Waltemathe Walter (from 10 June 1991 until 21 August 1994) Walther Wartenberg Wegner Weiermann Weiler (until 14 August 1994) Weis Weisheit (from 29 June 1992) Weißgerber Weisskirchen Welt Wernitz Wester Westrich Wettig-Danielmeier Wetzel Weyel Wieczorek Wieczorek Wieczorek-Zeul Wiefelspütz Wimmer With Wittich Wohlleben Wolf Zapf Zöpel Zumkley (until 3 July 1991) FDP FDP Speaker: Hermann Otto Solms Members: Albowitz Babel Baum Beckmann (until 27 May 1994) Blunk (from 7 August 1992) Bredehorn Cronenberg Eimer Engelhard Essen Feldmann Friedhoff Friedrich Funke Funke-Schmitt-Rink Gallus Ganschow Gattermann (until 27 January 1994) Genscher Gries Grünbeck Grüner Günther Guttmacher Hansen Haussmann Heinrich Hirsch Hitschler Homburger Hoth Hoyer Hübner (until 12 May 1992) Irmer Jordan (from 8 June 1994) Kleinert Kohn Kolb Koppelin Kubicki (until 2 August 1992) Laermann Lambsdorff Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger Lüder Lühr Menzel Mischnick Möllemann Nolting Ortleb Otto Paintner Parr (from 1 February 1994) Peters Pohl Richter Rind Röhl Schäfer Schmalz-Jacobsen Schmidt Schmieder Schnittler (from 22 May 1992) Schüßler Schuster Schwaetzer Sehn Seiler-Albring Semper Solms Starnick Teichman Thiele Thomae Timm Türk Walz Weng Wolfgramm Würfel Zurheide Zywietz PDS PDS Speaker: Gregor Gysi Members: Bläss Braband (until 2 May 1992) Enkelmann Fischer Fuchs (from 11 March 1992) Gysi Henn Heuer Höll Jelpke Keller Lederer Modrow Philipp (from 21 May 1992) Riege (until 15 February 1992) Schumann Seifert GRÜNE GRUENE Speaker: Werner Schulz Members: Feige Köppe Poppe Schulz Ullmann Weiß Wollenberger OTHER Independent Members: Briefs Hackel Krause Lowack Schenk Stachowa List of members of the 12th Bundestag Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz FID People MEP directory Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Willy_Brandt&oldid=1301259600 " Categories : Social Democratic Party of Germany politicians Willy Brandt 1913 births 1992 deaths 20th-century chancellors of Germany 20th-century German male writers 20th-century German non-fiction writers Alterspräsidents of the Bundestag Burials at the Waldfriedhof Zehlendorf Deaths from colorectal cancer in Germany European integration pioneers Exiles from Nazi Germany Ministers for foreign affairs of Germany German autobiographers German Christian socialists German Christian Zionists German Lutherans German Nobel laureates German anti-communists German anti-fascists German expatriates in Norway German male non-fiction writers German people of the Spanish Civil War Grand Crosses 1st class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Honorary grand commanders of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia Lutheran socialists Mayors of West Berlin Members of the Abgeordnetenhaus of Berlin Members of the Bundestag 1949–1953 Members of the Bundestag 1953–1957 Members of the Bundestag 1961–1965 Members of the Bundestag 1969–1972 Members of the Bundestag 1972–1976 Members of the Bundestag 1976–1980 Members of the Bundestag 1980–1983 Members of the Bundestag 1983–1987 Members of the Bundestag 1987–1990 Members of the Bundestag 1990–1994 Members of the Bundestag for Berlin Members of the Bundestag for North Rhine-Westphalia Naturalised citizens of Norway Nobel Peace Prize laureates Norwegian refugees People of the Cold War People who lost German citizenship Politicians from Lübeck Presidents of the German Bundesrat Presidents of the Socialist International Recipients of the Order of the White Lion Refugees in Norway Refugees in Sweden Chairmen of the Social Democratic Party of Germany Socialist Workers' Party of Germany politicians Time Person of the Year Vice-chancellors of Germany War correspondents of the Spanish Civil War Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 German-language sources (de) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2017 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles containing German-language text Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Commons category link is on Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN Nobelprize template using Wikidata property P8024 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 22:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Willy Brandt 98 languages Add topic

