Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy 2 Reviews 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Neosymbolism 2 languages Català Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Neosymbolism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Neosymbolism is a movement current [ citation needed ] in the visual arts genre.  Active in the movement are artists in the United States, Denmark, the Czech Republic , and Canada.

Philosophy [ edit ] The core philosophy of Neosymbolism, like that of its predecessor Symbolism , is the idea of "correspondences", the "emblematic order" of a world in which technology and the industrial reality have not yet drowned the forces of mysticism and belief. In a world where visual images exist to generate sales and revenue, Neosymbolist imagery attempts to preserve the relationship between image and the human soul. The imagery is necessarily representational rather than abstract. It borders on the narrative, but stops short of the commercial trap of illustration to convey an idea for profit. Artists like Norman Rockwell could qualify as Neosymbolist painters in that they adopt a social and cultural undercurrent and then convey it in terms of the cultural cliche—the image as representative of core aspects of the culture. The same is not true, however, of the generally accepted idea of commercial illustration which attempts more to influence cultural, political, and economic ideology than it tries to communicate an existential reality.

Neosymbolism is fairly well-hidden within the culture, with few references and almost no broad-based visibility. In 1988, Nick A_Demos published a book in two editions. This was  the first visible sign of an idea underlying a Neosymbolist philosophy. A_Demos then developed this first book of Neosymbolism into paintings. He was also the first to use the word "Neosymbolism", thus coining it.

[ citation needed ] There has also been a separate group using the Neosymbolism name for the creation of an international collective representing a number of artists who share the goals of preserving the visual art of Symbolism (the foundation of the ideas associated with the term Neosymbolism) in its original and essential sense. This preservation, as opposed to the "non-sense" of various philosophies that have evolved since the late nineteenth century and have deviated from the core Symbolist philosophy.

The Neosymbolist movement was born spontaneously in numerous locations across the globe. Many groups use the word but also do not want to be limited to only this discipline. A group of Danish Neosymbolists defined their movement thus: [ 1 ] Using Iconic language in their expressions Reproducing the inner experience of the outer world Examining the human experience and circumstance in today’s changing world Examining the underlying meaning of life Using media in conscious and innovative ways The founder of the Canadian Neosymbolists, meanwhile, describes the foundations of their movement in Brief Summary of the Foundations of Canadian Neosymbolism, [ citation needed ] written by their founder, Gary F. Manzo.

Using Symbolic language in our expressions, often derived from Dream Sequences and Archetypal Imagery as described by Carl Jung, and others involved with Mysticism, Alchemy, Depth Psychology and Philosophy.

Depicting the inner experience of the outer world, in relationship to Self-Actualization and Depth Psychology and related fields of study.

Examining the human experience and circumstance in today’s changing world, with the idea that mankind must “make friends with his animal nature” in order to achieve Wholeness of SELF in a contemporary world.

Examining the underlying meaning of life, both from an historical perspective and its relevancy to the new age of Technology as well as New Age Psychology.

Using mediums and techniques, in conscious, experimental and innovative ways, utilizing both traditional methods and contemporary cutting-edge techniques and technologies.

Another international Neosymbolist collective that began exhibiting as a group in 2001 has a simpler definition: The "exploration of the emotional, political, and spiritual themes of the rapidly changing culture of the late 20th and early 21st (century) through the use of symbols both personal and universal." [ 2 ] This perspective of the Neosymbolist movement can be seen as a reaction against abstraction, an attempt to weave artists’ intellectual and spiritual experiences into the fabric of their work. Furthermore, the Neosymbolists’ palette is not limited to the use of words and ancient symbols of ideas, even as these remain powerful tools of expression.

[ citation needed ] Reviews [ edit ] The exhibition history of these groups, including their collaborations with the Danish Neosymbolist collective, are documented in reviews in the following periodicals.  More information about this group can also be found at www.neosymbolism.eu Sketch Book, the Artists’ Coalition of Austin Newsletter Pascale Vial, July 2001, "Neosymbolismus at Depot St. Gallery" Jacqueline May, May 7, 2004, Austin Chronicle , Vol 23, No. 26 Gabriela Garbova - March 17, 2005, Olomoucky Den "The Exhibition of Neosymbolist Art", Austin Gazeta , October, 2006 Af Michael Friis, November 22, 2006, "Symbol X i Rahuset", Vesterbro Bladet , Copenhagen, Denmark "Galerii Osadil Neosymbolismus", Dnes , January 5, 2007 Vlasta Hrdilova, January 12, 2007, "Neosymboliste Vystavuji v Olomouci", Pravo Ondrej Grezdo, Octobra 14, 2008, "Americki vytarnici predstavili neosymbolizmus", Piestansky Tyzden References [ edit ] ^ "webbyen.dk" . 2011-07-19. Archived from the original on 2011-07-19 . Retrieved 2017-02-07 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Grezdo, Stanislav (2010).

Neosymbolism : Bridges to the Unknown . Chicago: Ukrainian Institute of Modern Art.

ISBN 978-0557374199 .

External links [ edit ] NEOSYMBOLISM.eu Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neosymbolism&oldid=1244995970 " Category : Art movements Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from April 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015 This page was last edited on 10 September 2024, at 12:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neosymbolism 2 languages Add topic

