Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 House traditions 3 House life 4 Pronunciation 5 Notable alumni 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Quincy House (Harvard College) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′14″N 71°07′02″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3705°N 71.1171°W ﻿ / 42.3705; -71.1171 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residential House of Harvard College This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Quincy House" Harvard College – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Quincy House Residential House at Harvard University Harvard University Stone Hall (the former Increase Mather Hall, usually called "Old Quincy") Shield Location 58 Plympton Street Coordinates 42°22′14″N 71°07′02″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3705°N 71.1171°W ﻿ / 42.3705; -71.1171 Full name Josiah Quincy III House Established 1959 Named for Josiah Quincy III Sister college Branford College Freshman dorm Pennypacker Hall Faculty Deans Eric Beerbohm and Leslie Duhaylongsod Dean Nicole S. Simon HoCo chairs Jack "watch it, Nathan" Towers and Honor "Varun and Aidan" Pimentel Tutors 21 Website quincy .harvard .edu Quincy House ( / ˈ k w ɪ n z i / ) is one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University , located on Plympton Street between Harvard Yard and the Charles River . The second largest of the twelve undergraduate houses, Quincy House was named after Josiah Quincy III (1772–1864), president of Harvard from 1829 to 1845.

[ 1 ] Quincy House's official counterpart at Yale University is Branford College .

House colors are red, gold, white, and black, and the House's seal in those colors is emblazoned on a wall of the dining hall wing facing the House's main courtyard. In 2005, Quincy House adopted the penguin as its official mascot.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Its residents, nicknamed "penguins" after the mascot, live in the house during their sophomore through senior years.

History [ edit ] Officially opened in September 1959, Quincy House symbolized the "new" Harvard. As a part of the Edward Harkness bequest, it was the first House to be built after construction of the original seven river Houses. Three buildings currently house Quincy House students: Old Quincy, New Quincy, and 20 DeWolfe Street.

The older of the sections of Quincy House, "Old Quincy", underwent extensive renovations during the 2012–13 academic year, and opened in the fall of 2013 as Stone Hall. It had originally been named for early Harvard president Increase Mather and was part of Harvard's Leverett House until 1960. Constructed in 1929–30 during Abbott Lawrence Lowell 's university presidency, its neo-Georgian exterior has been retained, but its finely detailed suites, high ceilings, carved moldings, and fireplaces have given way to modern suites, corridors that invite interaction between suite residents, and sunlit common rooms. Until the construction of New Quincy in the late 1950s necessitated their removal, the now open east side was enclosed by a one-story range of squash courts.

Designed by the Boston firm of Shepley, Bulfinch, Richardson, and Abbott , New Quincy is a modern eight-story high-rise with views of its more traditional neighbors. It consists of a two-story commons wing along Mt. Auburn Street, a nine-story main residence unit with split level suites having splendid views, and the raised, glass-walled House Library, nicknamed "the Qube", the placement of which adds a second interior court to the series of courtyards and gardens that are a distinctive part of the House.

[ 4 ] The 20 DeWolfe Street residence hall is a brick structure with a double mansard roof of lead-coated copper. The 10 and 20 DeWolfe Street residences are overflow housing that have at various times housed freshmen, [ 5 ] students from Leverett House, Dunster House , [ 6 ] and Kirkland House .

[ 7 ] The Quincy House served as an Olympic Village for competitors in football at the 1984 Summer Olympics .

[ 8 ] House traditions [ edit ] Traditionally at the beginning of each academic year, the Quincy House Masters and Senior Tutor gather with a bagpiper to conduct the Exorcism of the spirit of Josiah Quincy, parading in the courtyard after the exorcism speech is recited. Quincy House also hosts a field day in which second, third, and fourth year students compete against each other in athletic contests.  The "Quincy Assassins" is an annual event in which students target a fellow house member with a Nerf gun.  Another recently implemented tradition of the House is its annual lip-sync battle.

On the day each spring when freshmen learn of their House affiliations for their upperclass years, Quincy House students storm the yard with their house flag, led by someone wearing a penguin suit.

There had been a tradition in the 1970s for a regular dinner in one of the small rooms off the main dining hall (which were often used for meals organized by campus or house organizations), where cannabis was smoked by the attendees; by the end, or even the middle, of dinner a haze would usually settle over the room. This continued at least into spring term 1980 but was phased out not long after that. The regular event was called "The Space Table" and fliers advertising it included the Star Trek slogan "To Boldly Go Where No Man Has Gone Before." House life [ edit ] The current Quincy House faculty deans are Eric Beerbohm and Leslie Duhaylongsod.

[ 9 ] Beerbohm is a Professor of Government in Harvard's Faculty of Arts and Sciences and Duhaylongsod is a professor in the Secondary and Higher Education department at Salem State University . House events are coordinated by the Quincy House Committee, or HoCo. The committee operates separately from the Harvard Undergraduate Council (UC) to organize student events and manage funding.

The Quincy Grille is a student-run diner that is popular among students of all Harvard dormitories. The grill is open seven days a week and serves a standard board of grill fare such as mozzarella sticks, fries, and chicken fingers but additionally serves signature items such as the Lee and Nerden burgers (named after former Faculty Dean Lee Gehrke and Building Manager Dick Nerden, respectively) as well as Too Much Swag (a combination of cheese-covered popcorn chicken and curly fries) and Quinception (a quesadilla with chicken and mozzarella sticks).  Quincy House's library is called "the Qube", a reference to its shape and glass walls.  The Qube has one of the best comic book collections at Harvard.  The House's dining hall is unrestricted except to first-year students and on Thursday night for Community Dinner.  Large glass walls surround the dining hall, allowing natural light to enter and affording views of the House courtyards, Mt. Auburn Street, and even sunsets sometimes.  The dining hall's interior is also unique, as it has a "ski lodge" feel and a large abstract mural occupies its entire back wall.  Quincy's Junior Common Room, decorated with mid-century modern period furniture, is a popular location for doing homework and having informal and formal gatherings, but only Quincy students have swipe access.  The House lobby features pool and ping-pong tables that promote House socializing. The House also contains a pottery studio, dance studio, and gym.

Quincy House is sometimes called "The People's House," referring to its ease of access by non-residents in Harvard College. Quincy House is centrally located and has few restrictions on dining hall access by students from other houses.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Pronunciation [ edit ] As Quincy House was named after Josiah Quincy III , the correct pronunciation is / ˈ k w ɪ n z i / . It is widely mispronounced, however, as / ˈ k w ɪ n s i / .

[ 12 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Notable Quincy alumni include New York Times columnist Ross Douthat , [ 13 ] former U.S. Solicitor General Seth P. Waxman , [ 14 ] former Tennessee Governor Phil Bredesen , director Rob Cohen , Assemblyman Nelson Denis , journalist Lou Dobbs , former Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Douglas Feith , Jamie Gorelick , first Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge , Ron Kind , Peter Sagal , Suzanne Malveaux , Anthony Brown , Zappos CEO Tony Hsieh , Commerce Secretary , former Governor of Rhode Island Gina Raimondo , [ 15 ] ESPN sportswriter Pablo S. Torre , Robert Kirshner , Joe Sanberg , musician Dean Wareham , Merrick Garland , social media personality and chef Nick DiGiovanni , [ 16 ] former Chief Judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit and current Attorney General of the United States and Judge Lucy H. Koh . Massachusetts Congressman Seth Moulton was an affiliated tutors at Quincy House as graduate students.

References [ edit ] ^ "Photographic views of Quincy House, 1957-1970s" . Harvard University Archives . Retrieved June 16, 2016 .

^ Oreilly, Kara M.

"Mascot-less, But Not For Long" Harvard Crimson. April 21, 2005.

^ Lonyai, Anna "Photo: Penguin Parade" Harvard Crimson. May 25, 2005.

^ Quincy House: An introduction to its architecture.

Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1959.

^ Bishai, Graham; Shimozaki, Kenton (August 3, 2017).

"DeWolfe to House 28 Freshmen" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved July 10, 2018 .

^ "Dunster House" .

The Harvard Crimson . March 7, 2017 . Retrieved July 10, 2018 .

^ "Kirkland's History" . Harvard University . Retrieved July 10, 2018 .

^ Olympic Summer Games Villages from Paris 1924 to Tokyo 2020 , The Olympics Study Centre, 2022 , retrieved July 12, 2025 ^ "Administrative Staff" .

^ https://quincy.harvard.edu/community-life ^ https://dining.harvard.edu/campus-dining/undergraduate-dining/hours-interhouse-restrictions [ permanent dead link ] ^ In a sample of 15 former undergraduates from the classes of 1997 and 1998 taken on July 26–27, 2014, all 15 used the second, incorrect pronunciation.

^ Walsh, Colleen "Guardian of the House" Harvard Gazette. March 18, 2010.

^ "1972 Class Marshal Candidates" Cambridge: Harvard Crimson , October 26, 1972.

^ "Gina M. Raimondo '93 Recalls Harvard as Formative | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

^ Aggarwal-Schifellite, Manisha (June 18, 2019).

"Harvard graduate Nick DiGiovanni competes on 'MasterChef' " .

Harvard Gazette . Retrieved May 29, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Photographic views of Quincy House, 1957-1970s, Harvard University Archives Wikimedia Commons has media related to Quincy House .

Quincy House official site v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quincy_House_(Harvard_College)&oldid=1305947946 " Categories : Harvard Houses 1959 establishments in Massachusetts School buildings completed in 1959 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2022 Articles needing additional references from July 2023 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 01:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quincy House (Harvard College) Add languages Add topic

