Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Prosecution for assassination of Judge John H. Wood 2.2 Defense of Enron 2.3 Comments regarding Ted Stevens 2.4 Defense of Michael Flynn 2.5 2020 presidential election 2.5.1 2020 Election Legitimacy Team 2.5.2 Independent election lawsuits 2.5.3 Arizona 2.5.4 Georgia 2.5.5 Michigan 2.5.6 Wisconsin 2.5.7 Defamation lawsuits against Powell 2.6 QAnon 2.7 Texas Bar petition against Powell 3 Political fundraising 4 Criminal charges and guilty plea 5 Writing 6 Personal life and other ventures 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Sidney Powell 9 languages العربية Deutsch Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American lawyer and conspiracy theorist (born 1955) Sidney Powell Powell in 2020 Born ( 1955-05-01 ) May 1, 1955 (age 70) Durham, North Carolina , U.S.

Education University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill ( BA , JD ) Occupation Attorney Years active 1978–present Criminal charges Felonies: 1 count of Georgia RICO (Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations) Act 2 counts of Election fraud 3 counts of computer crimes 1 count of Defrauding the State [ 1 ] Criminal penalty 6 years' suspended sentence $6,000 fine $2,700 restitution Criminal status Pleaded guilty to misdemeanors: 6 counts: conspiracy to commit intentional interference with the performance of election duties Website sidneypowell .com This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Sidney Katherine Powell (born May 1, 1955) is an American attorney and former federal prosecutor . In August 2023, she was indicted along with Donald Trump and eighteen others in the Georgia election case . In October 2023, she pleaded guilty to six misdemeanor counts of conspiring to intentionally interfere with the performance of election duties. She was sentenced to six years of probation and agreed to testify against the other defendants .

Prior to her political involvement, Powell served as an assistant United States attorney in the Western District of Texas . She was best known for prosecuting high-profile drug smuggler Jimmy Chagra and, as private counsel, defending Merrill Lynch executives in proceedings related to the Enron scandal .

Later in her career, Powell began promoting conspiracy theories. Powell defended retired lieutenant general Michael Flynn in United States v. Flynn , claiming that he was framed by a covert " deep state " operation, and has promoted personalities and slogans associated with QAnon . After the 2020 election, she claimed that there had been a global conspiracy to tamper with voting machines, despite lacking evidence. After she accused the election technology companies Dominion Voting Systems and Smartmatic of engaging in a conspiracy to rig the election, both companies sued her for defamation .

In 2020, Powell joined the legal team of then-President Trump in an attempt to overturn Joe Biden 's victory in the 2020 presidential election . Powell continued filing lawsuits independently and ultimately lost four federal lawsuits in Michigan , Georgia , Arizona , and Wisconsin . In August 2021, Michigan federal judge Linda Vivienne Parker formally sanctioned Powell and eight other pro-Trump lawyers for their frivolous suit seeking to overturn Trump's election loss. The attorneys were ordered repay the  legal expenses incurred by the defense and recommended for disbarment . The State Bar of Texas ' Texas Commission for Lawyer Discipline brought a disciplinary action against Powell, alleging that she violated the rules of professional conduct governing lawyers; that proceeding is pending.

Early life and education Sidney Katherine Powell was born on May 1, 1955, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] in Durham, North Carolina , grew up in the city of Raleigh , and knew from an early age that she wanted to be a lawyer.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] She graduated from Needham Broughton High School and attended the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , where she earned a Bachelor of Arts .

[ 4 ] At the age of 19, she was accepted into the University of North Carolina School of Law , where she graduated in 1978 with a Juris Doctor degree.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] She began her legal career as one of the youngest federal prosecutors in the U.S.

[ 5 ] Career From 1978 through 1988, Powell was an assistant United States attorney for the Western and Northern Districts of Texas and the Eastern District of Virginia , where she handled civil and criminal trial work. She was appointed Appellate Section Chief for the Western District of Texas and then the Northern District of Texas.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Powell established her own law firm in 1993 in Dallas, Texas.

[ 7 ] Around 2002, [ vague ] she began to practice in Asheville, North Carolina, [ 5 ] but moved back to Texas later.

[ 9 ] Prosecution for assassination of Judge John H. Wood Powell was best known as one of the prosecutors in the 1979 trial of Jimmy Chagra [ 7 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] who was accused in the assassination of John H. Wood Jr.

, a federal judge from Texas. He was acquitted of involvement in the assassination but convicted on other charges.

[ 12 ] He later admitted to his role in the conspiracy to murder the judge.

[ 13 ] Defense of Enron In the 2000s, Powell represented firms and executives involved in the Enron scandal , including the accounting firm Arthur Andersen and former Merrill Lynch executive Jim Brown.

[ 14 ] She was an outspoken critic of the Enron Task Force prosecutions, and accused prosecutor Andrew Weissmann of overreach.

[ 15 ] After that, Powell wrote extensively about prosecutorial abuses in the 2014 book Licensed to Lie .

[ 4 ] The book was noticed by then- Senator Orrin Hatch , who described it as "powerful".

[ 11 ] The experience contributed to her distrust of government institutions.

[ 16 ] Comments regarding Ted Stevens In Licensed to Lie , Powell contended that prosecutors in the corruption trial of U.S. senator Ted Stevens of Alaska, held in 2008, before federal judge Emmet G. Sullivan [ 17 ] in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia , intentionally withheld " Brady material " they should have disclosed to the defense and that they returned Rocky Williams, a terminally ill witness, to Alaska, ostensibly so that his testimony would not exonerate Stevens. The senator was subsequently convicted of seven felony counts of corruption for failing to annually declare gifts from VECO owner Bill Allen . However, due to numerous instances of prosecutorial misconduct, Attorney General Eric Holder moved to dismiss the indictment prior to sentencing, effectively vacating the conviction.

[ 18 ] Defense of Michael Flynn Main article: United States v. Flynn After publishing her first book, Powell continued writing opinion pieces for right-leaning websites.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 11 ] In 2017, Weissmann joined Robert Mueller 's Special Counsel investigation , reviving interest in Licensed to Lie from Newt Gingrich and Sean Hannity .

[ 11 ] Using her status as a former federal prosecutor, Powell became a leading voice against the Mueller investigation; [ 11 ] in a February 2018 op-ed, Powell wrote that retired lieutenant general Michael Flynn should "withdraw his guilty plea" for making false statements to the FBI , alleging "egregious government misconduct".

[ 21 ] Powell's appearances on Fox News to discuss the Flynn case were noticed by President Donald Trump , and the two spoke on several occasions. To raise money for Flynn's defense, Powell spoke at a November 2018 conference, where she met Flynn's siblings.

[ 4 ] They agreed that Flynn was the victim of a "deep state plot" and had only pleaded guilty because he was coerced.

[ 4 ] [ 21 ] Flynn released his law firm of Covington & Burling and retained Powell to serve as his lead attorney in June 2019.

[ 4 ] On the same day this was disclosed, Powell sent a letter to Attorney General William Barr requesting the "utmost confidentiality" and argued that Flynn's prosecution was due to "corruption of our beloved government institutions for what appears to be political purposes".

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Among other things, she requested that Barr appoint an outsider to investigate. Six months later, Barr appointed Jeffrey Jensen to conduct an investigation.

[ 24 ] The Justice Department filed a motion to drop Flynn's prosecution with presiding federal judge Emmet G. Sullivan in May 2020.

[ 25 ] Sullivan did not immediately grant the motion; Powell later requested a writ of mandamus from the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to compel Sullivan to drop the case. After an initial ruling in favor of Powell by a three-judge panel of the court, the case was appealed to the full court, which denied the mandamus request in an 8–2 ruling and returned the case to Sullivan's court.

[ 26 ] Powell had argued to the full court that Sullivan's role was " ministerial ", giving him no discretion but to comply with the Justice Department motion, to which judge Thomas Griffith replied: "It's not ministerial and you know it's not. So it's not ministerial, so that means that the judge has to do some thinking about it, right?" [ 27 ] Other judges on the court also pushed back on Powell's characterization of a federal judge's role.

[ 28 ] After Trump pardoned Flynn in November 2020, Sullivan dismissed the case as moot, though he stated he probably would have denied the Justice Department motion had the case proceeded.

[ 29 ] According to a Justice Department official, the Justice Department was not consulted about the pardon.

[ 30 ] Soon after taking the Flynn case, Powell had accused the Justice Department of prosecutorial misconduct against Flynn; in a footnote to a June 2020 court brief, the department described Powell's allegations as "unfounded and provide no basis for impugning the prosecutors from the D.C. United States Attorney's Office".

[ 4 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Powell has been described as a proponent of conspiracy theories about Flynn, namely that he was framed by members of the " deep state " who were trying to eject President Donald Trump from office.

[ 4 ] [ 21 ] [ 11 ] 2020 presidential election Main articles: Post-election lawsuits related to the 2020 United States presidential election and 2020 United States presidential election § Controversies Days before the 2020 presidential election , Dennis Montgomery , a software designer with a history of making dubious claims, asserted that a government supercomputer program would be used to switch votes from Trump to Biden on voting machines. Powell promoted the conspiracy theory on Lou Dobbs Tonight on November 6, [ 33 ] [ 34 ] and again on November 8, 2020, on Maria Bartiromo 's Fox Business program, ...claiming to have "evidence that that is exactly what happened".

On December 10, – long after other hosts had started to push her for more evidence – Dobbs continued to praise her.

"Sidney Powell, thank you for all you're doing," "It is the Lord's work." [ 35 ] [ 36 ] The Washington Post indicated Bartiromo asked Powell for proof of specifics of voting fraud made by her, supposedly including dead voters casting ballots, ballots lacking Trump's name, and a postal employee's confession that he had postdated mailed ballots. She said "Sidney, we talked about the Dominion software." "I know that there were voting irregularities. Tell me about that." [ 36 ] Powell alleged that a secret international cabal involving communists, " globalists ", George Soros , Hugo Chávez (who died in 2013), the Clinton Foundation , the CIA , and thousands of Democratic and Republican officials—including then-Trump ally and Georgia governor Brian Kemp —used voting machines to transfer millions of votes away from Trump in the 2020 presidential election .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] She also asserted that the CIA ignored warnings about the software, and urged Trump to fire director Gina Haspel .

[ 40 ] Christopher Krebs , director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), characterized the supercomputer claim as "nonsense" and a "hoax".

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] CISA described the 2020 election as "the most secure in American history", with "no evidence that any voting system deleted or lost votes, changed votes or was in any way compromised".

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] 2020 Election Legitimacy Team In the wake of the election, Trump established a legal team to challenge the legitimacy of the results .

[ 43 ] On November 14, Trump named Rudy Giuliani to lead the team, with Victoria Toensing , her husband Joseph diGenova , Jenna Ellis , and Powell as members of this team.

[ 44 ] The team proceeded to file numerous lawsuits in several states over alleged vote harvesting , illegal votes, machine errors, vote dumps, and late-counted votes. Precisely how Powell gained prominence in the legal team is unknown, even to some campaign officials. One official claimed Powell "simply showed up at headquarters".

[ 11 ] Giuliani and Powell alleged multiple instances of voter fraud in key states at a November 19 press conference.

[ 45 ] They cited an affidavit —filed by Russell Ramsland [ 46 ] and L. Lin Wood on behalf of the Trump campaign [ 47 ] —as evidence of manipulated results. In their comparison of votes cast against total voters registered in Michigan , Powell asserted that they found over-voting of "up to 350 percent in some places".

[ 45 ] However, the affidavit's conclusion was erroneous since it compared the Michigan vote tallies against population data from Minnesota (whose respective abbreviations are MI and MN, a possible source of the error).

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] When The Washington Post independently checked the numbers, no voter discrepancies were found.

[ 45 ] When questioned the next day, Wood described this as "a simple mistake" and said the affidavit "will be corrected if it hasn't been already".

[ 47 ] After Giuliani's segment ended, Powell took the lectern and alleged, without evidence, that an international communist plot to rig the 2020 election had been engineered by Cuba, China, Venezuela, Hugo Chávez (who died in 2013), George Soros , the Clinton Foundation and antifa .

[ 38 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] She also alleged that Dominion Voting Systems "can set and run an algorithm that probably ran all over the country to take a certain percentage of votes from President Trump and flip them to President Biden".

[ 52 ] The source for many of these claims appeared to be far right news organization One America News Network (OANN).

[ 38 ] She also repeated a conspiracy theory [ 53 ] —spread by Congressman Louie Gohmert , OANN and others [ 54 ] —that election results showing a landslide victory for Trump had been transmitted to the German office of the Spanish electronic voting firm Scytl , after which a company server was supposedly seized in a raid by the United States Army.

[ 38 ] The US Army and Scytl refuted these claims; [ 55 ] Scytl has not had any offices in Germany since September 2019 and does not tabulate US votes.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] In a March 2021 report, the Justice and Homeland Security Departments flatly rejected accusations of voting fraud conducted by foreign nations.

[ 58 ] Jonathan Karl , former ABC News chief White House correspondent for the duration of the Trump presidency, wrote in his November 2021 book, Betrayal , that Powell told Defense Department official Ezra Cohen-Watnick that CIA director Gina Haspel had been injured and detained in Germany while attempting to retrieve the alleged server and destroy the purported evidence. She asked Cohen-Watnick, who previously worked under Flynn in the government, to launch a special operations mission to physically seize Haspel and compel her to confess.

[ 59 ] Later on the evening of November 14, on his Fox News program Tucker Carlson Tonight , conservative commentator Carlson said he had invited Powell onto his show to provide proof of her allegations. After repeated requests, he said Powell became angry with him and said he should "stop contacting her." Carlson's team contacted other figures in the Trump campaign who said that Powell had not given them evidence of her allegations.

[ 60 ] In an interview with Newsmax on November 21, [ 61 ] Powell accused Georgia's Republican governor, Brian Kemp , of being "in on the Dominion scam" and suggested financial impropriety.

[ 62 ] Powell additionally alleged that fraud had cost Doug Collins the nonpartisan blanket primary against incumbent Kelly Loeffler in the Senate race in Georgia .

[ 63 ] She also claimed the Democratic Party had used rigged Dominion machines to defeat Bernie Sanders in the 2016 primary, and that Sanders learned of this but "sold out".

[ 64 ] She said she would "blow up" Georgia with a "biblical" court filing.

[ 65 ] Powell suggested that candidates "paid to have the system rigged to work for them".

[ 66 ] On the basis of these claims, Powell called for Republican-controlled state legislatures in swing states to disregard the election results and appoint a slate of "loyal" electors who would vote to re-elect Trump, [ 67 ] based on authority supposedly resting in Article Two of the Constitution .

[ 68 ] Giuliani and Ellis issued a November 22 statement that Powell was "practicing law on her own" and was not (or was no longer) a part of the Trump legal team.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 36 ] [ 71 ] According to The Washington Post , the Trump campaign cut ties with Powell because she was seen as harming Trump's broader legal efforts, and because Trump disliked the coverage she received from Tucker Carlson Tonight .

[ 72 ] However, she continued to meet with the president in the White House .

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] Shortly after the announcement, her client Michael Flynn tweeted that Twitter had suspended her account for twelve hours, and that she agreed with the campaign's announcement and was "staying the course" to prove election fraud.

[ 77 ] On November 23, Fox executive Raj Shah informed his superiors that Fox staff had entreated numerous of its sources within Trump's administration "...to inform reporters that Powell offered no evidence for her claims and didn't speak for the president." [ 36 ] Despite this, on November 24 she joined host Lou Dobbs to tell his viewers that in Arizona, "...there were 35,000 votes added to every Democrat candidate just to start their voting off. It's like getting your $500 of Monopoly money to begin with when you haven't done anything, and it was only for Democrats." [ 36 ] Dominion Voting Systems released a statement refuting Powell's fraud claims on November 26.

[ 78 ] [ 11 ] A draft executive order dated December 16 called for Trump to order a military seizure of voting machines and the appointment of a special counsel; when it surfaced a year later, it was not immediately clear who drafted it.

[ 79 ] Trump ally Bernard Kerik testified to the January 6 committee that Michael Flynn associate Phil Waldron originated the idea of a military seizure of voting machines.

[ 80 ] Powell, who had previously called on the president to invoke the Insurrection Act to deploy military forces, [ 81 ] joined an Oval Office meeting on December 18, with Giuliani, Flynn, and Pat Cipollone .

[ 36 ] There, Trump suggested naming Powell as a special counsel to investigate allegations of election fraud. Most Trump advisors opposed the idea, while Powell characterized them as quitters.

[ 82 ] The meeting was reportedly heated and included Flynn's proposal for the president to declare martial law .

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] By December 2020 over 4,000 attorneys had signed an open letter asking bar disciplinary authorities to condemn and investigate Powell's behavior.

[ 85 ] In May 2021, Powell continued to express the hope that the election result would be reversed. She spoke at a QAnon conference in Dallas over Memorial Day weekend, where she falsely asserted Trump "can simply be reinstated, that a new Inauguration Day is set", eliciting cheers from the crowd. The date for this was supposedly August 13, however this date passed and Trump was not reinstated.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] Powell was subpoenaed in January 2022 to testify before the House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack .

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] She sued to block release of her phone records.

[ 91 ] Independent election lawsuits While working for Trump, Powell stated she would "release the Kraken ", a catchphrase from the 1981 film Clash of the Titans , and the expression spread across Twitter.

[ 92 ] After the Trump campaign cut ties with Powell, she continued to file independent election lawsuits in Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, and Wisconsin.

[ 93 ] Sources described Powell's election-related filings as filled with significant "sloppy mistakes".

[ 94 ] In her Georgia lawsuit, she claimed that a computer algorithm took votes from Biden and flipped them to Trump, later amending the filing.

[ 95 ] In Powell's submissions to district courts in Georgia and Michigan, district was misspelled three different ways on the first pages.

[ 96 ] Powell's Michigan filing also had numerous formatting errors and misidentified one of her experts.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Two Republicans said they had been named as a plaintiff in the Georgia and Wisconsin lawsuits despite not having given permission to be included (although one later agreed to remain as a plaintiff).

[ 94 ] Powell's lawsuits cited an anonymous witness, referred to as "Spyder" or "Spider", who alleged that American voting systems were "certainly compromised by rogue actors, such as Iran and China". Spyder's real name was redacted from submitted documents; however, a bookmark in the file revealed his identity to be Joshua Merritt, an IT consultant. Although Powell's filings describe Merritt as a former "military intelligence expert", the United States Army Intelligence Center stated that he never worked in military intelligence and had not finished a training course in military intelligence. Merritt acknowledged that the description was wrong and attributed the error to Powell's clerks. However, Merritt claimed he did finish the training, producing an "unofficial transcript" as evidence.

[ 98 ] Powell also presented an affidavit from an individual she described as a former intelligence contractor with knowledge of a foreign conspiracy to subvert democracy, who Powell said needed to remain anonymous to protect their "reputation, professional career and personal safety".

The Washington Post identified the individual as pro-Trump podcaster Terpsichore Maras-Lindeman, and that parts of the affidavit matched a blog post she had written in November 2019. Maras-Lindeman had served in the Navy for less than a year over two decades earlier, and in a November 2018 civil suit the attorney general of North Dakota accused her of misappropriating funds for personal use from a charitable event she tried to organize. State attorneys asserted that she exaggerated her credentials and used multiple aliases and Social Security numbers in "a persistent effort...to deceive others". Asked about Maras-Lindeman, Powell told the Post : "I don't have the same information you do." [ 99 ] Arizona Powell filed a federal lawsuit against Arizona governor Doug Ducey , Arizona secretary of state Katie Hobbs and other Arizona election officials on December 2, alleging that "poll watchers failed to adequately verify signatures on ballots, that Maricopa County ballot dispute referees were partisan, that Dominion backups had no chain of custody, and the Dominion machines themselves suffered from errors during state evaluations." The plaintiffs asked the court to decertify Arizona's election results or order that Arizona certify Trump electors.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] On December 9, U.S. district judge Diane Humetewa dismissed the case due to plaintiffs' lack of legal standing , and ruled that the allegations of impropriety were "sorely wanting of relevant or reliable evidence", instead being "largely based on anonymous witnesses, hearsay, and irrelevant analysis of unrelated elections". The judge singled out the fraud allegations being put forth, writing that they "fail in their particularity and plausibility" and that there would be "extreme, and entirely unprecedented" harm to Arizona's more than 3 million voters to entertain Powell's lawsuit "at this late date".

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] Powell filed an appeal of the lawsuit's dismissal in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in December, which scheduled the due date for the opening brief to be two months after the inauguration .

[ 103 ] That month, Powell also filed an emergency petition with the United States Supreme Court seeking an extraordinary writ of mandamus for intervention in the case. The petition was denied without comment on March 1, 2021, ending the matter.

[ 104 ] Georgia Powell and Lin Wood filed a lawsuit against Georgia governor Brian Kemp and other state officials on November 25, alleging that Dominion Voting Systems was used to rig votes for Biden. The plaintiffs asked the court to halt the certification of elections results and order Kemp to certify Trump as the winner in Georgia.

[ 105 ] U.S. district judge Timothy Batten issued a temporary restraining order on November 29 that voting machines in Georgia's Cobb, Gwinnett, and Cherokee counties were to preserve their data, after Wood had argued to retain "this information on a very limited basis". Powell appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit to expand the restraining order. A three-judge panel unanimously dismissed Powell's appeal on December 4, citing a failure to prove that the restraining order caused serious harm. The panel also indicated that the original lawsuit, in which Powell also sought to have voting machines inspected, was "considerably delayed" by the appeal.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] Powell's evidence in the Georgia lawsuit included an affidavit from Ron Watkins , a former administrator of 8chan /8kun, the online home of QAnon . In his affidavit, Watkins stated that his reading of an online user guide for Dominion Voting Systems software led him to conclude that election fraud might be "within the realm of possibility". Watkins did not provide any legitimate evidence of fraud.

[ 109 ] Powell also claimed that "a certificate from the [Georgia] Secretary of State was awarded to Dominion Voting Systems but is undated." However, the attached certificate had apparently been edited to remove the date; the actual certificate is dated and available publicly.

[ 94 ] [ 110 ] Batten dismissed the case in a ruling from the bench on December 7.

[ 111 ] The judge ruled that the plaintiffs did not have legal standing to bring the case, filed the case too late (as the Dominion machines were adopted months earlier), and filed the case in the wrong venue, the appropriate venue being a state court.

[ 112 ] Batten also stated that the relief sought by Powell was impossible to grant.

[ 113 ] The plaintiffs filed an appeal (Case No. 20-14579) [ 114 ] of Batten's decision in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit on December 8.

[ 115 ] Powell also appealed the decision to the U.S. Supreme Court, which denied a motion to expedite the case.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] She dropped the lawsuit on January 19, 2021, one day before Biden's inauguration.

[ 118 ] In August 2022, Fulton County district attorney Fani Willis sought to have Powell testify before a special grand jury seated for the investigation into possible illegal election interference. Powell was involved in arranging for the collection of data from election systems and voting machines at the county's elections office in rural Coffee County in January 2021.

[ 119 ] On October 19, 2023, Powell pleaded guilty to six misdemeanor charges for her role in the attempt by the former president and his allies to alter the outcome of the election in the State of Georgia and other states. She was sentenced to serve six years' probation (one year for each charge) and pay a $6,000 fine, and agreed to testify against the other defendants.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] On October 31, 2023, the Georgia secretary of state's chief operating officer, Gabriel Sterling , displayed the final payment check from Powell at a press conference where he said that the check represented an admission that Powell's claims against Georgia's voting machines were false. He said, "If you didn't believe the three recounts, if you didn't believe the investigations, if you didn't believe the court cases, this check shows you she says, yes, I lied." [ 123 ] Michigan Powell filed a lawsuit against Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer and other state officials on November 25, alleging a variety of violations of the election code and asking the court to decertify the state's election results or certify them for Trump.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] In the lawsuit, Powell submitted a witness's declaration that Joe Biden had "received more than 100% of the votes" in Edison County; however, there is no Edison County in Michigan or any other U.S. state.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] There is an Edison Township in Minnesota, leading to speculation that the information was again taken from a list of Minnesota precincts.

[ 128 ] U.S. district judge Linda V. Parker denied the requested relief on December 7, stating that the plaintiffs had only offered "theories, conjecture, and speculation" of potential vote switching. The judge also declared that the "ship has sailed" for most of the relief requested by the plaintiffs, while the rest "is beyond the power of any court". Furthermore, Parker wrote that the relief requested would "greatly harm the public interest" and felt that the plaintiffs' motive for filing the case was not to win, but rather to shake "people's faith in the democratic process and their trust in our government".

[ 129 ] Powell has filed an appeal of the decision in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, [ 130 ] as well as the U.S. Supreme Court, which denied a motion for expedited review of the case.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] The city of Detroit has called for sanctions against the plaintiffs in the case as well as their counsel, requesting that Powell and the other attorneys be disbarred for "trying to use this court's processes to validate their conspiracy theories".

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] Michigan attorney general Dana Nessel filed a similar motion on January 28, 2021, accusing Powell and three Michigan lawyers of violating their oaths by attempting to overturn Biden's victory.

[ 133 ] On February 1, 2021, Nessel, along with Michigan governor Whitmer and Michigan secretary of state Jocelyn Benson , filed complaints with the State Bar of Texas seeking Powell's disbarment .

[ 134 ] During a July 2021 hearing to consider sanctions against Powell and other attorneys for their activities in Michigan, Parker discussed the hundreds of pages of allegations by others that the attorneys had submitted to courts, which included an individual claiming to have witnessed poll workers changing votes from Trump to Biden. None of the attorneys responded when Parker asked if they had spoken to the witness to vet their allegation.

[ 135 ] On August 25, 2021, Judge Parker ruled that Powell, L. Lin Wood , and seven other pro-Trump lawyers had filed the suit "in bad faith and for an improper purpose"; that their litigation was  "a historic and profound abuse of the judicial process"; and that they had filed "baseless and frivolous lawsuits in order to undermine public confidence in the democratic process." The court ordered that they pay attorney's fees to the City of Detroit and State of Michigan to reimburse them for the costs of defending against the suit, and referred them to their respective state bars for investigation into ethical violations, which could lead to disbarment .

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] [ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] On November 4, 2021, a closed-door investigatory hearing was held by the State Bar of Texas to begin the process of determining possible sanctions or disbarment for Powell.

[ 141 ] On December 2, 2021, Judge Parker ordered Powell, Wood and the other "Kraken" attorneys to pay $175,250 to the city of Detroit and the state of Michigan.

[ 142 ] Wisconsin Powell filed a federal lawsuit against the Wisconsin Elections Commission on December 1, claiming that Dominion Voting Systems and Smartmatic were used to conduct electronic ballot-stuffing and rig votes for Joe Biden. The lawsuit asked the court to decertify the state's election results or declare Donald Trump the winner of the state.

[ 143 ] The lawsuit mistakenly demanded the release of video footage from a voting center in Michigan and made erroneous references to the election in Georgia and the Georgia state legislature.

[ 94 ] U.S. district judge Pamela Pepper filed a December 2 order noting that while an "expedited" injunction was sought, the initial filings did not "indicate whether the plaintiffs are asking the court to act more quickly or why", and did not request a hearing or propose a briefing schedule.

[ 94 ] Pepper dismissed the case on December 9, writing that the "federal court has no authority or jurisdiction to grant the relief the remaining plaintiff seeks", and that the litigation on behalf of the plaintiff was "sometimes odd and often harried" and ultimately failed to establish why a federal case was appropriate. Pepper also repeatedly stated that the plaintiff did not have legal standing to bring the case and concluded that granting the relief would be unconstitutional.

[ 144 ] Powell then applied for a writ of mandamus from the U.S. Supreme Court, which rejected her petition on March 1, 2021, to end the lawsuit; Powell said the court's decision "completes the implosion of each of our three branches of government into the rubble of a sinkhole of corruption".

[ 145 ] Defamation lawsuits against Powell Dominion Voting Systems sent a letter to Powell on December 16, 2020, demanding she publicly retract her baseless allegations about the company.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] Shortly thereafter, the Trump legal team instructed dozens of staff members to preserve all documents relating to Dominion, Powell and others for any future litigation.

[ 148 ] Smartmatic sent a similar demand letter to conservative television outlets and within days Fox News, its sister network Fox Business, as well as Newsmax broadcast segments walking back conspiracy allegations they had previously promoted.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] On January 8, 2021, Dominion sued Powell for defamation and asked for over $1.3 billion in damages.

[ 152 ] [ 66 ] [ 146 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] On February 4, 2021, Smartmatic filed a defamation lawsuit that accused Powell, Fox News, some hosts at Fox News, and Rudy Giuliani of engaging in a "disinformation campaign" against the company, and asked for $2.7 billion in damages.

[ 156 ] [ 66 ] [ 146 ] [ 153 ] [ 157 ] In March 2022 a New York State Supreme Court judge dismissed the Smartmatic allegations against Powell on jurisdictional grounds; [ 158 ] however, the company had already filed a second lawsuit in Washington, D.C. in anticipation of the New York ruling.

[ 159 ] On March 22, 2021, lawyers defending Powell against Dominion's lawsuit filed a motion to dismiss the lawsuit. They argued that "no reasonable person would conclude that the statements [by Powell about the 2020 election] were truly statements of fact". Instead, "it was clear to reasonable persons that Powell's claims were her opinions and legal theories", argued the lawyers.

[ 160 ] Furthermore, the lawyers claimed that Dominion could not prove that Powell took action with "actual malice", because "she believed the allegations then and she believes them now".

[ 161 ] On August 11, 2021, Judge Carl Nichols denied this motion to dismiss the lawsuit.

[ 155 ] A scheduling order filed March 1, 2022, for Dominion's suit against Powell and parallel lawsuits against Rudy Giuliani and My Pillow, Inc.

, calls for depositions and pretrial motions through September 2023.

[ 162 ] Venezuelan businessman Majed Khalil sued Powell, Fox News, and Lou Dobbs for $250 million in December 2021, alleging they had falsely implicated him in rigging Dominion and Smartmatic machines.

[ 163 ] The lawsuit was settled out of court for an undisclosed amount in April 2023.

[ 164 ] QAnon Powell has been described by some sources as a supporter of the QAnon conspiracy theory, [ 165 ] [ 166 ] a far-right conspiracy theory which alleges that a cabal of Satan-worshipping pedophiles is running a global child sex-trafficking ring and plotting against former president Donald Trump, who is fighting the cabal.

[ 167 ] In January 2020, Powell denied knowledge of QAnon or Q; [ 4 ] later that year, she retweeted major QAnon accounts and catchphrases and appeared on QAnon shows on YouTube.

[ 166 ] Upon leaving Trump's legal team, Powell was embraced by QAnon followers, many of whom had become discouraged that years of predictions of a Trump landslide victory and coming revelations about his enemies had not materialized.

[ 168 ] [ 92 ] On January 8, 2021, Twitter permanently suspended the accounts of Powell, Michael Flynn and others. A statement from Twitter said this development was in line with their policies on "coordinated harmful activity".

[ 169 ] In May 2021, Powell (alongside Lin Wood and Michael Flynn ) was a keynote speaker at what was essentially a QAnon conference in Dallas, Texas .

[ 170 ] Texas Bar petition against Powell On March 1, 2022, the State Bar of Texas's Commission for Lawyer Discipline submitted in court a disciplinary petition against Powell [ 171 ] alleging that she had violated several rules of professional conduct, such as those about making false statements to a tribunal, using evidence known to be false, and engaging in dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] On February 23, 2023, Judge Andrea Bouressa of the 471st District Court dismissed the petition, on the grounds of the commission failing to meet the burden of proof that Powell had indeed violated Texas's attorney code of conduct. In her decision, the judge also admonished the commission for not "properly labeling" the exhibits in its filing, which led to the consideration of only two of them.

[ 174 ] Political fundraising In November 2020, Powell established Legal Defense Fund for the American Republic, a 501(c)(4) nonprofit organization with stated purpose to collect funds to help prosecute fraud in U.S. elections.

[ 175 ] Powell launched Restore the Republic, a super PAC , in January 2021.

[ 176 ] In November 2021, The Washington Post reported that the preceding September federal prosecutors had issued a subpoena for the financial records of groups Powell had formed, including Defending the Republic, which was registered as a social welfare organization , and a political action committee by the same name. Days after the election, Powell created a website to raise funds for her new organization, referring to "Sidney Powell's Legal Defense Fund," asking donors to make checks payable to her law firm.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] The Daily Beast reported that the organization's board of directors initially included Michael Flynn and Lin Wood , and Patrick Byrne as CEO. All left the organization in April 2021 after Powell refused to allow it to be audited. In a recorded phone call with Wood that Byrne confirmed as authentic, Byrne asserted Powell was diverting donations to pay for her legal defense against defamation lawsuits.

[ 179 ] Defending the Republic raised $16.4 million in the year following the election.

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] The group spent millions to fund the legal defense of the January 6 defendants; its expenditures, as well as reduced donations, substantially reduced DTR's cash on hand, but it still has more than $5 million as of November 2022.

[ 182 ] As a dark money group, Defending the Republic is not required to disclose its donors.

[ 182 ] Criminal charges and guilty plea As part of the prosecution of Donald Trump in Georgia , on August 14, 2023, she was indicted by a grand jury for violating Georgia's Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) statute along with 18 other alleged co-conspirators, including Trump himself. She was also charged with two counts of conspiracy to commit election fraud; and one count of each of the following conspiracies to commit: computer theft, computer trespass, computer invasion of privacy, and defraud the state—for a total of seven felony counts.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Powell turned herself in at the Fulton County jail on August 23, 2023.

[ 185 ] On October 19, 2023, Powell pleaded guilty to six misdemeanor counts related to her role in Trump's attempts to overturn the election and her own role in breaching electoral equipment security in Coffee County, Georgia. She agreed to a sentence of six years' probation, a $6,000 fine and $2,700 in restitution, and to write a letter of apology to the people of Georgia.

[ 120 ] [ 186 ] She will also testify in other cases.

[ 187 ] Within a week, Trump claimed that Powell was "not my attorney, and never was", despite his November 2020 Twitter statement that "Sidney Powell ... [has been] added to our other wonderful lawyers and representatives".

[ 188 ] Powell's guilty plea was generally analyzed in American news media as a major victory for prosecutors against Trump and his associates.

The New York Times ' Alan Feuer and Maggie Haberman noted Powell as the first time that prosecutors collaborated with a major co-conspirator of Trump's attempts to overturn the election. Both also noted the potential for Powell's guilty plea to legitimize other criminal charges against other figures involved in both Georgia's racketeering cases and Jack Smith 's federal charges against Trump and his associates.

[ 189 ] The Atlantic echoed these concerns, with journalist David A. Graham comparing the relationship between Powell's plea and the other figures charged in the Georgia racketeering case to the prisoner's dilemma .

[ 190 ] Likewise, CNN analyst Marshall Cohen viewed the Powell plea as having the potential to incriminate anyone who worked with Powell during the attempts to overturn the election, though Cohen said that the plea deal in Georgia could open up Powell to prosecution by Jack Smith and a potential second plea deal with him, where she is alluded to as an unindicted co-conspirator .

[ 191 ] Alternatively, PBS News Georgia correspondent Stephen Fowler said Powell's testimony was potentially unreliable, and cited Trump's lawyer's assertion that Powell's testimony would exonerate the former president.

[ 192 ] Writing Powell has written opinion pieces for The New York Observer , The Daily Caller , The Hill , National Review , [ 19 ] Fox News, and media organizations and conservative content producers.

[ 193 ] [ 20 ] She has written two published books: Powell, Sidney K. (May 1, 2014).

Licensed to Lie: Exposing Corruption in the Department of Justice . Brown Books.

ISBN 978-1-61254-149-5 .

OCLC 870288205 .

[ 194 ] Powell, Sidney K.; Silverglate, Harvey A.

(February 18, 2020).

Conviction Machine: Standing Up to Federal Prosecutorial Abuse .

Encounter Books .

ISBN 978-1-59403-803-7 .

OCLC 1104857327 .

In addition, she has published several journal articles on law practice. Examples include: Powell, Sidney (1988).

"Federal Jurisdiction in Criminal Appeals—Appealable Orders in the Fifth Circuit" .

Texas Tech Law Review .

19 (3): 1003– 1028.

Powell, Sidney (1990).

"Federal Appeals in the Fifth Circuit: Tips for the Texas Practitioner" .

Baylor Law Review .

42 (1): 97– 140.

Gabriel, Henry D; Powell, Sidney (1994).

Federal Appellate Practice Guide: Fifth Circuit . Rochester, New York: Lawyers Cooperative Publishing.

OCLC 30772185 .

Personal life and other ventures Powell has a son from a marriage that ended in divorce "decades ago".

[ 5 ] In 2004, she founded a non-profit for victims of domestic violence . She has participated in volunteer work for women's shelters and other charities. Powell was not recalled as "being a staunch conservative or even very political" by people who interacted with her in those organizations.

[ 5 ] Powell served as executive producer on the 2013 drama Decoding Annie Parker , providing guidance to help bring the film to a commercial release. The film tells the story of Annie Parker [ 195 ] and the discovery of the BRCA1 breast cancer gene. Powell oversaw fundraising screenings for the film that raised approximately $1 million for breast cancer charities.

[ 196 ] See also List of alleged Georgia election racketeers List of federal political scandals in the United States References ^ File:Donald Trump Indictment in Georgia.pdf ^ "Powell, Sidney K." Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 16, 2020 .

^ McBurney, Robert C. I. (August 22, 2022).

"Certificate of material witness pursuant to uniform act to secure the attendance of witnesses from without the state, codified in the state of Georgia as O.C.G.A. §24-13-90 et. seq.

" – via Clerk of Superior Court of Fulton County, Georgia.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Kloor, Keith (January 17, 2020).

"The #MAGA Lawyer Behind Michael Flynn's Scorched-Earth Legal Strategy" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ a b c d e Morill, Jim (November 21, 2020).

"Sidney Powell's road from UNC to defending Trump's supposed 'landslide' reelection" .

Charlotte Observer .

^ "Commencement 1978 – University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill" . University of North Carolina Library digital archive. May 14, 1978 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ a b c Thompson, Elizabeth (November 23, 2020).

"5 things to know about Sidney Powell, the Dallas lawyer formerly on Trump's legal team" .

Dallas News .

^ "Sidney Powell P.C." Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ Boyle, John.

"Answer Man: Is Trump lawyer Sidney Powell an Asheville resident?" .

The Asheville Citizen Times . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ "5 things to know about Sidney Powell, the Dallas lawyer formerly on Trump's legal team" .

Dallas News . November 23, 2020.

, ^ a b c d e f g h Davis, Aaron C.; Dawsey, Josh; Brown, Emma; Swaine, Jon (November 28, 2020).

"For Trump advocate Sidney Powell, a playbook steeped in conspiracy theories" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved November 30, 2020 .

^ McKinley, James C. Jr. (July 29, 2008).

"Jamiel A. Chagra, 63, Drug Kingpin, Dies (Published 2008)" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ Contreras, Guillermo (August 26, 2017).

"Judge's 1979 slaying was 'crime of the century' " .

San Antonio Express-News . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ Wisenberg, S.L. (October 27, 2014).

"Too Much Skin in the Game? A Review of Sidney Powell's Licensed To Lie" .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Harris, Andrew; Farrell, Greg (June 12, 2019).

"Michael Flynn's new lawyer is firebrand DOJ critic Sidney Powell" .

Providence Journal . Retrieved November 24, 2020 .

^ Wickert, David.

"Sidney Powell's journey: From prosecutor to prosecuted" .

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution .

ISSN 1539-7459 . Retrieved September 30, 2024 .

^ Breuninger, Kevin; Mangan, Dan (June 12, 2019).

"Michael Flynn hires new lawyer, Sidney Powell, who had urged him to withdraw guilty plea in Mueller case" .

CNBC . Retrieved March 24, 2021 .

^ Neil A. Lewis (October 27, 2008).

"Justice Dept. Moves to Void Stevens Case" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 24, 2021 .

^ a b "Sidney Powell" .

National Review . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ a b "Sidney Powell" .

Observer .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ a b c "Michael Flynn hires Dallas lawyer Sidney Powell, a conspiracy theorist who calls Mueller a 'creep' " .

Dallas News . June 12, 2019.

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Mazzetti, Mark; Savage, Charlie; Goldman, Adam (June 28, 2020).

"How Michael Flynn's Defense Team Found Powerful Allies" .

The New York Times .

^ Powell, Sidney (June 6, 2019).

"Letter to William Barr re Internal review, Brady , IG Report, Declassification, and Lt. General Michael Flynn (retired)" (PDF) . Sidney Powell, P.C.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 4, 2019 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Mazzetti, Mark; Savage, Charlie; Goldman, Adam (June 28, 2020).

"How Michael Flynn's Defense Team Found Powerful Allies" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Polantz, Katelyn (May 7, 2020).

"Justice Department drops criminal case against Michael Flynn" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ "Full D.C. Circuit Court Rejects Michael Flynn's Emergency Petition for Immediate Dismissal of Criminal Case" .

Lawandcrime.com . August 31, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Tucker, Eric (August 11, 2020).

"Appeals court seems wary of ordering dismissal of Flynn case" .

Star Tribune .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ " 'That's Not True and You Know It,' Federal Judge Tells DOJ Lawyer in Flynn Matter" .

Courthousenews.com . August 11, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Hsu, Spencer S.; Marimow, Ann E.

"Michael Flynn judge says pardon doesn't mean ex-national security adviser is innocent" – via www.washingtonpost.com.

^ Tucker, Eric (November 25, 2020).

"Trump pardons Flynn despite guilty plea in Russia probe" .

Associated Press . Retrieved November 26, 2020 .

^ "Justice Department defends prosecutors in Flynn case" .

Politico . June 17, 2020.

^ "United States v. Michael T. Flynn, Crim. No. 17-232 (D.D.C. 2020) – Government's Response to Court-Appointed Amicus Curiae, the Honorable John Gleeson (Ret.)" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ "Fact check: TV news clip does not show 'live computerized fraud' on Election Day 2020" .

Reuters . November 10, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Fichera, Angelo; Spencer, Saranac Hale (November 13, 2020).

"Bogus Theory Claims Supercomputer Switched Votes in Election" .

FactCheck.org .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Fichera, Angelo; Spencer, Saranac Hale (November 13, 2020).

"Bogus Theory Claims Supercomputer Switched Votes in Election" .

FactCheck.org . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ a b c d e f Sarah Ellison and Amy Gardner (March 16, 2023).

At center of Fox News lawsuit, Sidney Powell and a 'wackadoodle' email , The Washington Post . Retrieved March 18, 2023.

^ Walsh, Joe (November 20, 2020).

"Who Is Sidney Powell? Meet Trump's New Top Conspiracy Theorist" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ a b c d Bump, Philip.

"Here's how seriously you should take the Trump legal team's conspiracy theories" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Qiu, Linda (November 19, 2020).

"How Sidney Powell inaccurately cited Venezuela's elections as evidence of U.S. fraud" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Leibovich, Mark (November 20, 2020).

"Trump's Legal Team Sets a Precedent for Lowering the Bar" .

The New York Times .

^ a b Fichera, Angelo; Spencer, Saranac Hale (November 13, 2020).

"Bogus Theory Claims Supercomputer Switched Votes in Election" .

FactCheck.org .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ a b "Repudiating Trump, officials say election 'most secure' " .

AP NEWS . November 13, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ "Trump legal team to file new ballot lawsuits" .

Fox News . November 8, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ Trump, Donald [@realDonaldTrump] (November 15, 2020).

"I look forward to Mayor Giuliani spearheading the legal effort to defend OUR RIGHT to FREE and FAIR ELECTIONS! Rudy Giuliani, Joseph diGenova, Victoria Toensing, Sidney Powell, and Jenna Ellis, a truly great team, added to our other wonderful lawyers and representatives!" ( Tweet ).

Archived from the original on August 16, 2022 . Retrieved December 8, 2022 – via Twitter .

^ a b c Blake, Aaron (November 20, 2020).

"The Trump campaign's much-hyped affidavit features a big, glaring error" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Emma Brown; Aaron C. Davis; Jon Swaine; Josh Dawsey (May 9, 2021).

"The making of a myth" .

The Washington Post .

^ a b c "Giuliani cites affidavit with crucial errors in press conference" .

PolitiFact . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Williams, Jordan (November 20, 2020).

"Trump lawyers cited Minnesota counties in affidavit about Michigan: report" .

The Hill . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Sherman, Jake; Palmer, Anna; Ross, Garrett; Okun, Eli (November 19, 2020).

"POLITICO Playbook PM: Rudy" .

POLITICO .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 19, 2020 .

^ Peters, Jeremy W.; Feuer, Alan (December 8, 2020).

"What We Know About Sidney Powell, the Lawyer Behind Wild Voting Conspiracy Theories" .

The New York Times – via NYTimes.com.

^ Kessler, Glenn.

"Analysis | Fact-checking the craziest news conference of the Trump presidency" – via www.washingtonpost.com.

^ Subramaniam, Tara; Lybrand, Holmes.

"Fact checking Giuliani and the Trump legal team's wild, fact-free press conference" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Darcy, Oliver.

"Company debunks conspiracy theory that its server showed a landslide for Trump" .

CNN . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Qiu, Linda (November 20, 2020).

"Trump allies are among the frequent purveyors of election misinformation" .

The New York Times .

^ Joffe-Block, Jude (November 14, 2020).

"False reports claim election servers were seized in Germany" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ "Scytl strongly denies the false information related to the U.S. elections" .

Scytl . November 13, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Roose, Kevin (November 18, 2020).

"No, the Army didn't seize a German server showing a Trump landslide" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Barnes, Julian E. (March 16, 2021).

"Russian Interference in 2020 Included Influencing Trump Associates, Report Says" .

The New York Times – via NYTimes.com.

^ Steakin, Will (November 16, 2021).

"Trump allies pressed Defense Department to help overturn election, new book says" . ABC News.

^ Carlson, Tucker (November 19, 2020).

"Tucker Carlson: Time for Sidney Powell to show us her evidence" .

Fox News . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ "Trump lawyer Sidney Powell says Georgia election lawsuit "will be biblical," suggests GOP governor helped Biden" .

Newsweek . November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ "Trump campaign cuts ties with attorney Sidney Powell after bizarre election fraud claims" .

The Guardian . Associated Press. November 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Haberman, Maggie; Feuer, Alan (November 22, 2020).

"Trump Team Disavows Lawyer Who Peddled Conspiracy Theories on Voting" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 26, 2020 .

^ "Sidney Powell Goes After Brian Kemp Over Election Conspiracy" . Mediaite. November 22, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ "Sidney Powell: Trump team cuts ties with lawyer who peddled bizarre fraud claims" .

BBC News . November 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 24, 2020 .

^ a b c Carney, Jordain (November 19, 2020).

"Ernst: Trump lawyer claim that candidates pay to rig elections 'absolutely outrageous' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Smith, David (November 21, 2020).

"Trump makes futile last stand to overturn results as Georgia certifies Biden win" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ "Sidney Powell: "The entire election, frankly, in all the swing states should be overturned and the legislatures should make sure that the electors are selected for Trump" " .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ "Trump campaign legal team distances itself from Powell" .

AP NEWS . November 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ "Trump legal team disavows association with lawyer Sidney Powell" .

CBS News . November 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ "Trump campaign cuts Sidney Powell from president's legal team" .

POLITICO . November 22, 2020.

^ Sonmez, Felicia; Dawsey, Josh (November 22, 2020).

"Giuliani releases statement distancing Trump campaign from lawyer Sidney Powell" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Wolfe, Jan (November 22, 2020).

"Trump campaign says Sidney Powell not a member of legal team" .

Reuters .

^ Bowden, John (November 22, 2020).

"Giuliani distances Trump campaign from attorney Sidney Powell" .

The Hill . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Kevin Liptak and Pamela Brown.

"Heated Oval Office meeting included talk of special counsel, martial law as Trump advisers clash" .

CNN .

^ Maggie Haberman [@maggieNYT] (December 21, 2020).

"Four people briefed on events said Sidney Powell was back at the White House again today, for third time in four days" ( Tweet ).

Archived from the original on April 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 2, 2021 – via Twitter .

^ Wolfe, Jan (November 23, 2020).

"Trump campaign parts ways with Powell after vote-switching claim" . Reuters.

^ Buchanan, Christopher (November 27, 2020).

"Dominion Voting Systems responds to 'wild and reckless' claims by Sidney Powell on website" .

WTIC-TV . Retrieved November 29, 2020 .

^ Woodruff Swan, Betsy (January 21, 2022).

"Read the never-issued Trump order that would have seized voting machines" .

Politico .

^ Woodruff Swan, Betsy (January 24, 2022).

"Kerik told Jan. 6 panel that former Army colonel came up with idea to seize voting machines" .

Politico .

^ "Trump sought to tap Sidney Powell as special counsel for election fraud" .

POLITICO . December 19, 2020.

^ Haberman, Maggie ; Kanno-Youngs, Zolan (December 19, 2020).

"Trump Discussed Naming Campaign Lawyer as Special Counsel on Election Fraud" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 19, 2020 .

^ Kevin Liptak; Pamela Brown.

"Heated Oval Office meeting included talk of special counsel, martial law as Trump advisers clash" .

CNN .

^ Blake, Aaron (October 19, 2023).

"Analysis | What could Sidney Powell testify to now that she's pleaded guilty?" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved October 19, 2023 .

'I think that it got to the point where the screaming was completely, completely out there,' Trump White House lawyer Eric Herschmann testified to the House Jan. 6 committee.

^ Chen, Shawna (March 22, 2021).

"Pro-Trump lawyer Sidney Powell moves to dismiss Dominion defamation suit" .

Axios .

^ Lemon, Jason (May 30, 2021).

"Sidney Powell Claims Trump 'Can Simply Be Reinstated,' Biden Told to Leave White House" .

newsweek.com .

Newsweek . Retrieved May 30, 2021 .

^ Relman, Eliza (May 31, 2021).

"Ex-Trump lawyer Sidney Powell showed up to a QAnon conference in a biker vest and falsely claimed Trump could be 'reinstated' as president" .

Business Insider . Retrieved June 1, 2021 .

^ Tara Subramaniam.

"Fact check: No, Trump can't 'simply be reinstated' as president" .

CNN .

^ Zachary Cohen; Annie Grayer (January 18, 2022).

"January 6 committee subpoenas Giuliani and 3 others" . CNN.

^ January 6 Committee (January 18, 2022).

"Letter to Sidney Powell" (PDF) . Letter to Sidney Powell.

{{ cite press release }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Murdock, Sebastian (February 19, 2022).

"Sidney Powell Sues To Block Subpoena By Jan. 6 Committee For Phone Records" .

HuffPost . Retrieved February 21, 2022 .

^ a b Alba, Davey (November 17, 2020).

" 'Release the Kraken,' a catchphrase for unfounded conspiracy theory, trends on Twitter" .

The New York Times .

^ Brumback, Kate (December 10, 2020).

"Sidney Powell unrelenting in legal battle on Trump's behalf" .

Associated Press . Retrieved December 24, 2020 .

^ a b c d e Montellaro, Zach; Cheney, Kyle (December 3, 2020).

"Pro-Trump legal crusade peppered with bizarre blunders" .

Politico . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

^ Breuninger, Kevin (December 4, 2020).

"Sidney Powell amends court filing that mistakenly said Georgia votes were flipped from Biden to Trump" .

CNBC . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ a b Blake, Aaron (December 3, 2020).

"Trump allies' sloppy, error-riddled legal effort" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on December 3, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ Aarons, Tony (November 26, 2020).

"Ex-Trump Lawyer Sidney Powell Files Election Suits in 'DISTRCOICT' Court" .

Bloomberg News . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ Brown, Emma; Davis, Aaron; Crites, Alice (December 11, 2020).

"Sidney Powell's secret 'military intelligence expert,' key to fraud claims in election lawsuits, never worked in military intelligence" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 13, 2020 .

^ Swaine, Jon.

"Sidney Powell's secret intelligence contractor witness is a pro-Trump podcaster" – via www.washingtonpost.com.

^ "Bowyer v. Ducey" .

Stanford-MIT Healthy Elections Project .

^ "Docket for Bowyer v. Ducey, 2:20-cv-02321" .

CourtListener . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

^ Fischer, Howard (December 9, 2020).

"Federal judge tosses last lawsuit that remained against Arizona's election results" .

Arizona Daily Star . Capitol Media Services . Retrieved December 10, 2020 .

^ a b Billeaud, Jacques (December 10, 2020).

"Powell trying to resurrect bid to undo Biden's Arizona win" .

Associated Press . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

^ "Supreme Court Rejects Sidney Powell's Election Fraud Petitions without Further Comment" . March 1, 2021.

^ "Trump supporters file lawsuit asking Georgia to decertify election, declare Trump the winner" .

WSBTV .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2020 . Retrieved November 28, 2020 .

^ Gerstein, Josh (December 1, 2020).

"Judge: 'Precious little proof' in Georgia election fraud suit" .

Politico . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ Cheney, Kyle; Gerstein, Josh (December 4, 2020).

"Donald Trump's brutal day in court" .

Politico . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ Larson, Erik (December 5, 2020).

"Georgia Says Ex-Trump Lawyer Suit Could Hinder Senate Runoff" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ Harwell, Drew (December 1, 2020).

"To boost voter-fraud claims, Trump advocate Sidney Powell turns to unusual source: The longtime operator of QAnon's Internet home" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 2, 2020 .

^ Hohmann, James; Alfaro, Mariana (December 2, 2020).

"The Daily 202: Trump's threat to veto NDAA follows pattern of tenuously invoking 'National Security' " .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

^ Fowler, Stephen (December 7, 2020).

"Judge Finds 'Kraken' Election Challenge Lacking, Dismisses Lawsuit" .

Georgia Public Broadcasting . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ Carr, Nicole (December 7, 2020).

"Federal judge dismisses Sidney Powell lawsuit seeking to decertify Georgia's elections" .

WSB-TV . Retrieved December 10, 2020 .

^ Breuninger, Kevin; Mangan, Dan (December 7, 2020).

"Federal judge dismisses Sidney Powell lawsuit that sought to overturn Trump loss in Georgia" .

CNBC . Retrieved December 10, 2020 .

^ "Court of Appeals Docket #: 20-14579" . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ Choi, Joseph (December 8, 2020).

"Sidney Powell appeals dismissal of lawsuit to overturn Georgia election result" .

TheHill .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ a b Stohr, Greg (December 15, 2020).

"Ex-Trump Lawyer Asks Supreme Court to Nullify Two Biden Wins" .

Bloomberg News . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

^ a b Durkee, Alison (January 11, 2021).

"Supreme Court Refuses To Consider GOP Post-Election Cases Before Biden Takes Office" .

Forbes . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

^ Durkee, Alison (January 19, 2021).

"Sidney Powell Drops Georgia Kracken Lawsuit On Eve Of Biden's Inauguration" .

Forbes . Retrieved January 19, 2021 .

^ "Trump election probe in Georgia cites voting system breach" .

AP News . August 26, 2022 . Retrieved August 27, 2022 .

^ a b Durkee, Alison.

"Sidney Powell Pleads Guilty In Georgia Election Case" .

Forbes .

^ "Trump's ex-lawyer Sidney Powell pleads guilty in Georgia election case" .

The Guardian . October 19, 2023.

^ "Sidney Powell pleads guilty in case over efforts to overturn Trump's Georgia loss and gets probation" .

AP News . October 19, 2023 . Retrieved October 19, 2023 .

^ Gray, Justin (November 1, 2023).

"Former Trump attorney, election denier Sidney Powell pays restitution to Ga. Secretary of State" .

WSB-TV . Retrieved November 3, 2023 .

^ "King v. Whitmer" (PDF) . November 25, 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 26, 2020 . Retrieved November 25, 2020 .

^ "King v. Whitmer" .

Stanford-MIT Healthy Elections Project .

Archived from the original on December 9, 2020 . Retrieved December 9, 2020 .

^ Mikkelson, David (December 1, 2020).

"Sidney Powell Lawsuit Cites Election Fraud in Non-Existent Michigan County" .

Snopes . Retrieved December 2, 2020 .

^ Pierce, Charles P. (December 1, 2020).

"Sidney Powell Is the Elite Legal Strike Force's Elite Legal Kraken Keeper Trump's legal eagle flies into Edison County, Michigan, which does not exist" . Esquire . Retrieved December 2, 2020 .

^ Halpert, Madeline; Oosting, Jonathan; Shaheen, Mansur (December 1, 2020).

"Weeks after vote, 13 fake fraud claims persist in Michigan. Here's the truth" . Bridge Michigan . Retrieved December 2, 2020 .

^ Mauger, Craig (December 7, 2020).

"Federal judge upholds Michigan election: 'The people have spoken' " .

The Detroit News . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ "Fact check: Six Michigan areas did not have voter turnouts of more than 100%" .

Reuters . December 17, 2020 . Retrieved December 24, 2020 .

^ Polus, Sarah (January 5, 2021).

"Detroit asks federal judge to disbar 'Kraken' team that fought in court to overturn election results" .

The Hill . Retrieved January 29, 2021 .

^ McEvoy, Jemima (January 6, 2021).

"Detroit Files Request To Sanction, Potentially Disbar Sidney Powell And Other 'Kraken' Lawyers" .

Forbes . Retrieved January 29, 2021 .

^ Foster, Wells; Darling, Tom (January 28, 2021).

"AG Nessel seeks sanctions on Sidney Powell, other lawyers over election lawsuits" .

WLNS . Retrieved January 29, 2021 .

^ Mauger, Craig; LeBlanc, Beth (February 1, 2021).

"Whitmer, Nessel seek disbarment of lawyers in election challenge" .

Detroit News . Retrieved January 29, 2021 .

^ Helderman, Rosalind (July 12, 2021).

" 'This is really fantastical': Federal judge in Michigan presses Trump-allied lawyers on 2020 election fraud claims in sanctions hearing" .

The Washington Post .

^ Sneed, Tierney (August 25, 2021).

"Judge sanctions pro-Trump lawyers who brought 'frivolous' election fraud lawsuits" .

CNN . Retrieved August 25, 2021 .

^ "Civil Case No. 20-13134" (PDF) .

^ Feuer, Alan (August 25, 2021).

"Judge Orders Sanctions Against Pro-Trump Lawyers Over Election Lawsuit" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 18, 2023 .

^ Jan Wolfe, 'Profound abuse': Judge disciplines pro-Trump lawyers over election lawsuit , Reuters (August 25, 2021).

^ Alan Feuer, Judge Orders Sanctions Against Pro-Trump Lawyers Over Election Lawsuit , New York Times (August 25, 2021).

^ Durkee, Alison (August 26, 2021).

"Sidney Powell To Face Texas State Bar Investigation—Potentially Leading To Her Disbarment" .

Forbes .

^ "Sidney Powell, team ordered to pay $175,250 in fees for Michigan election case" .

^ "Complaint for Declaratory, Emergency, and Permanent Injunctive Relief" (PDF) .

Democracy Docket .

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ "Election lawsuit involving La Crosse Co. GOP chair dismissed in federal court" .

WXOW . December 10, 2020 . Retrieved December 10, 2020 .

^ Weigel, David (March 3, 2021).

"The Trailer: Why Republicans keep running against trans rights" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

^ a b c Naham, Matt (December 17, 2020).

"Days After Smartmatic's Legal Threat, Dominion Voting Systems Follows Suit with Demand Letter to Sidney Powell" .

Law & Crime . Retrieved February 2, 2021 .

^ Clare, Thomas A.; Meier, Megan L.; Clare Locke LLP (December 16, 2020).

"Re: Defamatory Falsehoods About Dominion" . Letter to Sidney Powell.

Dominion Voting Systems .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2020.

Your false accusations about Dominion are defamatory per se and have exposed you, the entities you control, and the Trump Campaign to substantial legal risk for defamation.  As a result of your false accusations, Dominion has suffered enormous harm, and its employees have been stalked, have been harassed, and have received death threats.  For the safety of Dominion's employees and for the sake of the truth and confidence in American democracy, we demand that you immediately and publicly retract your false accusations and set the record straight.  If you refuse to do so and instead choose to stand by your defamatory falsehoods, that will be viewed as additional evidence of actual malice.

^ Kaitlan Collins, Kevin Liptak and Pamela Brown.

"Trump campaign told to preserve all documents related to Sidney Powell and Dominion Voting Systems" .

CNN .

^ Barr, Jeremy.

"Lou Dobbs debunks his own claims of election fraud — after a legal demand from Smartmatic" – via www.washingtonpost.com.

^ Barr, Jeremy.

"Newsmax issues sweeping 'clarification' debunking its own coverage of election misinformation" – via www.washingtonpost.com.

^ "Maria Bartiromo Airs Fact-Check, Adds 'We Will Keep Investigating' " . December 20, 2020.

^ Feuer, Alan (January 8, 2021).

"Dominion Voting Systems files defamation lawsuit against pro-Trump attorney Sidney Powell" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ a b Darcy, Oliver (February 4, 2021).

"Voting technology company Smartmatic files $2.7 billion lawsuit against Fox News, Rudy Giuliani and Sidney Powell over 'disinformation campaign' " .

CNN . Retrieved February 5, 2021 .

^ Brown, Emma (January 8, 2021).

"Dominion sues pro-Trump lawyer Sidney Powell, seeking more than $1.3 billion" .

Washington Post . Retrieved January 9, 2021 .

^ a b Polantz, Katelyn (August 11, 2021).

"Judge allows defamation lawsuits against Sidney Powell, Rudy Giuliani and MyPillow CEO to go forward" .

CNN .

^ Feuer, Alan (January 8, 2021).

"Dominion Voting Systems files defamation lawsuit against pro-Trump attorney Sidney Powell" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ Coster, Helen (February 5, 2021).

"Smartmatic sues Fox News, Giuliani over election-rigging claims" .

Reuters . Retrieved March 23, 2021 .

^ Stempel, Jonathan (March 8, 2022).

"Smartmatic can pursue election-rigging claims against Fox News, Giuliani" . Reuters.

^ Shamsian, Jacob (March 10, 2022).

"Smartmatic says it's continuing to press its defamation lawsuit against Sidney Powell after a judge dismissed the case" .

Business Insider .

^ Thomsen, Jacqueline (March 22, 2021).

"Facing Defamation, Sidney Powell Says 'No Reasonable Person' Thought Her Election Fraud Claims Were Fact" .

The National Law Journal . Retrieved March 23, 2021 .

^ Tillman, Zoe (March 22, 2021).

"Sidney Powell Now Argues "No Reasonable Person" Would Believe Her Voter Fraud Lies Were "Fact" " .

Buzzfeed News . Retrieved March 23, 2021 .

^ "Scheduling Order" (PDF) . United States District Court for the District of Columbia. March 1, 2022 . Retrieved May 1, 2023 .

^ Shamsian, Jacob (December 28, 2021).

"Venezuelan man files $250 million lawsuit against Fox News and Sidney Powell after baseless accusations that he rigged 2020 election results" .

Business Insider .

^ Farrell, Maureen (April 9, 2023).

"Fox News Settles Defamation Case With Venezuelan Businessman" .

New York Times .

^ Porter, Tom.

"An attorney leading Trump's attempt to subvert the election results is a longtime QAnon supporter" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ a b Gilbert, David (November 20, 2020).

"Trump's Lawyer Sidney Powell Is Hardcore QAnon" .

Vice .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Roose, Kevin (August 28, 2020).

"What Is QAnon, the Viral Pro-Trump Conspiracy Theory?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2020 . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ O'Sullivan, Donie.

"Sidney Powell is a beacon of hope to sad Qanon supporters" .

CNN .

^ Collins, Ben; Zadrozny, Brandy (January 8, 2021).

"Twitter bans Michael Flynn, Sidney Powell in QAnon account purge" .

NBC News . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

^ Palmer, Ewan (April 7, 2021).

"QAnon couple are behind 3-day Dallas event billing Michael Flynn and Sidney Powell" .

Newsweek . Retrieved October 25, 2021 .

^ "Commission for Lawyer Discipline" .

DocumentCloud . District Court of Dallas County, Texas . March 1, 2022 . Retrieved February 27, 2023 .

^ Sneed, Tierney (March 10, 2022).

"Inside the effort to disbar attorneys who backed bogus election lawsuits" .

CNN . Retrieved February 27, 2023 .

^ Torralva, Krista M. (June 22, 2022).

"Case to rebuke Sidney Powell for pushing Donald Trump's election narrative to continue" . Dallasnews.com . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ Sneed, Tierney (February 24, 2023).

"Judge tosses out disciplinary action against Sidney Powell for work on Trump election reversal bid" .

CNN . Retrieved February 27, 2023 .

^ Friedman, Dan (November 17, 2020).

"Michael Flynn's Lawyer Wants to Raise "Millions of Dollars" to Overturn the Election" .

Mother Jones . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Reimann, Nicholas (January 22, 2021).

"Sidney Powell Has Started A Super PAC" .

Forbes . Retrieved January 24, 2021 .

^ Isaac Stanley-Becker; Emma Brown; Rosalind S. Helderman (November 30, 2021).

"Prosecutors demanded records of Sidney Powell's fundraising groups as part of criminal probe" .

The Washington Post .

^ Michael Kunselman (May 15, 2021).

"Company: Ex-Trump lawyer raiding nonprofit for personal use" .

Associated Press .

^ Adam Rawnsley; Asawin Suebsaeng; Will Sommer (November 30, 2021).

"Feds Are Asking Questions About Sidney Powell and Her Pro-Trump Group" .

The Daily Beast .

^ Emma Brown; Rosalind S. Helderman; Isaac Stanley-Becker; Josh Dawsey (December 6, 2021).

"Sidney Powell group raised more than $14 million spreading election falsehoods" .

The Washington Post .

^ Swaine, Jon; Brown, Emma (October 14, 2022).

"Sidney Powell's nonprofit raised $16 million as she spread election falsehoods" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved October 17, 2022 .

^ a b Jack Newsham, Sidney Powell could finally be disbarred after pleading guilty, but she has a dark money org to fall back on , Insider (October 19, 2023).

^ "The People of the State of Georgia v. Donald J. Trump, et al" (PDF) .

Fulton County Superior Court . August 14, 2023 . Retrieved August 14, 2023 – via The Washington Post .

^ Cole, Devan; Murray, Sara; Morris, Jason; Cohen, Marshall (August 14, 2023).

"Here are the names and titles of all 19 people charged in Georgia case" .

CNN . Retrieved August 14, 2023 .

^ Lee, Ella (August 23, 2023).

"Trump campaign attorney Sidney Powell surrenders in Georgia election case" .

The Hill . Retrieved August 23, 2023 .

^ Fausset, Richard; Hakim, Danny (October 19, 2023).

"Sidney Powell Pleads Guilty in Georgia Trump Case" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 19, 2023 .

^ Cohen, Marshall (October 19, 2023).

"Trump attorney Sidney Powell pleads guilty in Georgia election subversion case" .

CNN .

^ Medsger, Matthew (October 22, 2023).

"Trump denies 'Kraken' lawyer Sidney Powell ever worked for him" .

Boston Herald . Archived from the original on October 23, 2023 . Retrieved October 23, 2023 .

^ Feurer, Alan; Haberman, Maggie (October 19, 2022).

"Sidney Powell's Plea Deal Could Be a Threat to Trump" .

The New York Times .

^ Graham, David A. (October 19, 2023).

"What Sidney Powell's Deal Could Mean for the Fulton County Case Against Trump" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved October 20, 2023 .

^ Cohen, Marshall (October 19, 2023).

"How Sidney Powell's guilty plea may impact Donald Trump" .

CNN . Retrieved October 20, 2023 .

^ "What Sidney Powell's guilty plea means for Trump in his Georgia election subversion case" .

PBS NewsHour . October 19, 2023 . Retrieved October 20, 2023 .

^ Mustafa, Filiz (November 16, 2020).

"Who is Sidney Powell?" .

HITC .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ "Review of Licensed to Lie " .

Kirkus Reviews . April 29, 2014.

Archived from the original on May 26, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Highfill, Samantha (May 2, 2014).

"Meet the woman behind 'Decoding Annie Parker' " .

Entertainment Weekly .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2014 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ McNary, Dave (December 4, 2013).

"Samantha Morton-Helen Hunt's 'Decoding Annie Parker' Gets U.S. Distribution" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on August 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 19, 2020 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sidney Powell .

Official website Appearances on C-SPAN Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐6zsq7
Cached time: 20250817053412
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.778 seconds
Real time usage: 1.964 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12451/1000000
Revision size: 121217/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 461327/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8265/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 724530/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.123/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11250743/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1651.800      1 -total
 61.98% 1023.727      1 Template:Reflist
 33.54%  554.024    112 Template:Cite_news
 19.93%  329.169     74 Template:Cite_web
  7.14%  117.951      1 Template:Infobox_person
  6.65%  109.899      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  4.47%   73.902      3 Template:Cite_book
  2.85%   47.094      1 Template:Short_description
  2.54%   42.013      1 Template:Authority_control
  2.25%   37.200      4 Template:Br_separated_entries Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:65843760:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817053412 and revision id 1297256252. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sidney_Powell&oldid=1297256252 " Categories : 1955 births Living people 20th-century American lawyers 20th-century American women writers 21st-century American criminals 21st-century American lawyers 21st-century American women writers American conspiracy theorists American political writers Donald Trump attorneys Lawyers from Dallas Lawyers from Raleigh, North Carolina Needham B. Broughton High School alumni People associated with the 2020 United States presidential election People from Durham, North Carolina Texas Republicans The State of Georgia v. Donald J. Trump, et al. defendants University of North Carolina alumni University of North Carolina School of Law alumni Writers from North Carolina Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use mdy dates from October 2023 Use American English from November 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with hCards All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 02:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sidney Powell 9 languages Add topic

