Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 1.1 Governing body 1.2 Director-General 1.3 Membership 2 Objectives 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Origins 3.1.1 IFTU Bern Conference 3.1.2 Commission on International Labour Legislation 3.2 Interwar period 3.3 Wartime and the United Nations 3.4 Cold War era 4 Offices Toggle Offices subsection 4.1 ILO headquarters 4.2 Regional offices 4.3 Sub-regional offices 4.4 Country and liaison offices 5 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 5.1 Conventions 5.2 International Labour Conference 5.3 Global forum meetings 5.4 Labour statistics 5.5 Training and teaching units 6 Responses to issues Toggle Responses to issues subsection 6.1 Child labour 6.1.1 Exceptions in indigenous communities 6.2 Forced labour 7 Role of Civil Society Organizations in the International Labour Conference Toggle Role of Civil Society Organizations in the International Labour Conference subsection 7.1 Opportunities for Participation 7.2 Minimum wage law 7.3 Commercialized sex 7.4 HIV/AIDS 7.5 Migrant workers 7.6 Domestic workers 7.7 Environmental sustainability 8 Awards 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents International Labour Organization 89 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bislama Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar मैथिली Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Specialized agency of the United Nations "ILO" redirects here. For other uses, see Ilo (disambiguation) .

International Labour Organization [ 1 ] Abbreviation ILO Formation 11 April 1919 ; 106 years ago ( 1919-04-11 ) Type United Nations specialized agency Legal status Active Headquarters Geneva , Switzerland Official languages English Spanish French Director-general Gilbert Houngbo Parent organization United Nations General Assembly United Nations Economic and Social Council Staff 3,651 (2022 [ 2 ] ) Award(s) Nobel Peace Prize (1969) Website ilo .org The International Labour Organization ( ILO ) is a United Nations agency whose mandate is to advance social and economic justice by setting international labour standards .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Founded in October 1919 under the League of Nations , it is one of the first and oldest specialized agencies of the UN . The ILO has 187 member states : 186 out of 193 UN member states plus the Cook Islands . It is headquartered in Geneva , Switzerland, with around 40 field offices around the world, and employs some 3,381 staff across 107 nations, of whom 1,698 work in technical cooperation programmes and projects.

[ 4 ] The ILO's standards are aimed at ensuring accessible, productive, and sustainable work worldwide in conditions of freedom, equity, security and dignity.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] They are set forth in 189 conventions and treaties , of which eight are classified as fundamental according to the 1998 Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work ; together they protect freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining , the elimination of forced or compulsory labour, the abolition of child labour , and the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation. The ILO is a major contributor to international labour law .

Within the UN system the organization has a unique tripartite structure: all standards, policies, and programmes require discussion and approval from the representatives of governments, employers, and workers. This framework is maintained in the ILO's three main bodies: The International Labour Conference, which meets annually to formulate international labour standards; the Governing Body, which serves as the executive council and decides the agency's policy and budget; and the International Labour Office, the permanent secretariat that administers the organization and implements activities. The secretariat is led by the Director-General, Gilbert Houngbo of Togo, who was elected by the Governing Body in 2022.

In 2019, the organization convened the Global Commission on the Future of Work, whose report made ten recommendations for governments to meet the challenges of the 21st century labour environment; these include a universal labour guarantee, social protection from birth to old age and an entitlement to lifelong learning.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] With its focus on international development, it is a member of the United Nations Development Group, a coalition of UN organizations aimed at helping meet the Sustainable Development Goals .

Two milestones in the history of the ILO were the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, establishing the International Labour Organization, Article 427. And secondly, the Declaration of Philadelphia in 1944, reestablishing the ILO under the United Nations and reaffirming the first principle that "labour is not a commodity ".

Structure [ edit ] ILO headquarters in Geneva , Switzerland The ILO is a specialized agency of the United Nations (UN).

[ 9 ] As with other UN specialized agencies (or programmes) working on international development , the ILO is also a member of the United Nations Development Group .

[ 10 ] Unlike other United Nations specialized agencies, the International Labour Organization (ILO) has a tripartite governing structure that brings together governments, employers, and workers of 187 member States, to set labour standards, develop policies and devise programmes promoting decent work for all women and men. The structure is intended to ensure the views of all three groups are reflected in ILO labour standards, policies, and programmes, though governments have twice as many representatives as the other two groups.

Governing body [ edit ] The Governing Body is the executive body of the International Labour Organization. It meets three times a year, in March, June and November. It takes decisions on ILO policy, decides the agenda of the International Labour Conference, adopts the draft Programme and Budget of the Organization for submission to the Conference, elects the Director-General, requests information from the member states concerning labour matters, appoints commissions of inquiry and supervises the work of the International Labour Office.

The Governing Body is composed of 56 titular members (28 governments, 14 employers and 14 workers) and 66 deputy members (28 governments, 19 employers and 19 workers).

Ten of the titular government seats are permanently held by States of chief industrial importance: Brazil , China , France , Germany , India , Italy , Japan , the Russian Federation , the United Kingdom and the United States .

[ 11 ] The other Government members are elected by the Conference every three years (the last elections were held in June 2021).

[ 12 ] The Employer and Worker members are elected in their individual capacity.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Director-General [ edit ] On 25 March 2022 Gilbert Fossoun Houngbo was elected Director-General of ILO.

[ 15 ] On 1 October 2022 he succeeded Guy Ryder , who was elected by the ILO Governing Body in October 2012, and re-elected for a second five-year-term in November 2016.

[ 16 ] He is the organization's first African Director-General. In 2024, a group of African countries that play a crucial role visited the International Labour Office, such as Morocco, where they held talks with the Minister of Economic Integration, Small Business, Employment, and Skills Development, Younes Sekouri.

[ 17 ] The list of the Directors-General of ILO since its establishment in 1919 is as follows: [ 18 ] Name Country Term Albert Thomas France 1919–1932 Harold Butler United Kingdom 1932–1938 John G. Winant United States 1939–1941 Edward J. Phelan Ireland 1941–1948 David A. Morse United States 1948–1970 Clarence Wilfred Jenks United Kingdom 1970–1973 Francis Blanchard France 1974–1989 Michel Hansenne Belgium 1989–1999 Juan Somavía Chile 1999–2012 Guy Ryder United Kingdom 2012–2022 Gilbert Houngbo Togo 2022–present Membership [ edit ] Further information: Member states of the International Labour Organization International Labour Organization flag The ILO has 187 state members. 186 of the 193 member states of the United Nations plus the Cook Islands are members of the ILO.

[ 19 ] The UN member states which are not members of the ILO are Andorra , Bhutan , Liechtenstein , Micronesia , Monaco , Nauru , and North Korea .

[ 20 ] The ILO constitution permits any member of the UN to become a member of the ILO. To gain membership, a nation must inform the director-general that it accepts all the obligations of the ILO constitution.

[ 21 ] Other, non-UN states can be admitted by a two-thirds vote of all delegates, including a two-thirds vote of government delegates, at any ILO General Conference. The Cook Islands, a non-UN state, joined in June 2015.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Countries that had been members of the ILO under the League of Nations remained members when the organization's new constitution came into effect in 1946.

[ 23 ] Objectives [ edit ] The Declaration of Philadelphia (10 May 1944) restated the traditional objectives of the International Labour Organization and then branched out in two new directions: the centrality of human rights to social policy , and the need for international economic planning.

[ 24 ] : 481–2 With the end of the world war in sight, it sought to adapt the guiding principles of the ILO "to the new realities and to the new aspirations aroused by the hopes for a better world." [ 25 ] : 287 It was adopted at the 26th Conference of the ILO in Philadelphia , United States of America.

[ 24 ] : 481 In 1946, when the ILO's constitution was being revised by the General Conference convened in Montreal, the Declaration of Philadelphia was annexed to the constitution and forms an integral part of it by Article 1.

[ 25 ] : 287 Most of the demands of the declaration were a result of a partnership of American and Western European labor unions and the ILO secretariat.

[ 24 ] : 481 "Labour is not a commodity" is the principle expressed in the preamble to the International Labour Organization's founding documents. It expresses the view that people should not be treated like inanimate commodities , capital , another mere factor of production , or resources . Instead, people who work for a living should be treated as human beings and accorded dignity and respect.

Paul O'Higgins attributes the phrase to John Kells Ingram , who used it in 1880 during a meeting in Dublin of the British Trades Union Congress .

[ 26 ] History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] It is the first organization for the UN.While the ILO was established as an agency of the League of Nations following World War I , its founders had made great strides in social thought and action before 1919. The core members all knew one another from earlier private professional and ideological networks, in which they exchanged knowledge, experiences, and ideas on social policy. Pre-war " epistemic communities ", such as the International Association for Labour Legislation (IALL), founded in 1900, and political networks, such as the socialist Second International , were a decisive factor in the institutionalization of international labour politics.

[ 27 ] In the post-World War I euphoria, the idea of a "makeable society" was an important catalyst behind the social engineering of the ILO architects. As a new discipline, international labour law became a useful instrument for putting social reforms into practice. The utopian ideals of the founding members—social justice and the right to decent work—were changed by diplomatic and political compromises made at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, showing the ILO's balance between idealism and pragmatism.

[ 27 ] Over the course of the First World War, the international labour movement proposed a comprehensive programme of protection for the working classes, conceived as compensation for labour's support during the war.

[ clarification needed ] Post-war reconstruction and the protection of labour unions occupied the attention of many nations during and immediately after World War I. In Great Britain, the Whitley Commission , a subcommittee of the Reconstruction Commission, recommended in its July 1918 Final Report that "industrial councils" be established throughout the world.

[ 28 ] The British Labour Party had issued its own reconstruction programme in the document titled Labour and the New Social Order .

[ 29 ] In February 1918, the third Inter-Allied Labour and Socialist Conference (representing delegates from Great Britain, France, Belgium and Italy) issued its report, advocating an international labour rights body, an end to secret diplomacy, and other goals.

[ 30 ] And in December 1918, the American Federation of Labor (AFL) issued its own distinctively apolitical report, which called for the achievement of numerous incremental improvements via the collective bargaining process.

[ 31 ] IFTU Bern Conference [ edit ] As the war drew to a close, two competing visions for the post-war world emerged. The first was offered by the International Federation of Trade Unions (IFTU), which called for a meeting in Bern , Switzerland, in July 1919. The Bern meeting would consider both the future of the IFTU and the various proposals which had been made in the previous few years. The IFTU also proposed including delegates from the Central Powers as equals.

Samuel Gompers , president of the AFL, boycotted the meeting, wanting the Central Powers delegates in a subservient role as an admission of guilt for their countries' role in bringing about war. Instead, Gompers favoured a meeting in Paris which would consider President Woodrow Wilson 's Fourteen Points only as a platform. Despite the American boycott, the Bern meeting went ahead as scheduled. In its final report, the Bern Conference demanded an end to wage labour and the establishment of socialism. If these ends could not be immediately achieved, then an international body attached to the League of Nations should enact and enforce legislation to protect workers and trade unions.

[ 31 ] Commission on International Labour Legislation [ edit ] Meanwhile, the Paris Peace Conference sought to dampen public support for communism. Subsequently, the Allied Powers agreed that clauses should be inserted into the emerging peace treaty protecting labour unions and workers' rights, and that an international labour body be established to help guide international labour relations in the future. The advisory Commission on International Labour Legislation was established by the Peace Conference to draft these proposals. The Commission met for the first time on 1 February 1919, and Gompers was elected as the chairman.

[ 31 ] Samuel Gompers (right) with Albert Thomas , 1918 Two competing proposals for an international body emerged during the Commission's meetings. The British proposed establishing an international parliament to enact labour laws which each member of the League would be required to implement. Each nation would have two delegates to the parliament, one each from labour and management.

[ 31 ] An international labour office would collect statistics on labour issues and enforce the new international laws. Philosophically opposed to the concept of an international parliament and convinced that international standards would lower the few protections achieved in the United States, Gompers proposed that the international labour body be authorized only to make recommendations and that enforcement be left up to the League of Nations. Despite vigorous opposition from the British, the American proposal was adopted.

[ 31 ] Gompers also set the agenda for the draft charter protecting workers' rights. The Americans made 10 proposals. Three were adopted without change: That labour should not be treated as a commodity ; that all workers had the right to a wage sufficient to live on; and that women should receive equal pay for equal work. A proposal protecting the freedom of speech, press, assembly, and association was amended to include only freedom of association. A proposed ban on the international shipment of goods made by children under the age of 16 was amended to ban goods made by children under the age of 14. A proposal to require an eight-hour work day was amended to require the eight-hour work day or the 40-hour work week (an exception was made for countries where productivity was low). Four other American proposals were rejected. Meanwhile, international delegates proposed three additional clauses, which were adopted: One or more days for weekly rest; equality of laws for foreign workers; and regular and frequent inspection of factory conditions.

[ 31 ] The Commission issued its final report on 4 March 1919, and the Peace Conference adopted it without amendment on 11 April. The report became Part XIII of the Treaty of Versailles .

[ 31 ] Interwar period [ edit ] The first annual International Labour Conference (ILC) began on 29 October 1919 at the Pan American Union Building in Washington, D.C.

[ 32 ] and adopted the first six International Labour Conventions, which dealt with hours of work in industry, unemployment, maternity protection, night work for women, minimum age, and night work for young persons in industry.

[ 33 ] The prominent French socialist Albert Thomas became its first director-general.

Despite open disappointment and sharp critique, the revived International Federation of Trade Unions (IFTU) quickly adapted itself to this mechanism. The IFTU increasingly oriented its international activities around the lobby work of the ILO.

[ 34 ] At the time of establishment, the U.S. government was not a member of ILO, as the US Senate rejected the covenant of the League of Nations, and the United States could not join any of its agencies. Following the election of Franklin Delano Roosevelt to the U.S. presidency, the new administration made renewed efforts to join the ILO without league membership. On 19 June 1934, the U.S. Congress passed a joint resolution authorizing the president to join ILO without joining the League of Nations as a whole. On 22 June 1934, the ILO adopted a resolution inviting the U.S. government to join the organization. On 20 August 1934, the U.S. government responded positively and took its seat at the ILO.

Greenwood, Ernest H. (of the United States – Deputy secretary general of the conference) / Secretary General: Harold B. Butler (Great Britain) / Deputy Secretaries General: Ernest H. Greenwood (United States) / Guido Pardo (Italy) /Legal Adviser: Manley 0. Hudson (United States) / with staff of the first International Labour Conference, in Washington, D.C., in 1919, in front of the Pan American Union Building Wartime and the United Nations [ edit ] During the Second World War , when Switzerland was surrounded by German troops, ILO director John G. Winant made the decision to leave Geneva. In August 1940, the government of Canada officially invited the ILO to be housed at McGill University in Montreal. Forty staff members were transferred to the temporary offices and continued to work from McGill until 1948.

[ 35 ] The ILO became the first specialized agency of the United Nations system after the demise of the League in 1946.

[ 36 ] Its constitution, as amended, includes the Declaration of Philadelphia (1944) on the aims and purposes of the organization.

Cold War era [ edit ] R. Rao, the Deputy Director General of ILO with Wilopo , the then-Indonesian labor minister, 15 March 1950 Beginning in the late 1950s the organization was under pressure to make provisions for the potential membership of ex-colonies which had become independent; in the Director General's report of 1963 the needs of the potential new members were first recognized.

[ 37 ] The tensions produced by these changes in the world environment negatively affected the established politics within the organization [ 38 ] and they were the precursor to the eventual problems of the organization with the USA.

In July 1970, the United States withdrew 50% of its financial support to the ILO following the appointment of an assistant director-general from the Soviet Union. This appointment (by the ILO's British director-general, C. Wilfred Jenks ) drew particular criticism from AFL–CIO president George Meany and from New Jersey Assemblyman John E. Rooney . However, the funds were eventually paid.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Ratifications of 1976 Tripartite Consultation Convention On 12 June 1975, the ILO voted to grant the Palestine Liberation Organization observer status at its meetings. Representatives of the United States and Israel walked out of the meeting. The U.S. House of Representatives subsequently decided to withhold funds. The United States gave notice of full withdrawal on 6 November 1975, stating that the organization had become politicized. The United States also suggested that representation from communist countries was not truly " tripartite "—including government, workers, and employers—because of the structure of these economies. The withdrawal became effective on 1 November 1977.

[ 39 ] The United States returned to the organization in 1980 after extracting some concession from the organization. It was partly responsible for the ILO's shift away from a human rights approach and towards support for the Washington Consensus . Economist Guy Standing wrote "the ILO quietly ceased to be an international body attempting to redress structural inequality and became one promoting employment equity".

[ 41 ] In 1981, the government of Poland declared martial law . It interrupted the activities of Solidarność detained many of its leaders and members. The ILO Committee on Freedom of Association filed a complaint against Poland at the 1982 International Labour Conference. A Commission of Inquiry established to investigate found Poland had violated ILO Conventions No. 87 on freedom of association [ 42 ] and No. 98 on trade union rights, [ 43 ] which the country had ratified in 1957. The ILO and many other countries and organizations put pressure on the Polish government, which finally gave legal status to Solidarność in 1989. During that same year, there was a roundtable discussion between the government and Solidarnoc which agreed on terms of relegalization of the organization under ILO principles. The government also agreed to hold the first free elections in Poland since the Second World War.

[ 44 ] Offices [ edit ] ILO headquarters [ edit ] Centre William Rappard , seat of the ILO between 1926 and 1974, now hosting the WTO The ILO is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. In its first months of existence in 1919, it offices were located in London, only to move to Geneva in the summer 1920. The first seat in Geneva was on the Pregny hill in the Ariana estate, in the building that used to host the Thudicum boarding school and currently the headquarters of the International Committee of the Red Cross . As the office grew, the Office relocated to a purpose-built headquarters by the shores of lake Leman , designed by Georges Épitaux and inaugurated in 1926 (currently the seat of the World Trade Organization ). During the Second World War the Office was temporarily relocated to McGill University in Montreal , Canada.

The current seat of the ILO's headquarters is located on the Pregny hill, not far from its initial seat. The building, a biconcave rectangular block designed by Eugène Beaudoin , Pier Luigi Nervi and Alberto Camenzind , was purpose-built between 1969–1974 in a severe rationalist style and, at the time of construction, constituted the largest administrative building in Switzerland.

[ 45 ] Regional offices [ edit ] Regional Office for Africa , in Abidjan , Côte d'Ivoire Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific , in Bangkok , Thailand Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia , in Geneva , Switzerland Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean , in Lima , Peru Regional Office for the Arab States , in Beirut , Lebanon Sub-regional offices [ edit ] Called "Decent Work Technical Support Teams (DWT)", they provide technical support to the work of a number of countries under their area of competence.

ILO office in Santiago , Chile DWT for North Africa, in Cairo , Egypt DWT for West Africa, in Dakar , Senegal DWT for Eastern and Southern Africa, in Pretoria , South Africa DWT for Central Africa, in Yaoundé , Cameroon DWT for the Arab States, in Beirut, Lebanon DWT for South Asia, in New Delhi , India DWT for East and South-East Asia and the Pacific, in Bangkok, Thailand DWT for Central and Eastern Europe, in Budapest , Hungary DWT for Eastern Europe and Central Asia, in Moscow , Russia DWT for the Andean Countries, in Lima, Peru DWT for the Caribbean Countries, in Port of Spain , Trinidad and Tobago DWT for Central American Countries, in San José, Costa Rica DWT for Countries of the South Cone of Latin America, in Santiago , Chile Country and liaison offices [ edit ] In Africa: Abidjan , Abuja , Addis Ababa , Algiers , Antananarivo , Cairo, Dakar, Dar es Salaam , Harare , Kinshasa , Lusaka , Pretoria, Yaoundé In the Arab States: Beirut, Doha , [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Jerusalem In Asia and the Pacific: Bangkok, Beijing , Colombo , Dhaka , Hanoi , Islamabad , Jakarta , Kabul , Kathmandu , Manila , New Delhi, Suva , Tokyo , Yangon In Europe and Central Asia: Ankara , Berlin , Brussels , Budapest, Lisbon , Madrid , Moscow, Paris , Rome In the Americas: Brasília , Buenos Aires , Mexico City , New York , Lima, Port-of-Spain, San José, Santiago, Washington, D.C.

Activities [ edit ] Conventions [ edit ] Main article: List of International Labour Organization Conventions Through July 2018, the ILO had adopted 189 conventions. If these conventions are ratified by enough governments, they come in force. However, ILO conventions are considered international labour standards regardless of ratification. When a convention comes into force, it creates a legal obligation for ratifying nations to apply its provisions.

Every year the International Labour Conference's Committee on the Application of Standards examines a number of alleged breaches of international labour standards. Governments are required to submit reports detailing their compliance with the obligations of the conventions they have ratified. Conventions that have not been ratified by member states have the same legal force as recommendations.

In 1998, the 86th International Labour Conference adopted the Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work . This declaration contains four fundamental policies: [ 48 ] The right of workers to associate freely and bargain collectively The end of forced and compulsory labour The end of child labour The end of unfair discrimination among workers The ILO asserts that its members have an obligation to work towards fully respecting these principles, embodied in relevant ILO conventions. The ILO conventions that embody the fundamental principles have now been ratified by most member states.

[ 49 ] Protocols are always linked to Conventions, even though they are international treaties they do not exist on their own. As with Conventions, Protocols can be ratified.

Recommendations do not have the binding force of conventions and are not subject to ratification. Recommendations may be adopted at the same time as conventions to supplement the latter with additional or more detailed provisions. In other cases recommendations may be adopted separately and may address issues separate from particular conventions.

[ 50 ] International Labour Conference [ edit ] Once a year, the ILO organizes the International Labour Conference (ILC) in Geneva to set the broad policies of the ILO, including conventions and recommendations.

[ 51 ] Also known as the "international parliament of labour", the conference makes decisions about the ILO's general policy, work programme and budget and also elects the Governing Body.

The first conference took place in 1919: [ 52 ] see Interwar period below.

Each member state is represented by a delegation composed of two government delegates, an employer delegate, a worker delegate. All of them have individual voting rights and all votes are equal, regardless of the population of the delegate's member State. The employer and worker delegates are normally chosen in agreement with the most representative national organizations of employers and workers. Usually, the workers and employers' delegates coordinate their voting. All delegates have the same rights and are not required to vote in blocs.

Delegates can attend with advisers and substitute delegates, [ 53 ] and all have the same rights: they can express themselves freely and vote as they wish. This diversity of viewpoints does not prevent decisions from being adopted by very large majorities or unanimously .

[ citation needed ] Heads of State and prime ministers also participate in the Conference. International organizations, both governmental and others, also attend but as observers.

The 109th session of the International Labour Conference was delayed from 2020 to May 2021 and was held online because of the COVID-19 pandemic . The first meeting was on 20 May 2021 in Geneva for the election of its officers. Further sittings were held in June, November and December.

[ 54 ] The 110th session took place from 27 May to 11 June 2022.

[ 55 ] The 111th session of the International Labour Conference took place in June 2023.

[ 56 ] Global forum meetings [ edit ] The ILO organizes regular international tripartite gatherings and global dialogue fora on issues of interest to specific sectors of business and employment, [ 57 ] for example on supply chain safety in the packing of containers for global shipping (2011), [ 58 ] and on employment conditions in early childhood education (2012).

[ 59 ] Labour statistics [ edit ] The ILO is a major provider of labour statistics. Labour statistics are an important tool for its member states to monitor their progress toward improving labour standards. As part of their statistical work, ILO maintains several databases.

[ 60 ] This database covers 11 major data series for over 200 countries. In addition, ILO publishes a number of compilations of labour statistics, such as the Key Indicators of Labour Markets [ 61 ] (KILM). KILM covers 20 main indicators on labour participation rates, employment, unemployment, educational attainment, labour cost, and economic performance. Many of these indicators have been prepared by other organizations. For example, the Division of International Labour Comparisons of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics prepares the hourly compensation in manufacturing indicator.

[ 62 ] The U.S. Department of Labor also publishes a yearly report containing a List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor [ 63 ] issued by the Bureau of International Labor Affairs . The December 2014 updated edition of the report listed a total of 74 countries and 136 goods.

The ILO is the custodian agency for nine of the 17 indicators of Sustainable Development Goal 8 (SDG 8).

[ 64 ] : 5 [ 65 ] This goal is about "decent work and economic growth".

[ 66 ] For example, ILO is the agency for Indicator 8.b.1 of Target 8.b. The wording of this target is: "By 2020, develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment and implement the Global Jobs Pact of the International Labour Organization".

[ 67 ] As such, ILO is in charge of the data gathering for the progress of the Global Youth Empowerment Strategy.

[ 68 ] Training and teaching units [ edit ] The International Training Centre of the International Labour Organization (ITCILO) is based in Turin , Italy.

[ 69 ] Together with the University of Turin Department of Law , the ITC offers training for ILO officers and secretariat members, as well as offering educational programmes. The ITC offers more than 450 training and educational programmes and projects every year for some 11,000 people around the world.

For instance, the ITCILO offers a Master of Laws programme in management of development, which aims specialize professionals in the field of cooperation and development.

[ 70 ] Responses to issues [ edit ] Child labour [ edit ] Parties to ILO's 1973 Minimum Age Convention , and the minimum ages they have designated: purple, 14 years; green, 15 years; blue, 16 years These young boys are among the millions of children in child labour worldwide. They work at a brickyard in Antsirabe, Madagascar.

Child labour is often defined as work that deprives children of their childhood, potential, dignity, and is harmful to their physical and mental development.

Child labour refers to work that is mentally, physically, socially or morally dangerous and harmful to children. Further, it can involve interfering with their schooling by depriving them of the opportunity to attend school, obliging them to leave school prematurely, or requiring them to attempt to combine school attendance with excessively long and heavy work.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] The ILO's International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC) was created in 1992 with the overall goal of the progressive elimination of child labour, which was to be achieved through strengthening the capacity of countries to deal with the problem and promoting a worldwide movement to combat child labour. The IPEC currently has operations in 88 countries, with an annual expenditure on technical cooperation projects that reached over US$61 million in 2008. It is the largest programme of its kind globally and the biggest single operational programme of the ILO.

The number and range of the IPEC's partners have expanded over the years and now include employers' and workers' organizations, other international and government agencies, private businesses, community-based organizations, NGOs, the media, parliamentarians, the judiciary, universities, religious groups and children and their families.

The IPEC's work to eliminate child labour is an important facet of the ILO's Decent Work Agenda.

[ 74 ] Child labour prevents children from acquiring the skills and education they need for a better future.

[ 75 ] The ILO also hosts a Global Conference on the Elimination of Child Labour every four years. The most recent conference was held in Durban, South Africa from 15 to 20 May 2022.

[ 76 ] The ILO has established the World Day Against Child Labour on June 12 as an annual event starting in 2002 to raise awareness and prompt action to tackle child labour worldwide. Coinciding with the Sustainable Development Goals , the event particularly targets the eradication of its worst forms, like slavery and the use of child soldiers, by 2025. The ILO distinguishes between detrimental child labour, which hinders children's development and education, and acceptable work that supports their growth and learning.

[ 77 ] In 2023, the World Day's theme, 'Social Justice for All. End Child Labour!', calls for reinvigorated global efforts towards achieving social justice and underscores the critical need for the universal ratification and enforcement of ILO Conventions No. 138 and No. 182 to protect all children from child labour.

[ 78 ] Exceptions in indigenous communities [ edit ] Because of different cultural views involving labour, the ILO developed a series of culturally sensitive mandates, including convention Nos. 169, 107, 138, and 182, to protect indigenous culture, traditions, and identities. Convention Nos. 138 and 182 lead in the fight against child labour , while Nos. 107 and 169 promote the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples and protect their right to define their own developmental priorities.

[ 79 ] In many indigenous communities, [ example needed ] parents believe that children learn important life lessons through the act of work and through the participation in daily life.  Working is seen as a learning process preparing children of the future tasks they will eventually have to do as an adult.

[ 80 ] It is a belief that the family's and child well-being and survival is a shared responsibility between members of the whole family. They also see work as an intrinsic part of their child's developmental process. While these attitudes toward child work remain, many children and parents from indigenous communities still highly value education.

[ 79 ] Forced labour [ edit ] Krychów forced labour camp 1940 (Krowie Bagno) The ILO has considered the fight against forced labour to be one of its main priorities. During the interwar years, the issue was mainly considered a colonial phenomenon, and the ILO's concern was to establish minimum standards protecting the inhabitants of colonies from the worst abuses committed by economic interests.

[ 81 ] After 1945, the goal became to set a uniform and universal standard, determined by the higher awareness gained during World War II of politically and economically motivated systems of forced labour, but debates were hampered by the Cold War and by exemptions claimed by colonial powers. Since the 1960s, declarations of labour standards as a component of human rights have been weakened by government of postcolonial countries claiming a need to exercise extraordinary powers over labour in their role as emergency regimes promoting rapid economic development.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Ratifications of the ILO's 1930 Forced Labour Convention , with non-ratifiers shown in red In June 1998, the International Labour Conference adopted a Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its follow-up that obligates member states to respect, promote and realize freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining, the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour, the effective abolition of child labour, and the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation.

Ratifications of the ILO's 1957 Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, with non-ratifiers shown in red In November 2001, following the publication of the InFocus Programme's first global report on forced labour, the ILO's governing body created a special action programme to combat forced labour (SAP-FL), [ 84 ] as part of broader efforts to promote the 1998 Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its follow-up. The SAP-FL was created in November 2001 "to tackle the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour, one of its foremost concerns, through both technical assistance and promotional means." [ 85 ] SAP-FL has developed indicators of forced labour practices [ 86 ] and published survey reports on forced labour.

[ 87 ] In 2013, the SAP-FL was integrated into the ILO's Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work Branch (FUNDAMENTALS) [ 88 ] bringing together the fight against forced and child labour and working in the context of Alliance 8.7.

[ 89 ] One major tool to fight forced labour was the adoption of the ILO Forced Labour Protocol by the International Labour Conference in 2014 . It was ratified for the second time in 2015 and on 9 November 2016 it entered into force. The new protocol brings the existing ILO Convention 29 on Forced Labour, [ 90 ] adopted in 1930, into the modern era to address practices such as human trafficking. The accompanying Recommendation 203 provides technical guidance on its implementation.

[ 91 ] In 2015, the ILO launched a global campaign to end modern slavery, in partnership with the International Organization of Employers (IOE) and the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC). The 50 for Freedom Campaign aims to mobilize public support and encourage countries to ratify the ILO's Forced Labour Protocol .

[ 84 ] Role of Civil Society Organizations in the International Labour Conference [ edit ] Civil society organizations (CSOs) play a supportive and increasingly recognized role in the work of the International Labour Organization (ILO) , particularly in relation to the annual International Labour Conference (ILC) —the ILO’s highest decision-making body.

[ 92 ] Through participation in the ILC and other ILO-led initiatives, CSOs contribute to the advancement of labor rights and the promotion of social justice on a global scale.

The ILO encourages engagement with CSOs as part of its tripartite approach to labor governance, which includes representatives from governments, employers, and workers. Civil society actors bring additional perspectives, often representing marginalized groups, informal workers, or specific thematic concerns (e.g., gender equity, forced labor, or child labor).

Opportunities for Participation [ edit ] CSOs can engage with the ILO and its annual Conference through several mechanisms: Accreditation [ 93 ] – CSOs may apply for accreditation to attend the International Labour Conference as observers or participants in side events. Accreditation follows formal procedures established by the ILO and is typically granted to international NGOs or networks with relevant expertise in labor standards and rights.

Policy Submissions and Reports– Accredited organizations may submit written reports, proposals, and observations relevant to the agenda of the Conference. These contributions inform the deliberations on labor rights, occupational safety, decent work, and social protection.

Partnership and Collaboration – Beyond the Conference, the ILO maintains ongoing collaboration with CSOs to promote better working conditions, inclusive labor policies, and the implementation of international labor standards. CSOs may partner with the ILO in research, advocacy, technical cooperation, and monitoring initiatives.

More information on the ILO’s engagement with civil society is available at: https://www.ilo.org/partnering-development/civil-society-ilo-partnership Minimum wage law [ edit ] To protect the right of labours for fixing minimum wage , ILO has created Minimum Wage-Fixing Machinery Convention, 1928 , Minimum Wage Fixing Machinery (Agriculture) Convention, 1951 and Minimum Wage Fixing Convention, 1970 as minimum wage law .

Commercialized sex [ edit ] From the moment its creation in the 1919 Treaty of Versailles , the ILO has been concerned with the controversial issue of commercial sex. Prior to the creation of the ILO and League of Nations , the issue of sex work had been exclusively under the jurisdiction of the state, now, the ILO and League of Nations believed the issue transcended borders and within their jurisdiction.

[ 94 ] In the early twentieth, commercialized sex was considered both immoral and criminal activity. Initially, the ILO strongly believed prostitution was linked to vulnerable single working women emigrating to other nations without being under the paternal supervision of a man.

[ 94 ] After the widespread destruction caused by World War I , the ILO saw prostitution as spreading contagion requiring regulation.

[ 95 ] Under the leadership of the French socialist Albert Thomas, the ILO created a medical division whose primary focus was on male sailors whose lives were viewed as "nomadic" and "promiscuous", which made these men susceptible to infection of STD's.

[ 95 ] After the conclusion of the Genoa maritime conference in 1920, the ILO proclaimed itself as the critical leader of the prevention and treatment of STD's in sailors.  In the interwar years, the ILO also sought to protect female workers in dangers trades, but delegates to ILO Conferences did not consider the sex trade to be "work", which was conceived of as industrial labor.

[ 96 ] The ILO believed that if women worked industrial jobs, this would be a deterrent from them living immoral lives. In order to make these industrial jobs more attractive, the ILO promoted better wages and safer working conditions, both intended  to prevent women from falling victim to the temptation of the sex trades.

[ 97 ] Following the creation of the United Nations, the ILO took a back seat to the newly formed organization on the issue of commercialized sex. The UN Commission on the Status of Women called for abolishing both sex trafficking and prostitution.

[ 98 ] In the 1950s, the UN Economic and Social Council and the International Police Organization sought to end any activity that resembled slavery, classifying sex trafficking and prostitution as criminal rather than labor issues.

[ 98 ] Beginning in 1976, the ILO and other organizations began to examine the working and living conditions of rural women in developing countries .

[ 99 ] One example the ILO investigated was the go-go bars and the growing phenomenon of hired wives in Thailand, which both thrived because the development of U.S. military bases in the region.

[ 99 ] In the late 1970s, the ILO established the Programme on Rural Women , which investigated the involvement of young masseuses in the sex trade in Bangkok.

[ 99 ] It was critical because it was the first time in the history of the ILO or any of its branches that prostitution was described as a form of labor.

[ 99 ] In the decades that followed, the increase in sex tourism and the exploding AIDS epidemic strengthened ILO interest in the commercial sex trade.

[ 100 ] HIV/AIDS [ edit ] The International Labour Organization (ILO) is the lead UN -agency on HIV workplace policies and programmes and private sector mobilization. ILOAIDS [ 101 ] is the branch of the ILO dedicated to this issue.

The ILO has been involved with the HIV response since 1998, attempting to prevent potentially devastating impact on labour and productivity and that it says can be an enormous burden for working people, their families and communities. In June 2001, the ILO's governing body adopted a pioneering code of practice on HIV/AIDS and the world of work, [ 102 ] which was launched during a special session of the UN General Assembly.

The same year, ILO became a cosponsor of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).

In 2010, the 99th International Labour Conference adopted the ILO's recommendation concerning HIV and AIDS and the world of work, 2010 (No. 200), [ 103 ] the first international labour standard on HIV and AIDS. The recommendation lays out a comprehensive set of principles to protect the rights of HIV-positive workers and their families, while scaling up prevention in the workplace. Working under the theme of Preventing HIV, Protecting Human Rights at Work , ILOAIDS undertakes a range of policy advisory, research and technical support functions in the area of HIV and AIDS and the world of work. The ILO also works on promoting social protection as a means of reducing vulnerability to HIV and mitigating its impact on those living with or affected by HIV.

ILOAIDS ran a "Getting to Zero" [ 104 ] campaign to arrive at zero new infections, zero AIDS-related deaths and zero- discrimination by 2015.

[ 105 ] [ needs update ] Building on this campaign, ILOAIDS is executing a programme of voluntary and confidential counselling and testing at work, known as VCT@WORK.

[ 106 ] Migrant workers [ edit ] As the word "migrant" suggests, migrant workers refer to those who moves from one country to another to do their job. For the rights of migrant workers, the first ILC adopted a recommendation on equality and coordination, [ 52 ] and the ILO has adopted conventions, including Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 and United Nations Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families in 1990.

[ 107 ] Domestic workers [ edit ] Domestic workers are those who perform a variety of tasks for and in other peoples' homes. For example, they may cook, clean the house, and look after children. Yet they are often the ones with the least consideration, excluded from labour and social protection. This is mainly due to the fact that women have traditionally carried out the tasks without pay.

[ 108 ] For the rights and decent work of domestic workers including migrant domestic workers , ILO has adopted the Convention on Domestic Workers on 16 June 2011.

Environmental sustainability [ edit ] The ILO has been on working on integrating environmental sustainability into its activities (or greening its activities) and the broader discourse since the 1970s. For example, some of ILO's reports in 1972 to 1975 have investigated linkages between occupational safety and health , economic development and environmental protection .

[ 109 ] In the 2000s ILO began to promote a "socially just transition to green jobs". The organisation defined green jobs as "decent jobs that contribute to preserving and restoring the environment".

[ 109 ] Since 2017, the concept of just transition has been firmly embedded within the ILO’s position. For example its Centenary Declaration for the Future of Work in 2019 stated that: "[...] the ILO must direct its efforts to: (i) ensuring a just transition to a future of work that contributes to sustainable development in its economic, social and environmental dimensions".

[ 110 ] : 3 A just transition focuses on the connection between energy transition and equitable approaches to decarbonization that support broader development goals .

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] The ILO has also looked at the transition to a green economy , and the impact thereof on employment . It came to the conclusion a shift to a greener economy could create 24 million new jobs globally by 2030, if the right policies are put in place. Also, if a transition to a green economy were not to take place, 72 million full-time jobs may be lost by 2030 due to heat stress , and temperature increases will lead to shorter available work hours, particularly in agriculture.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] Awards [ edit ] In 1969, the ILO received the Nobel Peace Prize for improving fraternity and peace among nations, pursuing decent work and justice for workers, and providing technical assistance to other developing nations.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] See also [ edit ] Administrative Tribunal of the International Labour Organization Criticism of capitalism Labor theory of value League of Nations archives Seoul Declaration on Safety and Health at Work , 2008 Social clause , the integration of seven core ILO labour rights conventions into trade agreements United Nations Global Compact , launched in 2000, encouraging businesses to adopt sustainable and socially responsible policies References [ edit ] ^ a b Staff writer (2024).

"International Labour Organization (ILO)" . UIA Global Civil Society Database.

uia.org . Brussels, Belgium: Union of International Associations . Yearbook of International Organizations Online . Retrieved 24 December 2024 .

^ "PERSONNEL BY ORGANIZATION | United Nations - CEB" .

^ "Mission and impact of the ILO" .

International Labour Organization . 28 January 2024.

Archived from the original on 1 March 2024.

^ "Departments and offices" .

International Labour Organization . Archived from the original on 12 August 2021 . Retrieved 15 July 2021 .

^ "Labour standards" .

International Labour Organization .

Archived from the original on 1 May 2020 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

^ "Introduction to International Labour Standards" .

International Labour Organization . Archived from the original on 31 December 2023.

^ "Global Commission on the Future of Work" .

International Labour Organization . 14 August 2017.

Archived from the original on 21 March 2019 . Retrieved 21 March 2019 .

^ "A human-centred agenda needed for a decent future of work" .

International Labour Organization . 22 January 2019 . Retrieved 21 March 2019 .

^ "International Labour Organization" . britannica.com . Retrieved 24 May 2012 .

^ "Home" . Archived from the original on 13 October 2013 . Retrieved 22 May 2011 .

^ "Governing Body" . International Labour Organization . Retrieved 24 May 2012 .

^ "Governing Body elections (International Labour Conference (ILC))" .

www.ilo.org . Retrieved 11 December 2023 .

^ Article 7, ILO Constitution ^ "ILO Constitution" . International Labour Organization.

^ "Gilbert Houngbo will be the first African to lead the ILO" .

republicoftogo.com . 25 March 2022.

^ "Guy Ryder re-elected as ILO Director-General for a second term" .

International Labour Organization . 7 November 2016.

^ Taibi, FADLI; Technology, Archos (17 January 2024).

"ILO DG Lauds Morocco's Experience in Implementing Social State Policy" .

MapNews (in French) . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ ILO official site: Former Directors-General ^ "ILO Constitution Article 3" . Ilo.org. Archived from the original on 25 December 2009 . Retrieved 2 June 2012 .

^ "ILO Declaration on Fundamental Prinicples & Rights at Work" .

Equality & Human Rights Commission . 10 November 2020 . Retrieved 21 August 2023 .

^ "The International Labour Organization (ILO) – Membership" .

Encyclopedia of the Nations . Advameg, Inc. 2012 . Retrieved 16 August 2012 .

^ International Labour Organization. (n.d.).

About the ILO in the Cook Islands.

Retrieved June 26, 2021, from https://www.ilo.org/suva/countries-covered/cook-islands/WCMS_410209/lang--en/index.htm ^ a b "Key document - ILO Constitution" .

www.ilo.org . Retrieved 23 March 2024 .

^ a b c Norman F. Dufty, "Organizational Growth and Goal Structure: The Case of the ILO" , (1972) 26 (3) International Organization 479 accessed 24 August 2011 ^ a b Joseph Sulkowski, "The Competence of the International Labor Organization Under the United Nations System" , (1951) 45 (2) The American Journal of International Law 286 accessed 24 August 2011.

^ O'Higgins, P., 'Labour is not a Commodity' — an Irish Contribution to International Labour Law' (1997) 26(3) Industrial Law Journal 225–234 ^ a b VanDaele, Jasmien (2005).

"Engineering Social Peace: Networks, Ideas, And the Founding of the International Labour Organization" .

International Review of Social History .

50 (3): 435– 466.

doi : 10.1017/S0020859005002178 .

^ Haimson, Leopold H. and Sapelli, Giulio.

Strikes, Social Conflict, and the First World War: An International Perspective.

Milan: Fondazione Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, 1992.

ISBN 88-07-99047-4 ^ Shapiro, Stanley (1976). "The Passage of Power: Labor and the New Social Order".

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

120 (6): 464– 474.

JSTOR 986599 .

^ Ayusawa, Iwao Frederick .

International Labour Legislation . Clark, N.J.: Lawbook Exchange, 2005.

ISBN 1-58477-461-4 ^ a b c d e f g Foner, Philip S.

History of the Labor Movement in the United States. Vol. 7: Labor and World War I, 1914–1918.

New York: International Publishers, 1987.

ISBN 0-7178-0638-3 ^ "International Labor Conference. October 29, 1919 – November 29, 1919" (PDF) .

International Labour Organization . Washington Government Printing Office 1920.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 October 2014.

^ "Origins and history" .

International Labour Organization . 28 January 2024.

^ Reiner Tosstorff (2005).

"The International Trade-Union Movement and the Founding of the International Labour Organization" (PDF) .

International Review of Social History .

50 (3): 399– 433.

doi : 10.1017/S0020859005002166 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2013.

^ "ILO" .

International Labour Organization . 28 January 2024.

^ "Photo Gallery" . ILO. 2011. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2011 .

^ ILO: 'Programme and Structure of the ILO':report of the Director General, 1963.

^ R. W. Cox, "ILO: Limited Monarchy" in R.W. Cox and H. Jacobson The Anatomy of Influence: Decision Making in International Organization Yale University Press, 1973 pp.102-138 ^ a b Beigbeder, Yves (1979).

"The United States' Withdrawal from the International Labor Organization" (PDF) .

Relations Industrielles / Industrial Relations .

34 (2): 223– 240.

doi : 10.7202/028959ar .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 June 2013.

^ "Communication from the Government of the United States" (PDF) . International Labour Organization.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015.

. United States letter dated 5 November 1975 containing notice of withdrawal from the International Labour Organization.

^ Standing, Guy (2008).

"The ILO: An Agency for Globalization?" (PDF) .

Development and Change .

39 (3): 355– 384.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.593.4931 .

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7660.2008.00484.x . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2013 . Retrieved 4 August 2012 .

^ "ILO Conventions No. 98" .

International Labour Organization .

^ "ILO Conventions No. 98" .

International Labour Organization .

^ "The ILO and the story of Solidarnoc" .

International Labour Organization . 3 May 2016.

^ "A house for social justice - past, present and future" .

International Labour Organization . 9 November 2018 . Retrieved 8 December 2020 .

^ "New labour laws in Qatar benefiting migrant workers a 'momentous step forward': ILO" . 17 October 2019.

^ "ILO inaugurates its first project office in Qatar" . 30 April 2018.

^ "ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work" .

Rights at Work . International Labour Organization. 1998 . Retrieved 16 August 2012 .

^ See the list of ratifications at Ilo.org ^ "Recommendations" .

International Labour Organization .

^ "International Labour Conference" . International Labour Organization . Retrieved 24 May 2012 .

^ a b Vittin-Balima, C., Migrant workers: The ILO standards , archived at Bibliothek der Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung , accessed 15 December 2023 ^ ILO, Final list of delegations, International Labour Conference, 110th Session, 2022 , accessed 15 December 2023 ^ "109th International Labour Conference to be held virtually, opening in May" . 17 May 2021.

^ ILO, 110th International Labour Conference , accessed 25 September 2022 ^ ILO, 111th Session of the International Labour Conference , 5–16 June 2023, accessed 15 December 2023 ^ ILO, Sectoral meetings , accessed 19 January 2024 ^ ILO, "Any fool can stuff a container?": ILO to discuss safety in growing container industry , published 14 February 2011, accessed 19 January 2024 ^ ILO (2012).

Early childhood education and educators: Global Dialogue Forum on Conditions of Personnel in Early Childhood Education, Geneva, 22–23 February 2012 . Geneva: International Labour Office, Sectoral Activities Department.

^ "ILO statistics overview" .

International Labour Organization . 16 April 2024.

^ "Key Indicators of the Labour Market (KILM)" .

International Labour Organization . 11 December 2013.

^ "Hourly compensation costs" (PDF) .

International Labour Organization, KILM 17 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 July 2012 . Retrieved 2 June 2012 .

^ "List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor" .

U.S. Department of Labor . Archived from the original on 12 January 2021 . Retrieved 9 January 2015 .

^ ILO (2019).

Time to act for SDG 8: integrating decent work, sustained growth and environmental integrity . Geneva: International Labour Office.

ISBN 978-92-2-133677-8 .

^ "Sustainable Development Goal #8: Decent Work and Economic Growth | International Labour Organization" .

www.ilo.org . 28 January 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 .

^ "United Nations (2018) Economic and Social Council, Conference of European Statisticians, Geneva" (PDF) .

United Nations, Geneva . Retrieved 19 September 2020 .

^ United Nations (2017) Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 July 2017, Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ( A/RES/71/313 ) ^ "United Nations (2018) Economic and Social Council, Conference of European Statisticians, Geneva" (PDF) .

United Nations, Geneva . Retrieved 19 September 2020 .

^ BIZZOTTO.

"ITCILO – International Training Center" . Archived from the original on 10 July 2015 . Retrieved 21 May 2008 .

^ "LLM Guide (IP LLM) – University of Torino, Faculty of Law" .

llm-guide.com . Archived from the original on 18 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 June 2012 .

^ Ahmady, Kameel 2021: Traces of Exploitation in the World of Childhood (A Comprehensive Research on Forms, Causes and Consequences of Child Labour in Iran). Avaye Buf Publisher, Denmark .

^ "Child labour | UNICEF" .

www.unicef.org . Retrieved 10 June 2024 .

^ "Child labour has a profound impact on the health and wellbeing of children - European Commission" .

international-partnerships.ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 10 June 2024 .

^ "Decent work - Themes" . Archived from the original on 9 May 2008 . Retrieved 21 May 2008 .

^ Von Braun, Joachim (1995). Von Braun (ed.).

Employment for poverty reduction and food security . IFPRI Occasional Papers. Intl Food Policy Res Inst. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-89629-332-8 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 .

^ "5th Global Conference on the Elimination of Child Labour" .

www.5thchildlabourconf.org . Retrieved 7 June 2022 .

^ Nations, United.

"World Day Against Child Labour - Background | United Nations" .

United Nations . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ Nations, United.

"World Day Against Child Labour" .

United Nations . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ a b Larsen, P.B.

Indigenous and tribal children: assessing child labour and education challenges . International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC), International Labour Office.

^ Guidelines for Combating Child Labour Among Indigenous Peoples . Geneva: International Labour Organization. 2006.

ISBN 978-92-2-118748-6 .

^ Burbank, Jane; Cooper, Frederick (2010).

Empires in World History: Power and the Politics of Difference . Princeton University Press. p. 386.

ISBN 978-0-691-12708-8 .

^ Daniel Roger Maul (2007). "The International Labour Organization and the Struggle against Forced Labour from 1919 to the Present".

Labor History .

48 (4): 477– 500.

doi : 10.1080/00236560701580275 .

S2CID 154924697 .

^ Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr.(1973) The Gulag Archipelago : An Experiment in Literary Investigation. Parisian publisher YMCA-Press .

^ a b "Forced labour, modern slavery and trafficking in persons | International Labour Organization" .

www.ilo.org . 28 January 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 .

^ Plant, Roger; O'Reilly, Caroline (March 2003). "The ILO's Special Action Programme to Combat Forced Labour".

International Labour Review .

142 (1): 73.

doi : 10.1111/j.1564-913X.2003.tb00253.x .

^ Chantavanich, Supang; Laodumrongchai, Samarn; Stringer, Christina (2016). "Under the shadow: Forced labour among sea fishers in Thailand".

Marine Policy .

68 : 6.

Bibcode : 2016MarPo..68....1C .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpol.2015.12.015 .

ISSN 0308-597X .

S2CID 155418604 .

^ Lerche, Jens (October 2007).

"A Global Alliance against Forced Labour? Unfree Labour, Neo-Liberal Globalization and the International Labour Organization" .

Journal of Agrarian Change .

7 (4): 427.

Bibcode : 2007JAgrC...7..425L .

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0366.2007.00152.x .

^ "Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work Branch (FUNDAMENTALS) | International Labour Organization" .

www.ilo.org . 28 January 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 .

^ "Alliance 8.7" .

alliance87.org .

^ "ILO Convention 29" .

^ "ILO Recommendation 203" .

^ "ILO Homepage | International Labour Organization" .

www.ilo.org . Retrieved 27 June 2025 .

^ https://webapps.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---arabstates/---ro-beirut/documents/genericdocument/wcms_210580.pdf .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ; Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ a b Boris, Eileen; Rodriguez Garcia, Magaly (Winter 2021).

"(In)Decent Work: Sex and the ILO" .

Journal of Women's History .

33 (4): 197.

doi : 10.1353/jowh.2021.0050 .

S2CID 245127678 .

^ a b Boris, Eileen; Garcia, Magaly Rodriguez (Winter 2021).

"(In)Decent Work: Sex and the ILO" .

Journal of Women's History .

33 (4): 198.

doi : 10.1353/jowh.2021.0050 .

S2CID 245127678 .

^ Boris, Eileen; Garcia, Magaly Rodriguez (2021).

"(In)Decent Work: Sex and the ILO" .

Journal of Women's History .

33 (4): 200.

doi : 10.1353/jowh.2021.0050 .

S2CID 245127678 .

^ Boris, Eileen; Garcia, Magaly Rodriguez (Winter 2021).

"(In)Decent Work: Sex and the ILO" .

Journal of Women's History .

33 (4): 201.

doi : 10.1353/jowh.2021.0050 .

S2CID 245127678 .

^ a b Boris, Eileen; Garcia, Magaly Rodriguez (Winter 2021).

"(In)Decent Work: Sex and the ILO" .

Journal of Women's History .

33 (4): 202.

doi : 10.1353/jowh.2021.0050 .

S2CID 245127678 .

^ a b c d Garcia, Magaly Rodriguez (2018). Bosma, Ulbe; Hofmeester, Karin (eds.).

The ILO and the Oldest Non-Profession in The Lifework of a Labor Historian: Essays in Honor of Marcel van der Linden . Brill. p. 105.

^ Garcia, Magaly Rodriguez (2018). Bosma, Ulbe; Hofmeester, Karin (eds.).

The ILO and the Oldest Non-Profession in The Lifework of a Labor Historian: Essays in Honor of Marcel van der Linden . Brill. p. 106.

^ "HIV/AIDS and the World of Work Branch (ILOAIDS)" .

International Labour Organization .

^ "The ILO Code of Practice on HIV/AIDS and the World of Work" .

International Labour Organization . June 2001.

^ "Recommendation concerning HIV and AIDS and the World of Work, 2010 (No. 200)" .

International Labour Organization . 17 June 2010.

^ "Getting to Zero" . Archived from the original on 9 December 2014.

^ "UNAIDS" .

unaids.org .

^ "VCT@WORK: 5 million women and men workers reached with Voluntary and confidential HIV Counseling and Testing by 2015" .

International Labour Organization . December 2014.

^ Kumaraveloo, K Sakthiaseelan; Lunner Kolstrup, Christina (3 July 2018). "Agriculture and musculoskeletal disorders in low- and middle-income countries".

Journal of Agromedicine .

23 (3): 227– 248.

doi : 10.1080/1059924x.2018.1458671 .

ISSN 1059-924X .

PMID 30047854 .

S2CID 51719997 .

^ "Domestic workers" . International Labour Organization . Retrieved 24 May 2012 .

^ a b Montesano, Francesco S.; Biermann, Frank; Kalfagianni, Agni; Vijge, Marjanneke J. (2023).

"Can the Sustainable Development Goals Green International Organisations? Sustainability Integration in the International Labour Organisation" .

Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning .

25 (1): 1– 15.

Bibcode : 2023JEPP...25....1M .

doi : 10.1080/1523908X.2021.1976123 .

ISSN 1523-908X .

PMC 9893765 .

PMID 36744153 .

^ ILO (2019) ILO Centenary Declaration for the Future of Work . Adopted at the 108th session of the International Labour Conference ^ "How just transition can help deliver the Paris Agreement | UNDP Climate Promise" .

climatepromise.undp.org . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ McCauley, Darren; Heffron, Raphael (1 August 2018).

"Just transition: Integrating climate, energy and environmental justice" .

Energy Policy .

119 : 1– 7.

Bibcode : 2018EnPol.119....1M .

doi : 10.1016/j.enpol.2018.04.014 .

hdl : 10023/17583 .

ISSN 0301-4215 .

^ Green economy could create 24 million new jobs ^ Greening with jobs – World Employment and Social Outlook 2018 ^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 1969 - International Labour Organization Facts" .

Nobelprize.org . Retrieved 5 July 2006 .

^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 1969 - Presentation Speech" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to International Labour Organization .

Wikisource has the text of the 1922 Encyclopædia Britannica article  " International Labour Organization ".

Official website The International Training Centre of the ILO International Labour Organization, Declaration of Philadelphia (1944) v t e United Nations Secretary-General : António Guterres Deputy Secretary-General : Amina J. Mohammed General Assembly President : Philemon Yang UN System Charter Preamble Principal organs Secretariat Secretary-General selections Deputy Secretary-General Under-Secretary-General General Assembly President International Court of Justice Statute Security Council Elections Members President Reform Veto power Economic and Social Council President Trusteeship Council Funds, programmes, and other bodies Culture of Peace IAEA IPCC ITC MINURSO OHCHR SCSL UNAIDS UNCDF UNCITRAL UNCTAD UNDGC UNDP UNDPO peacekeeping UNEP OzonAction UNEP/GRID-Arendal UNEP-WCMC UNFPA UN-HABITAT UNHCR UNHRC UNICEF UNICRI UNIDIR UNITAR UN-Oceans UNODC UNOPS UNOSAT UNRISD UNRWA UNSDG UNSSC UNU UNU-CRIS UNU-OP UNV UN Women WFP Specialized agencies FAO ICAO IFAD ILO IMF IMO IOM ITU UN Tourism UNESCO UNIDO UPU WFEO WHO WIPO WMO World Bank Group IBRD IDA IFC Secretariat offices and departments Headquarters Conference Building General Assembly Building Secretariat Building Department of Economic and Social Affairs Department of Peace Operations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Dag Hammarskjöld Library Department for Safety and Security Division for Palestinian Rights Office at Geneva Palace of Nations Office at Nairobi Office at Vienna Office for Disarmament Affairs Office for Outer Space Affairs Office for Partnerships Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Office of Internal Oversight Services Office of Legal Affairs Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States Office of Counter-Terrorism Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General Office on Sport for Development and Peace UN organizations by location Members and observers Founding members Full members Security Council Permanent members Permanent representatives to the UN list General Assembly Observers European Union History Preceding years International Telegraph Union Universal Postal Union Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 Permanent Court of Arbitration International Office of Public Hygiene League of Nations archives covenant organization member states Preparatory years Declaration of St James's Palace (1941) Atlantic Charter (1941) Declaration by United Nations (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Tehran Conference (1943) Bretton Woods Conference (1944) Dumbarton Oaks Conference (1944) Yalta Conference (1945) Conference on International Organization (1945) Genocide Convention (1948) Activities Enlargement Peacekeeping missions timeline governed territories UNPOL Universal Declaration of Human Rights drafting Human Rights Day World Heritage Convention Convention on the Rights of the Child committee Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Indigenous Caucus Sustainable Development Goals Declaration on the Rights of Peasants Resolutions Security Council vetoes General Assembly 66th 67th Security Council Cyprus Iran Iraq Israel Lebanon Nagorno-Karabakh North Korea Palestine Syria Western Sahara Yemen Elections Secretary-General 2021 2016 International Court of Justice 2023 2022 2021 2020 2017 2014 2011 General Assembly President (2016) Security Council (2016) Related Outline Advisory Committee of Local Authorities Art Collection Security Council mural Block By Block Bretton Woods system Celestial Sphere Woodrow Wilson Memorial CCISUA Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Criticism Delivering as One Drug control treaties Expulsion from the United Nations Ex Tempore Federal Credit Union FICSA Flag Honour Flag Four Nations Initiative Global Compact International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons International Day of Peace International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World International Narcotics Control Board International School Hanoi Interpretation Service Laissez-passer Memorial Cemetery Korea Military Staff Committee Millennium Declaration Millennium Summit Model United Nations Official languages Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Postal Administration Ralph Bunche Park Reform SDG Publishers Compact Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners Treaty Series Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons UN Mandate UN Sacco UN Special UNICEF club United Nations Day United Nations in popular culture United Nations Medal United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights United Nations Radio United Nations television film series University for Peace Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge Withdrawal from the United Nations Women in peacekeeping World Federation of United Nations Associations World portal v t e Humanitarian partners of the European Commission Humanitarian partners DG ECHO NGOs International Action Against Hunger (France, Spain) ADRA (Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany) CARE International (Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Netherlands, Norway) Caritas Europa ( Austria , Belgium , Czech Republic , Denmark , France , Germany , Ireland , Luxembourg , Netherlands , Spain ) ICRC ( Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Luxembourg , Italy , Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Sweden ) Islamic Relief (Germany, Sweden) Oxfam (Belgium, Italy, Netherlands, Spain) Plan International (Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden) Save the Children (Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden) Solidarités international (France, Spain) SOS Children's Villages (Austria, Netherlands) Terre des hommes (Italy, Netherlands) World Vision (Austria, Finland, Netherlands) National MDM · VSF PIN DACAAR · DanChurchAid · DPA · DRC Estonian Refugee Council · MTÜ Mondo Fida International · FinnChurchAid · FRC · Mannerheim League for Child Welfare ACTED · ALIMA · AVSF · Institut Bioforce · CDE · Federation Handicap · GRET · iMMAP · MDM · Œuvre d'Orient · PUI · Relief International · Secours Islamique · SPF · Triangle · TSF arche noVa · ASB · Diakonie Deutschland · Die Johanniter · GAC · HELP · International Rescue Committee · Malteser Hilfsdienst · Medair · MI · Sign of Hope · VSF Concern Worldwide · GOAL · SHA · Trócaire ActionAid · AISPO · AVSI · Cesvi · CISP · COOPI · CUAMM · Emergency · FADV · INTERSOS · JRS · LVIA · Un Ponte Per · VIS · WeWorld Cordaid · DAI · HNTPO · INSO · Mercy Corps · REK · Stichting Vluchteling · Tearfund Netherlands · War Child Netherlands · ZOA NCA · NPA · NRC PAH AKF PRT ACPP · Ayuda en Acción · EDUCO · Entreculturas · Farmacéuticos Mundi · MDM · Medicus Mundi · MPDL · Mundubat · SIA COS · Diakonia · Läkarmissionen · PMU Interlife · SWEDO International organisations ICRC IFRC FAO ILO IOM OCHA OHCHR PAHO UNDP UNDP MPTFO UNDRR UNESCAP UNESCO UNICEF UNFPA UN-HABITAT UNHCR UNMAS UNODC UNOPS UNRWA UNSECOORD UN Women WFP WHO World Bank Agencies AECID DGPCE DEMA DGSCGC Protezione Civile Enabel Expertise France GIZ GSCP Hungary Helps ITF MSB THW European Union portal v t e Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize 1901–1925 1901 : Henry Dunant / Frédéric Passy 1902: Élie Ducommun / Charles Gobat 1903: Randal Cremer 1904: Institut de Droit International 1905: Bertha von Suttner 1906: Theodore Roosevelt 1907: Ernesto Moneta / Louis Renault 1908: Klas Arnoldson / Fredrik Bajer 1909: A. M. F. Beernaert / Paul Estournelles de Constant 1910: International Peace Bureau 1911: Tobias Asser / Alfred Fried 1912: Elihu Root 1913: Henri La Fontaine 1914 1915 1916 1917: International Committee of the Red Cross 1918 1919: Woodrow Wilson 1920: Léon Bourgeois 1921: Hjalmar Branting / Christian Lange 1922: Fridtjof Nansen 1923 1924 1925: Austen Chamberlain / Charles Dawes 1926–1950 1926: Aristide Briand / Gustav Stresemann 1927: Ferdinand Buisson / Ludwig Quidde 1928 1929: Frank B. Kellogg 1930: Nathan Söderblom 1931: Jane Addams / Nicholas Butler 1932 1933: Norman Angell 1934: Arthur Henderson 1935: Carl von Ossietzky 1936: Carlos Saavedra Lamas 1937: Robert Cecil 1938: Nansen International Office for Refugees 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944: International Committee of the Red Cross 1945: Cordell Hull 1946: Emily Balch / John Mott 1947: Friends Service Council / American Friends Service Committee 1948 1949: John Boyd Orr 1950: Ralph Bunche 1951–1975 1951: Léon Jouhaux 1952: Albert Schweitzer 1953: George C. Marshall 1954: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1955 1956 1957: Lester B. Pearson 1958: Georges Pire 1959: Philip Noel-Baker 1960: Albert Luthuli 1961: Dag Hammarskjöld 1962: Linus Pauling 1963: International Committee of the Red Cross / League of Red Cross Societies 1964 : Martin Luther King Jr.

1965 : UNICEF 1966 1967 1968 : René Cassin 1969 : International Labour Organization 1970 : Norman Borlaug 1971 : Willy Brandt 1972 1973 : Lê Đức Thọ (declined award) / Henry Kissinger 1974: Seán MacBride / Eisaku Satō 1975: Andrei Sakharov 1976–2000 1976: Betty Williams / Mairead Corrigan 1977: Amnesty International 1978: Anwar Sadat / Menachem Begin 1979: Mother Teresa 1980: Adolfo Pérez Esquivel 1981: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1982: Alva Myrdal / Alfonso García Robles 1983: Lech Wałęsa 1984: Desmond Tutu 1985: International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War 1986: Elie Wiesel 1987: Óscar Arias 1988: UN Peacekeeping Forces 1989: Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama) 1990: Mikhail Gorbachev 1991: Aung San Suu Kyi 1992: Rigoberta Menchú 1993: Nelson Mandela / F. W. de Klerk 1994: Shimon Peres / Yitzhak Rabin / Yasser Arafat 1995: Pugwash Conferences / Joseph Rotblat 1996: Carlos Belo / José Ramos-Horta 1997: International Campaign to Ban Landmines / Jody Williams 1998: John Hume / David Trimble 1999: Médecins Sans Frontières 2000: Kim Dae-jung 2001–present 2001 : United Nations / Kofi Annan 2002 : Jimmy Carter 2003 : Shirin Ebadi 2004 : Wangari Maathai 2005 : International Atomic Energy Agency / Mohamed ElBaradei 2006 : Grameen Bank / Muhammad Yunus 2007 : Al Gore / Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2008 : Martti Ahtisaari 2009 : Barack Obama 2010 : Liu Xiaobo 2011 : Ellen Johnson Sirleaf / Leymah Gbowee / Tawakkol Karman 2012 : European Union 2013 : Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 2014 : Kailash Satyarthi / Malala Yousafzai 2015 : Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet 2016 : Juan Manuel Santos 2017 : International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons 2018 : Denis Mukwege / Nadia Murad 2019 : Abiy Ahmed 2020 : World Food Programme 2021 : Maria Ressa / Dmitry Muratov 2022 : Ales Bialiatski / Memorial / Center for Civil Liberties 2023 : Narges Mohammadi 2024 : Nihon Hidankyo v t e 1969 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry Derek Barton (Great Britain) Odd Hassel (Norway) Literature ( 1969 ) Samuel Beckett (Ireland) Peace ( 1969 ) International Labour Organization Physics Murray Gell-Mann (United States) Physiology or Medicine Max Delbrück (United States) Alfred Hershey (United States) Salvador Luria (United States) Economic Sciences Ragnar Frisch (Norway) Jan Tinbergen (Netherlands) Nobel Prize recipients 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 v t e United Nations Economic and Social Council Membership List of members of the United Nations Economic and Social Council Functional commissions United Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (CCPCJ) United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) United Nations Commission on Population and Development (CPD) United Nations Commission on Science and Technology for Development (CSTD) United Nations Commission for Social Development (CSocD) United Nations Statistical Commission (StatCom) United Nations Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF) Regional commissions Europe (ECE) Africa (ECA) Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) Western Asia (ESCWA) Specialised agencies Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) International Labour Organization (ILO) International Monetary Fund (IMF) International Maritime Organization (IMO) International Telecommunication Union (ITU) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) UN Tourism Universal Postal Union (UPU) World Health Organization (WHO) World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) World Meteorological Organization (WMO) World Bank Group (WBG) Funds and Programmes United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) World Food Programme (WFP) World Bank Group International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) International Development Association (IDA) International Finance Corporation (IFC) Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) Expert bodies Committee for Development Policy (CDP) Committee of Experts on Public Administration (CEPA) Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) Committee of Experts on Global Geospatial Information Management (GGIM) Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (ISAR) Group of Experts on Geographical Names (UNGEGN) United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII) Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations Research and training United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI) United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD) United Nations System Staff College (UNSSC) United Nations University (UNU) Other entities High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF) International Trade Centre (ITC) Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) United Nations Sustainable Development Group (UNSDG) United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) Disbanded entities Functional Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD - Replaced in 2013 by UNHLPF ) Functional  Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR - Replaced in 2006 by UNHRC ) International Refugee Organization (IRO - Replaced in 1952 by UNHCR ) Category Politics portal v t e Occupational safety and health Occupational diseases and injuries Acrodynia Asbestosis Asthma Barotrauma Berylliosis Brucellosis Burnout Byssinosis ("brown lung") Cardiovascular Chalicosis Chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy Chronic stress Chimney sweeps' carcinoma Coalworker's pneumoconiosis ("black lung") Concussions in sport Decompression sickness De Quervain syndrome Erethism Exposure to human nail dust Farmer's lung Fiddler's neck Flock worker's lung Glassblower's cataract Golfer's elbow Hearing loss Hospital-acquired infection Indium lung Laboratory animal allergy Lead poisoning Low back pain Mesothelioma Metal fume fever Mule spinners' cancer Noise-induced hearing loss Phossy jaw Pneumoconiosis Radium jaw Repetitive strain injury Silicosis Silo-filler's disease Sports injury Surfer's ear Tennis elbow Tinnitus Writer's cramp Occupational hygiene Occupational hazard Biological hazard Chemical hazard Physical hazard Psychosocial hazard Occupational stress Hierarchy of hazard controls Prevention through design Exposure assessment Occupational exposure limit Occupational epidemiology Workplace health surveillance Professions Environmental health Industrial engineering Occupational health nursing Occupational health psychology Occupational medicine Occupational therapist Safety engineering Agencies and organizations International European Agency for Safety and Health at Work International Labour Organization World Health Organization National Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (Canada) Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (Germany) Istituto nazionale per l'assicurazione contro gli infortuni sul lavoro (Italy) National Institute for Safety and Health at Work (Spain) Health and Safety Executive (UK) Occupational Safety and Health Administration National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (US) Safe Work Australia (Australia) Standards Bangladesh Accord OHSAS 18001 ISO 45001 Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 Worker Protection Standard (US) Working Environment Convention, 1977 Safety Checklist Code of practice Contingency plan Diving safety Emergency procedure Emergency evacuation Hazard Hierarchy of hazard controls Hazard elimination Administrative controls Engineering controls Hazard substitution Personal protective equipment Job safety analysis Lockout-tagout Permit To Work Operations manual Redundancy (engineering) Risk assessment Safety culture Standard operating procedure Immediately dangerous to life or health Legislation Diving regulations Occupational Safety and Health Act (United States) Potty parity ( United States ) Right to sit ( United States ) Workers' right to access the toilet See also Aerosol Break Break room Drug policy Effects of overtime Environment, health and safety Environmental toxicology Ergonomics Fire Fighter Fatality Investigation and Prevention Program Hawks Nest Tunnel disaster Health physics Hostile work environment Indoor air quality International Chemical Safety Card Job strain National Day of Mourning (Canada) NIOSH air filtration rating Overwork Process safety Public health Quality of working life Risk management Safety data sheet Source control Toxic tort Toxic workplace Workers' compensation Workplace hazard controls for COVID-19 Workplace health promotion Category Occupational diseases Journals Organizations Commons Portals : Organized labour Politics Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Norway Greece Sweden Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐42nb8
Cached time: 20250817054355
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.671 seconds
Real time usage: 1.934 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12633/1000000
Revision size: 84756/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 439175/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12762/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 30/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 428936/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.907/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10262519/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1536.843      1 -total
 42.76%  657.212      1 Template:Reflist
 24.42%  375.333     63 Template:Cite_web
 12.41%  190.698      1 Template:Infobox_organization
 11.93%  183.391      1 Template:Infobox
  9.55%  146.804      8 Template:Navbox
  8.11%  124.575     19 Template:Cite_journal
  5.12%   78.700      1 Template:United_Nations
  4.49%   69.078      1 Template:Short_description
  4.24%   65.210     10 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14987:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817054355 and revision id 1305878129. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Labour_Organization&oldid=1305878129 " Categories : International Labour Organization Global workforce and labor organizations Organizations awarded Nobel Peace Prizes Organizations established in 1919 Swiss Nobel laureates United Nations Development Group United Nations organizations based in Geneva United Nations specialized agencies Workers' rights organizations Human resource management Commodification Labour movement Labour law Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from July 2019 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2019 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 16:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Labour Organization 89 languages Add topic

