Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career 3 Awards 4 Selected publications 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Jean-Bernard Zuber 2 languages Deutsch Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French theoretical physicist Jean-Bernard Zuber Nationality French Alma mater École Polytechnique Known for Quantum field theory Awards Prix Dostaut-Blutet (1988) Prix Paul Langevin (1991) Chevalier des Palmes Academiques (1999) Scientific career Fields Physics Institutions Saclay Nuclear Research Centre , Sorbonne Université Thesis Les champs de Yang-Mills et la diffusion des mésons pseudoscalaires (1974) Doctoral advisor Jean Zinn-Justin Jean-Bernard Zuber is a French theoretical physicist .

Education [ edit ] Zuber studied at the École polytechnique from 1966 to 1968 and then as a CNRS researcher at the theoretical physics department of the Nuclear Research Center in Saclay . In 1974, he received his doctorate from Jean Zinn-Justin at the University of Paris-Sud in Orsay .

[ 1 ] Career [ edit ] From 1975 to 2004 he was in the same capacity as an engineer of the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission at the Institute of Theoretical Physics, Saclay and at the same time (1995 through 1998) Professor at the Paris Diderot University .  From 1995 to 2000 he was the chairman of the CNRS section of theoretical physics. Since 2004 he has been a professor at the Pierre and Marie Curie University , (now Sorbonne Université ),  Emeritus professor since 2014,  and between 2005  and 2013
he has been director of the Fédération de Recherches Interactions Fondamentales (FRIF).

Zuber is author of a standard work on quantum field theory (QFT) with Claude Itzykson , with whom he often collaborated. In addition to applications of QFT in elementary particle physics , it also deals with statistical mechanics , for example the Ising model , and in particular with conformal field theories , random matrices and matrix integrals including applications in combinatorics and knot theory.

Awards [ edit ] In 1989 he received the Prix Dostaut-Blutet of the French Academy of Sciences and in 1991 the Prix Paul Langevin of the French Physical Society . Since 1999 he has been a Chevalier des Palmes Academiques .

Selected publications [ edit ] with Claude Itzykson: Quantum Field Theory, McGraw Hill 1980, Dover 2005 Editor with Itzykson, Saleur: Conformal invariance and applications to statistical mechanics, World Scientific 1988 Editor with Raymond Stora : Recent Advances in Field Theory and Statistical Mechanics, Les Houches Summer School Volume 39, 1982, North Holland 1984 Editor with Jean-Michel Drouffe: The mathematical beauty of physics-a memorial volume for Claude Itzykson, World Scientific 1997 Editor with Cécile DeWitt-Morette : Quantum field theory: perspective and prospective (Les Houches 1998) , Kluwer 1999 ISBN 0-7923-5672-1 Zuber J.-B., Thèse d'Etat, Université Paris XI, 28 janvier 1974, "Les champs de Yang-Mills et la diffusion des mésons pseudoscalaires" References [ edit ] ^ "Les champs de Yang-Mills et la diffusion des mésons pseudoscalaires" [Yang-Mills fields and the diffusion of pseudoscalar mesons] (in French).

External links [ edit ] Homepage Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Israel Belgium Academics ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project MathSciNet Other IdRef Yale LUX This article about a French physicist is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jean-Bernard_Zuber&oldid=1279892583 " Categories : Living people French theoretical physicists French mathematical physicists École Polytechnique alumni 20th-century French physicists Scientists from Paris Members of the Académie Française Members of the French Academy of Sciences Quantum physicists French physicist stubs Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Year of birth missing (living people) All stub articles This page was last edited on 11 March 2025, at 05:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jean-Bernard Zuber 2 languages Add topic

