Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Impact 2 By type Toggle By type subsection 2.1 Ballot design 2.2 Day-of experience 2.3 Disenfranchisement 2.4 Frequent elections 2.5 Identification 2.6 Influence of money 2.7 Information warfare 2.8 Intimidation and violence 2.9 Path dependence/tyranny of the past 2.10 Registration or enrollment 2.10.1 Party membership requirements 2.11 Voter apathy 2.12 Wasted votes 3 By country Toggle By country subsection 3.1 Australia 3.2 Brazil 3.3 Canada 3.4 France 3.5 Israel 3.6 United Kingdom 3.7 United States 4 See also 5 Further reading 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Voter suppression 8 languages العربية Español Bahasa Indonesia עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Shqip Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Strategy designed to restrict specific groups of people from voting Voters at voting booths in the United States in 1945 Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Voter suppression is the discouragement or prevention of specific groups of people from voting or registering to vote. It is distinguished from political campaigning in that campaigning attempts to change likely voting behavior by changing the opinions of potential voters through persuasion and organization, activating otherwise inactive voters, or registering new supporters. Voter suppression, instead, attempts to gain an advantage by reducing the turnout of certain voters. Suppression is an anti-democratic tactic associated with authoritarianism .

The tactics of voter suppression range from changes that increase voter fatigue , to intimidating or harming prospective voters .

Impact [ edit ] Some argue the term 'voter suppression' downplays the harm done when voices are not reflected in an election, calling for terms like 'vote destruction' that accounts for the permanence of each vote not being cast.

[ 1 ] Making it harder to vote for people who have been given the right, can lead to voter fatigue . Skewing the electorate jeopardizes the wisdom of the crowd , and the decision-making benefits it brings. Suppression does not require intent. Analyzing the turnout of eligible voters provides a partial way to study cumulative voter suppression impacts under specific conditions, though other avenues such as election subversion , gerrymandering , and corruption , cannot always be captured by voter turnout metrics. Additionally, some of the rules that end up suppressing votes can also be used as a pretext for throwing out votes , even when voter fraud is extremely rare.

[ 2 ] By type [ edit ] Ballot design [ edit ] A half-million Americans had their votes disqualified in 2008 and 2010 due to ballot design issues, including confusing instructions.

[ 1 ] The order of politicians on the ballot can also give one candidate an edge, [ 1 ] while the length of a ballot can overwhelm voters , pushing them from the electorate for some or all races and increasing the wait times in lines for in-person voters.

[ 3 ] Day-of experience [ edit ] Requiring people to travel long distances and/or wait in long lines, for example, suppresses voter turnout. Some parties in Europe that have less support among expats have made it much more difficult for them to cast ballots by removing vote by mail options, forcing some to travel hundreds of kilometers.

[ 4 ] Weekend (such as Saturday voting in Australia), also contributes to higher turnout than weekday voting, maybe even more than having Election Day as a recognized holiday.

[ 1 ] A study in the UK found that when the sun sets later in the day, turnout tends to improve.

[ 5 ] The Cost of Voting Index estimates how much more difficult the voting experience is on average in states around the U.S.

[ 6 ] 78% of respondents in one preferred vote-by-mail to voting in-person.

[ 2 ] Disenfranchisement [ edit ] The disenfranchisement of voters due to age , residence , citizenship , or criminal record are among the more recent examples of ways that elections can be subverted by changing who is allowed to vote. Most countries set their voting age to 18, thus disenfranchising citizens below that age. In many countries, like Germany, disenfranchisement is an additional penalty to certain crimes, such as treason or electoral fraud. In others such as India, all prisoners lose the right to vote during the duration of their imprisonment. Some jurisdictions may disenfranchise felons for life, including some (but not all) states of the United States of America.

Frequent elections [ edit ] Main article: Voter fatigue Frequent elections increase the amount of time and attention required of voters, typically leading to lower turnout among certain types of voters.

[ 7 ] Two-round elections (including primary elections ), recall elections , and off-year elections are some examples of elections that contribute to voter fatigue. For example, Japan , Switzerland and the United States have the lowest voter turnout rates among developed countries due to holding frequent elections.

[ 8 ] Identification [ edit ] Photo identification requirements to vote can disenfranchise many voters especially the young, elderly, lower-income people, recently transitioned individuals, people of color, recently married women and people with disabilities. Additionally, the implementation of signature-matching processes, especially for mail-in ballots, can also be done so strictly as to suppress orders of magnitude more votes than the actual fraud that it prevents.

[ 9 ] The Center for Democracy and Civic Engagement at The University of Maryland estimates that 15% of adult American either lack driver's licenses or state IDs or have IDs that may not meet strict photo ID voting law requirements.

[ 10 ] A solution implemented in a number of countries is to automatically send free ID cards to all its citizens.

[ 2 ] Influence of money [ edit ] Less-regulated campaign spending reduces the influence of every vote by giving more power to wealthy people, special interests and lobbyists .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Corruption presents a more widely recognized form of election subversion or electoral fraud where votes or positions are acquired illegally using money.

Information warfare [ edit ] Main article: Information warfare Misinformation , disinformation , and the platforms that are incentivized to boost half-truths and lies are forms of information warfare that can be used to confuse, intimidate, or deceive voters.

[ 13 ] When misinformation and disinformation is amplified by the laundering of foreign money through domestic nonprofit organizations or other allied domestic actors, charges of treason can be brought against these actors for colluding with a foreign power.

[ 14 ] Common examples include undermining journalism, academia, political speech and other fundamental exchanges of ideas and information. Free or low-cost sources of information, such as through libraries, schools, nonprofits, public media, or open-source projects (like Wikipedia ), have historically supported this key democratic prerequisite. For example, two-thirds of U.S. college students in one study cited a lack of information as a reason for why they did not vote.

[ 2 ] Intimidation and violence [ edit ] Intimidation can result from the presence of cameras or guns at polling places to ballots that may not be secret.

[ 15 ] Following-through on threats by physically harming or killing people can severely deter voter participation.

[ 16 ] Path dependence/tyranny of the past [ edit ] The lack of intergenerational equity in policy undermines the ability of voters to pursue self-determination through their democratic processes. For example, the lifetime appointments of judges, or constitutions that are so difficult to change that they do not reflect the values of current voters, show how power allocated in the past can thwart voter power in the present. This kind of lock-in is only helpful if the present is less democratic than the past, which can become a self-fulfilling prophecy by simultaneously hampering the democratic innovations and evolutions that could prevent those threats by bolstering ancient architecture with the latest best-practices. Past actions can also create other kinds of path dependence , where power to shape democratic institutions can be slowed down or subverted by decisions made by those who wielded power in the past, regardless of how fairly (democratically) those setting the rules came to power and regardless of the values held by or information available to voters in the present. A relatively tangible example could be a country allowing itself to run up a large national debt that present-day voters did not consent to, shrinking discretionary spending to a fraction of what previous voters were able to spend.

Registration or enrollment [ edit ] Voter registration (or enrollment) is an extra step in the election process creates extra work for voters, especially those who move often and are new to the system, thereby suppressing their votes. Registration has been the number one reason why citizens in the US do not vote, which is why most democracies automatically enroll their citizens.

[ 2 ] Same-day registration is another tool to make registration less of a barrier. In addition, the existence of the process itself opens up more opportunities to make the process intentionally difficult or impossible, including aggressive voter roll purges.

[ 17 ] The Cost of Voting Index quantifies some of the differences in voter registration experiences in US states.

[ 18 ] Party membership requirements [ edit ] Another example where registration can suppress votes is requiring a declared party preference, which is required in closed primaries in the United States for example, dissuading voters who do not want to declare a party preference in order to weigh-in on who represents them.

[ 19 ] Open primaries allow anyone to vote regardless of party preference or affiliation. In some more authoritarian states, [ which?

] loyal party membership may be required to have a say, or even basic rights and privileges.

Voter apathy [ edit ] Voters may be discouraged from voting by weak cultural norms around voting. Countries without universal voting signal that voting is unimportant. A voting culture can be developed by reinforcing how voting is valued, expected and a centerpiece of a place's culture, [ 20 ] as peer pressure and a sense of belonging are powerful incentives to do something collectively.

Some proposals for reform include requiring that every selection have a 'none of the above' option, allow a wide range of valid excuses for not voting for conscientious objectors, and charging a low, non-compounding, non-criminal fee for those who do not vote or select a valid reason.

[ 20 ] Wasted votes [ edit ] Winner-take-all systems (unlike in systems with proportional representation ), are especially vulnerable to weakening and wasting certain votes year after year .

[ 21 ] This phenomenon also suppresses turnout for that and other elections help simultaneously in states that are not competitive, suppressing the popular vote for president in the US, for example, while lowering turnout in a host of other contests.

[ 2 ] In contrast, a parliamentary system typically significantly reduces wasted (suppressed) votes, helping to ensure more vote equality and encouraging greater overall participation.

[ 8 ] Ballot referendum can also be a powerful avenue for changing political systems, for example, that are not as responsive to voters due to gerrymandering or other anti-democratic actions and policies.

[ 22 ] By country [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Australian citizens are expected to enroll to vote, and it is their responsibility to update their enrollment when they change their address. Even so, an estimated 6% of eligible Australian voters are not enrolled or are enrolled incorrectly. They are disproportionately younger voters, many of whom might neglect to enroll when they attain voting age .

In 2006, the Howard government legislated to close the electoral roll much earlier once an election was called than before. Previously, voters had been allowed seven days of grace after an election had been called to arrange or update their enrollment, but new voters were now allowed only until 8:00 p.m. on the day that the electoral writ was issued to lodge their enrollment form, and those who needed to update their addresses were allowed three days. In Australia , the Prime Minister effectively has the right to determine the date of the election as long as constitutional rules regarding the maximum term of the parliament are adhered to. That measure was therefore likely to result in many newer voters being precluded from voting in the first election for which they were eligible because the time to arrange their enrollment once an election is called had been greatly reduced.

The measure was widely seen as an attempt at voter suppression aimed at younger voters [ 23 ] since surveys had shown that younger voters are more likely than the general population to vote for the Australian Labor Party or the Greens than Howard's Liberal Party .

[ 24 ] The government denied that it was trying to suppress some voters and insisted that the purposes of the reform were a smoother administration of the elections and the reduction of the possibility of electoral fraud. However, the Australian Electoral Commission had requested no such reform, there had been no evidence of significant electoral fraud, and the Australian Electoral Commission had been dealing with hundreds of thousands of late enrollments without significant problems for decades.

In July 2010, the left-wing lobby group GetUp!

launched a challenge to the law. The High Court of Australia expedited the hearing so that a ruling could be made in time for the 2010 federal election . The majority ruling struck down early closing of the roll and reinstated the old rule allowing voters seven days grace to arrange or update their enrollment .

Brazil [ edit ] Further information: 2022 Brazilian general election § Voter suppression attempts In the 2022 Brazilian general election , there were attempts by police and political sympathisers to make it more difficult for lower-income people to attend polling stations. Some public transport services were temporary reduced, [ 25 ] [ 26 ] spot inspections of vehicles and public transport were increased in poorer areas of the country, [ 27 ] [ 28 ] and roadblocks set up to disrupt and delay traffic.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Canada [ edit ] Shortly before the 2011 Canadian federal election , voter suppression tactics were exercised by issuing robocalls and live calls , which falsely advised voters that their polling station had been changed. The locations offered by those messages were intentionally false, often led voters several hours from the correct stations, and often identified themselves illegally as coming from Elections Canada .

[ 31 ] In litigation brought by the Council of Canadians , a federal court found that such fraud had occurred and had probably been perpetrated by someone with access to the Conservative Party 's voter database, including its information about voter preferences.

[ 32 ] The court stated that the evidence did not prove that the Conservative Party or that its successful candidates had been directly involved, [ 32 ] but it criticized the Conservative Party for making "little effort to assist with the investigation." [ 32 ] The court did not annul the result in any of six ridings where the fraud had occurred because it concluded that the number of votes affected had been too small to change the outcome.

[ 32 ] France [ edit ] In France, as in some other countries with Voter Registration , requirements and processes to update your address suppress voter turnout disproportionately against people who move more often, who tend to be younger, for example.

[ 33 ] Israel [ edit ] Further information: April 2019 Israeli legislative election In April 2019, during Israel 's general elections for the 21st Knesset , Likud activists installed hidden cameras in polling stations in Arab communities .

[ 34 ] Election observers were seen wearing such cameras.

[ 35 ] Hanan Melcer , the Head of the General Elections Committee, called the cameras illegal.

[ 36 ] The following day, the public relations agency Kaizler Inbar took credit for the operation and said it had been planned in collaboration with Likud. It claimed that voter turnout in Arab communities had fallen under 50% by the presence of the agency's observers in the polling stations, [ 37 ] though some of this decrease is likely due to a boycott that was planned for the vote.

[ 38 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Lutfur Rahman was the directly-elected mayor of Tower Hamlets for the British Labour Party . He was removed from office after being convicted of breaches of electoral law when his supporters intimidated voters at polling stations.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Voter suppression in the United States In the United States , elections are administered locally (though with many election rules set by states and the federal government), and forms of voter suppression vary among jurisdictions. When the country was founded, the right to vote in most states was limited to property-owning white males.

[ 41 ] Over time, the right to vote was granted to racial minorities, women, and youth.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] In the late 19th and the early 20th centuries, Southern states passed Jim Crow laws to suppress poor and racial minority voters that involved poll taxes , literacy tests , and grandfather clauses .

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Most of those voter suppression tactics were made illegal after the enactment of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . Even after the repeal of those statutes, there have been repeated incidents of racial discrimination against voters, especially in the South. For example, 87,000 people in Georgia were unable to vote in 2018 because of late registration. Many of the strictest voting regulations are in swing states and have been enacted primarily by U.S. Republican Party politicians.

[ 48 ] According to AMP Reports, many people who were predicted to be in favor of voting for the U.S. Democratic Party had their ballot dismissed. The study's analysis noted, "A disproportionate number of those potential voters were people of color or young voters, groups that typically favor Democrats." [ 48 ] The history of the previous Jim Crow regulations in the Southern states affects the voter suppression today because minorities often have their vote dismissed by the manipulation of voting regulations.

[ 49 ] One analysis of a Florida election in 2012 found that 200,000+ people did not vote because of long lines.

[ 50 ] Some Floridians were forced to wait 6–7 hours to vote.

[ 1 ] In 2013, after the U.S. Supreme Court struck down Section 4 of the Voting Rights Act, several states enacted voter ID laws. Some argue that such laws amount to voter suppression against African-Americans.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] In Texas, a voter ID law requiring a driver's license, passport, military identification, or gun permit was repeatedly found to be intentionally discriminatory. However, the DOJ expressed support for Texas's ID law.

[ 53 ] A similar ID law in North Dakota, which would have disenfranchised many Native Americans , was also overturned.

[ 54 ] In Wisconsin, a federal judge found that the state's restrictive voter ID law had led to "real incidents of disenfranchisement, which undermine rather than enhance confidence in elections, particularly in minority communities." [ 55 ] Since there was no evidence of widespread voter impersonation in Wisconsin, it found that the law was "a cure worse than the disease". In addition to imposing strict voter ID requirements, the law reduced early voting , required people to live in a ward for at least 28 days before voting, and prohibited emailing absentee ballots to voters.

[ 54 ] Other controversial measures include shutting down Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) offices in minority neighborhoods, which makes it more difficult for residents to obtain voter IDs; [ 56 ] [ 57 ] shutting down polling places in minority neighborhoods; [ 58 ] systematically depriving precincts in minority neighborhoods of the resources needed to operate efficiently, such as poll workers and voting machines; [ 59 ] and purging voters from the rolls shortly before an election.

[ 60 ] Often, voter fraud is cited as a justification for such laws even if the incidence is low. In Iowa, lawmakers passed a strict voter ID law with the potential to disenfranchise 260,000 voters. Out of 1.6 million votes cast in Iowa in 2016, there were only 10 allegations of voter fraud, none of which being cases of impersonation that a voter ID law could have prevented. Iowa Secretary of State Paul Pate, the architect of the bill, stated "we've not experienced widespread voter fraud in Iowa".

[ 61 ] In May 2017, US President Donald Trump established the Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity for the purpose of preventing voter fraud. Critics have suggested its true purpose is voter suppression. The commission was led by Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach , a staunch advocate of strict voter ID laws and a proponent of the Crosscheck system. Crosscheck is a national database, which is designed to check for voters who are registered in more than one state by comparing names and dates of birth. Researchers at Stanford University, the University of Pennsylvania, Harvard University, and Microsoft found that for every legitimate instance of double registration it finds, Crosscheck's algorithm returns approximately 200 false positives.

[ 62 ] Kobach has been repeatedly sued by the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) for trying to restrict voting rights in Kansas.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] See also [ edit ] Authoritarianism Hybrid regime Democratic backsliding Electoral fraud Gerrymandering Unfair election Vote equality Voter caging Further reading [ edit ] Rick L. Hasen. 2020.

Election Meltdown: Dirty Tricks, Distrust, and the Threat to American Democracy . Yale University Press.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Litt (2020).

Democracy in one book or less : how it works, why it doesn't, and why fixing it is easier than you think (First ed.). New York: Ecco.

ISBN 978-0-06-287936-3 .

OCLC 1120147424 .

^ a b c d e f Rusch, Elizabeth (2020).

You call this democracy? : how to fix our government and deliver power to the people . Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 978-0-358-17692-3 .

OCLC 1124772479 .

^ Demsas, Jerusalem (2023-08-21).

"Americans Vote Too Much" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 2023-09-21 .

^ Fubini, Federico (2020-01-15).

"Voter suppression comes to Europe" .

www.ips-journal.eu . Retrieved 2023-10-11 .

^ Rallings, C.; Thrasher, M.; Borisyuk, G. (March 2003).

"Seasonal factors, voter fatigue and the costs of voting" .

Electoral Studies .

22 (1): 65– 79.

doi : 10.1016/S0261-3794(01)00047-6 .

^ Corasaniti, Nick; McCann, Allison (2022-09-20).

"The 'Cost' of Voting in America: A Look at Where It's Easiest and Hardest" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2023-01-05 .

^ Anzia, Sarah F. (2011-04-01).

"Election Timing and the Electoral Influence of Interest Groups" .

The Journal of Politics .

73 (2): 412– 427.

doi : 10.1017/S0022381611000028 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

^ a b Michael McDonald and Samuel Popkin.

"The Myth of the Vanishing Voter" in American Political Science Review. December 2001. p. 970.

^ "Signature Match Laws Disproportionately Impact Voters Already on the Margins" .

American Civil Liberties Union . 2018-11-02 . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ Rothschild, Jillian Andres; Novey, Samuel B; Hanmer, Michael J (January 2024).

"Who Lacks ID in America Today? An Exploration of Voter ID Access, Barriers, and Knowledge" (PDF) .

Center for Democracy and Civil Engagement . University of Maryland. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2025 . Retrieved 30 March 2025 .

^ Ginsburg, Tom (2018).

"Democratic Backsliding and the Rule of Law" .

Ohio Northern University Law Review .

44 : 351– 369.

^ Baldwin, Bridgette (April 24, 2015).

"Backsliding: The United States Supreme Court, Shelby County v. Holder and the Dismantling of Voting Rights Act of 1965" .

Journal of Race, Gender, and Ethnicity .

7 (1).

^ Ressa, Maria (2022).

How to stand up to a dictator: the fight for our future . Foreword by Amal Clooney (First ed.). New York: Harper.

ISBN 978-0-06-325751-1 .

OCLC 1333867107 .

^ Levin, Dov H. (2020).

Meddling in the ballot box : the causes and effects of partisan electoral interventions . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0197519882 .

^ Newman, Lily Hay (November 7, 2022).

"The Secret Ballot Is US Democracy's Last Line of Defense" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 . Retrieved 2022-12-09 .

^ Roush, Wade (January 2020).

"Truly Secure Voting Is on the Way" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 2023-08-16 .

^ "Voter Purges | Brennan Center for Justice" .

www.brennancenter.org . 20 July 2018 . Retrieved 2023-01-08 .

^ Schraufnagel, Scot; Pomante, Michael J.; Li, Quan (2022-09-01).

"Cost of Voting in the American States: 2022*" .

Election Law Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy .

21 (3): 220– 228.

doi : 10.1089/elj.2022.0041 .

ISSN 1533-1296 .

^ Cook, Rhodes (12 July 2018).

"Registering By Party: Where the Democrats and Republicans Are Ahead – Sabato's Crystal Ball" . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ a b Dionne, E. J. Jr.; Rapoport, Miles (2022).

100% Democracy: The Case for Universal Voting . Cornell William Brooks, Allegra Chapman, Joshua A. Douglas, Amber Herrle, Cecily Hines, Janai Nelson, Brenda Wright, Heather C. McGhee. New York: The New Press.

ISBN 978-1-62097-677-7 .

OCLC 1252962012 .

^ Seabrook, Nick (2022).

One person, one vote : a surprising history of gerrymandering in America (First ed.). New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 978-0-593-31586-6 .

OCLC 1286675891 .

^ "Ballot measures on weed and abortion won in 2022. Now they're fueling a backlash" .

NPR.org . Retrieved 2022-12-15 .

^ Orr, Graeme "Court by surprise: the High Court upholds voting rights" , 6 August 2010.

^ Brooker, Ron "Youth Federal Election Voting Intentions: A Statistical and Graphical Analysis of Newspoll Quarterly Data 1996–2010" , The Whitlam Institute, June 2011 ^ "PT teme que donos de empresas de ônibus pró-Bolsonaro reduzam frotas para sabotar eleitor de baixa renda" [PT fears that owners of pro-Bolsonaro bus companies will reduce fleets to sabotage low-income voters].

The Intercept Brasil (in Portuguese). 27 September 2022.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2022 . Retrieved 1 October 2022 .

^ "Ministro do TSE chama de absurdo pedido da campanha de Bolsonaro de limitar transporte nas eleições" [TSE minister calls Bolsonaro campaign's request to limit transport in elections absurd].

G1 (in Portuguese). October 2022.

Archived from the original on 2 October 2022 . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ Stargardter, Gabriel (30 October 2022).

"Brazil highway police blockades fan voter-suppression fears" .

Reuters . Retrieved 31 October 2022 .

^ Audi, Amanda (30 October 2022).

"More details on alleged voter suppression case emerge" .

The Brazilian Report . Retrieved 31 October 2022 .

^ Downie, Andrew; Phillips, Tom (30 October 2022).

"Brazil election: Lula's challenge hangs in balance amid voter suppression claims" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 31 October 2022 .

^ "Brazil election hit by outcry over roadblocks" .

France 24 . Agence France-Presse. 30 October 2022 . Retrieved 31 October 2022 .

^ "Robocalls complaints came 3 days before 2011 election" . CBC News. 2012-11-19 . Retrieved 2012-11-19 .

^ a b c d MacCharles, Tonda (May 23, 2013).

"Robocalls: Widespread but 'thinly scattered' vote suppression didn't affect election, judge rules" .

Toronto Star . Retrieved 2013-05-27 .

^ "Listes électorales : nouvelle inscription" [Election lists: new registration].

www.service-public.fr (in French) . Retrieved 2021-05-15 .

^ Azoulay, Moran (2019-09-04).

"Outrage as Likud activists secretly film voting in Arab communities" .

Ynetnews . Retrieved 2019-04-10 .

^ ynet (2019-04-10), משקיפים של הליכוד עם מצלמות נסתרות על מצביעים בקלפיות , archived from the original on 2021-12-22 , retrieved 2019-04-10 ^ "i24NEWS" .

www.i24news.tv . Retrieved 2019-04-10 .

^ "קייזלר ענבר" .

www.facebook.com . Retrieved 2019-04-10 .

^ "Israel's young Arab citizens call for election boycott" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . 5 April 2019 . Retrieved 2020-07-05 .

^ Syal, Rajeev; Quinn, Ben (2015-04-23).

"Met considers criminal inquiry into Tower Hamlets mayor Lutfur Rahman" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2020-07-05 .

^ "Tower Hamlets election fraud mayor Lutfur Rahman removed from office" .

BBC News . 23 April 2015 . Retrieved 23 April 2015 .

^ Bret Carroll.

American Masculinities: A Historical Encyclopedia . SAGE Publications; 14 October 2003.

ISBN 978-1-4522-6571-1 . p. 89.

^ Christina Rivers.

The Congressional Black Caucus, Minority Voting Rights, and the U.S. Supreme Court . University of Michigan Press; 17 July 2012.

ISBN 0-472-11810-2 . pp. 146–48.

^ Jennifer Macbain-Stephens.

Women's Suffrage: Giving the Right to Vote to All Americans . Rosen Classroom; January 2006.

ISBN 978-1-4042-0869-8 .

^ United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments.

Lowering the voting age to 18: Hearings, Ninety-first Congress, second session . U.S. Govt. Print. Off. 1970.

^ Kimberley Johnson.

Reforming Jim Crow: Southern Politics and State in the Age Before Brown . Oxford University Press; 16 April 2010.

ISBN 978-0-19-988904-4 . p. 97.

^ Michael J. Klarman.

From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle for Racial Equality . Oxford University Press; 5 February 2004.

ISBN 978-0-19-535167-5 . p. 70.

^ Walter Hazen.

The Civil War to the Jim Crow Laws: American Black History . Milliken Publishing Company; 1 September 2004.

ISBN 978-0-7877-2730-7 . p. 38.

^ a b Angela Caputo; Geoff Hing; Johnny Kauffman.

"A Georgia law prevented 87,000 people from voting last year. And it could have a big impact in 2020" .

www.apmreports.org . Retrieved 2020-10-07 .

^ "Constitutional Rights Foundation" .

www.crf-usa.org . Retrieved 2020-10-07 .

^ Powers, Scott; David Damron (January 29, 2013).

"Analysis: 201,000 in Florida didn't vote because of long lines" .

Orlando Sentinel . Orlando, Florida . Retrieved 2016-02-26 .

^ Childress, Sarah (June 26, 2013).

"With Voting Rights Act Out, States Push Voter ID Laws" .

FRONTLINE . PBS.

^ Childress, Sarah (June 25, 2013).

"Supreme Court Strikes Blow to Voting Rights Act: What's Next?" .

FRONTLINE . PBS.

^ "A Court Strikes Down Texas's Voter ID Law For the Fifth Time" .

The Atlantic . August 24, 2017.

^ a b "As November Approaches, Courts Deal Series Of Blows To Voter ID Laws" .

NPR . August 2, 2016.

^ "Case: 3:15-cv-00324-jdp Document #: 234 In the United States District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin" (PDF) . Retrieved January 23, 2018 .

^ "DOT launches investigation in Alabama over DMV closures" .

CNN . December 9, 2015.

^ "The State of Alabama Has Fully Lost Its Mind" .

Esquire . April 12, 2017.

^ "There Are 868 Fewer Places to Vote in 2016 Because the Supreme Court Gutted the Voting Rights Act" .

The Nation . November 4, 2016.

^ "Long Lines at Minority Polling Places" .

The New York Times . September 24, 2014.

^ "Ruling Preserves Voting Rights for Thousands in North Carolina" .

The New York Times . November 4, 2016.

^ "Iowa's New Voter-ID Law Would Have Disenfranchised My Grandmother" .

The Nation . April 13, 2017.

^ "How Trump's nationwide voter data request could lead to voter suppression" .

The Washington Post . June 30, 2017.

^ "The Man Behind Trump's Voter-Fraud Obsession" .

The New York Times . June 13, 2017.

^ Speri, Alice (October 27, 2016).

"Voter Suppression is the Real Election Scandal" .

The Intercept .

External links [ edit ] "Voter+suppression" , Core.ac.uk , Open access research papers v t e Corruption Corruption in different fields Corporate crime Corruption in local government Interest group corruption Police corruption Political corruption Measures of corruption Corruption Perceptions Index Economics of corruption Forms or aspects of corruption General Baksheesh Black market / Grey market Bribery Collusion Commercial bribery Conflict of interest Corporation Dummy Shell Confidence trick Embezzlement Extortion Fraud Graft (politics) Honest services fraud Insider trading Kickback Match fixing Money laundering Cryptocurrency and crime Hawala and crime Noble cause corruption Professional courtesy Scandal Slush fund Tax evasion Tax haven Offshore investment Offshore financial centre State Clientelism Coronelism Crony capitalism Cronyism Elite capture Failed state Ghost soldiers Kleptocracy Mafia state Nepotism Plutocracy Political scandal Regulatory capture Rent-seeking Rent-setting State capture State crime Elections Ballot stuffing Electoral fraud Election security Gerrymandering Unfair Vote pairing Vote suppression Institutions dealing with corruption International Global Financial Integrity Global Witness Group of States Against Corruption International Anti-Corruption Academy Mo Ibrahim Foundation Transparency International UNCAC Coalition of Civil Society Organisations National Oficina Anticorrupción (Argentina) Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission Anti-Corruption Commission (Bangladesh) (Bangladesh) Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory (Burundi) National Anti-Corruption Observatory (Cameroon) National Supervisory Commission / Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (China) Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong) Commission Against Corruption (Macau) USKOK (Croatia) European Anti-Fraud Office (European Union) Fiji Independent Commission Against Corruption Central Vigilance Commission (India) KPK (Indonesia) National Anti-Corruption Authority (Italy) Corruption Prevention and Combating Bureau (Latvia) Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program (Liberia) Special Investigation Service of the Republic of Lithuania BIANCO (Madagascar) Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission Anti-Corruption Commission of Myanmar (Myanmar) Independent Corrupt Practices Commission (Nigeria) National Accountability Bureau (Pakistan) Investigation Task Force Sweep (Papua New Guinea) Central Anticorruption Bureau (Poland) Anti-Corruption General Directorate (Romania) National Anticorruption Directorate (Romania) Investigative Committee of Russia (Russia) Sierra Leone Anti-corruption Commission Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (Singapore) Commission for the Prevention of Corruption of the Republic of Slovenia Anti-Corruption and Civil Rights Commission (South Korea) Servicio de Vigilancia Aduanera (Spain) National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine (Ukraine) Specialized Anti-Corruption Prosecutor's Office (Ukraine) Warioba Commission (Tanzania) Central Steering Committee for Anti-Corruption (Vietnam) Anti-corruption Laws and enforcement Citizen's Charter and Grievance Redressal Bill 2011 (pending) Foreign Corrupt Practices Act Foreign Extortion Prevention Act Freedom of information laws by country The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 UK Bribery Act of 2010 Whistleblower protection International instruments and efforts Inter-American Convention Against Corruption International asset recovery International Association of Anti-Corruption Authorities OECD Anti-Bribery Convention United Nations Convention against Corruption Protest movements 2011 Azerbaijani protests 2011 Indian anti-corruption movement 2012 Indian anti-corruption movement Anti-austerity movement in Spain Movement for Peace with Justice and Dignity Russian anti-corruption campaign Yo Soy 132 2017–2019 Romanian protests 2017–2018 Russian protests v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Voter_suppression&oldid=1298376870 " Categories : Voter suppression Political campaign techniques Political corruption Electoral fraud Discrimination Injustice Hidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2025 This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 03:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Voter suppression 8 languages Add topic

