Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formal definition 2 The stag hunt and social cooperation 3 Examples of the stag hunt 4 See also 5 Explanatory footnotes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Stag hunt 15 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar 日本語 Русский Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conflict between safety and cooperation This article is about the game theory problem about stag hunting. For the painting about stag hunting, see Stag Hunt . For stag hunting, see Deer hunting .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Stag hunt" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This Formal definition may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( July 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In game theory , the stag hunt , sometimes referred to as the assurance game , trust dilemma or common interest game , describes a conflict between safety and social cooperation. The stag hunt problem originated with philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau in his Discourse on Inequality .

In the most common account of this dilemma, which is quite different from Rousseau's, two hunters must decide separately, and without the other knowing, whether to hunt a stag or a hare . However, both hunters know the only way to successfully hunt a stag is with the other's help. One hunter can catch a hare alone with less effort and less time, but it is worth far less than a stag and has much less meat. But both hunters would be better off if both choose the more ambitious and more rewarding goal of getting the stag, giving up some autonomy in exchange for the other hunter's cooperation and added might. This situation is often seen as a useful analogy for many kinds of social cooperation, such as international agreements on climate change.

[ 1 ] The stag hunt differs from the prisoner's dilemma in that there are two pure-strategy Nash equilibria : [ 2 ] one where both players cooperate, and one where both players defect.

[ a ] In the prisoner's dilemma, despite the fact that both players cooperating is Pareto efficient , the only pure Nash equilibrium is when both players choose to defect.

An example of the payoff matrix for the stag hunt is pictured in Figure 2.

Stag Hare Stag a, a c, b Hare b, c d, d Fig. 1: Generic symmetric stag hunt Stag Hare Stag 10, 10 1, 8 Hare 8, 1 5, 5 Fig. 2: Stag hunt example Formal definition [ edit ] Formally, a stag hunt is a game with two pure strategy Nash equilibria—one that is risk dominant and another that is payoff dominant . The payoff matrix in Figure 1 illustrates a generic stag hunt, where a > b ≥ ≥ d > c {\displaystyle a>b\geq d>c} .

In addition to the pure strategy Nash equilibria there is one mixed strategy Nash equilibrium. This equilibrium depends on the payoffs, but the risk dominance condition places a bound on the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium. No payoffs (that satisfy the above conditions including risk dominance) can generate a mixed strategy equilibrium where Stag is played with a probability higher than one half. The best response correspondences are pictured here.

The stag hunt and social cooperation [ edit ] "Nature and Appearance of Deer" taken from "Livre du Roy Modus", created in the 14th century Although most authors focus on the prisoner's dilemma as the game that best represents the problem of social cooperation , some authors believe that the stag hunt represents an equally (or more) interesting context in which to study cooperation and its problems (for an overview see Skyrms 2004 ).

There is a substantial relationship between the stag hunt and the prisoner's dilemma. In biology many circumstances that have been described as prisoner's dilemma might also be interpreted as a stag hunt, depending on how fitness is calculated.

Cooperate Defect Cooperate 3, 3 0, 5 Defect 5, 0 1, 1 Fig. 3: Prisoner's dilemma example It is also the case that some human interactions that seem like prisoner's dilemmas may in fact be stag hunts. For example, suppose we have a prisoner's dilemma as pictured in Figure 3. The payoff matrix would need adjusting if players who defect against cooperators might be punished for their defection. For instance, if the expected punishment is −3, then the imposition of this punishment turns the above prisoner's dilemma into the stag hunt given at the introduction.

Examples of the stag hunt [ edit ] The original stag hunt dilemma is as follows: a group of hunters have tracked a large stag, and found it to follow a certain path. If all the hunters work together, they can kill the stag and all eat. If they are discovered, or do not cooperate, the stag will flee, and all will go hungry.

The hunters hide and wait along a path. An hour goes by, with no sign of the stag. Two, three, four hours pass, with no trace. A day passes. The stag may not pass every day, but the hunters are reasonably certain that it will come. However, a hare is seen by all hunters moving along the path.

If a hunter leaps out and kills the hare, he will eat, but the trap laid for the stag will be wasted and the other hunters will starve. There is no certainty that the stag will arrive; the hare is present. The dilemma is that if one hunter waits, he risks one of his fellows killing the hare for himself, sacrificing everyone else. This makes the risk twofold; the risk that the stag does not appear, and the risk that another hunter takes the kill.

In addition to the example suggested by Rousseau, David Hume provides a series of examples that are stag hunts. One example addresses two individuals who must row a boat. If both choose to row they can successfully move the boat. However, if one doesn't, the other wastes his effort. Hume's second example involves two neighbors wishing to drain a meadow. If they both work to drain it they will be successful, but if either fails to do his part the meadow will not be drained.

Several animal behaviors have been described as stag hunts. One is the coordination of slime molds . In times of stress, individual unicellular protists will aggregate to form one large body. Here if they all act together they can successfully reproduce, but success depends on the cooperation of many individual protozoa. Another example is the hunting practices of orcas (known as carousel feeding ). Orcas cooperatively corral large schools of fish to the surface and stun them by hitting them with their tails. Since this requires that the fish have no way to escape, it requires the cooperation of many orcas.

Author James Cambias describes a solution to the game as the basis for an extraterrestrial civilization in his 2014 science fiction book A Darkling Sea .

Carol M. Rose argues that the stag hunt theory is useful in 'law and humanities' theory.

[ 3 ] In international law, countries are the participants in a stag hunt. They can, for example, work together to improve good corporate governance.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Common knowledge (logic) Discourse on Inequality Mutual knowledge Pluralistic ignorance Prisoner's dilemma Social contract Christmas truce Explanatory footnotes [ edit ] ^ When both hunters choose the stag, one could not gain by changing to the hare, while the other still choosing the stag. The same scenario also happens when both choose the hare, thus reaching Nash equilibrium in both cases.

References [ edit ] Notes ^ david1gibbon (February 11, 2013).

"Uses of Game Theory in International Relations" .

Economic Theory of Networks at Temple University .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Fang C, Kimbrough SO, Pace S, Valluri A, Zheng Z (2002).

"On Adaptive Emergence of Trust Behavior in the Game of Stag Hunt" .

Group Decision and Negotiation .

11 (6): 449– 467.

doi : 10.1023/A:1020639132471 .

S2CID 7187903 . Archived from the original on 2020-03-20 . Retrieved 2022-07-07 .

^ Rose, C. (2010).

"Game Stories" .

Yale Journal of Law & the Humanities .

22 : 369– 391.

^ Nissen, A. (2021).

"Stag Hunt: Anti-Corruption Disclosures Concerning Natural Resources" (PDF) .

Chicago Journal of International Law .

1 : 1– 20.

Bibliography Skyrms, Brian (2004).

The Stag Hunt and the Evolution of Social Structure . Cambridge University Press.

External links [ edit ] The stag hunt at GameTheory.net Skyrms, Brian (March 2001).

The stag hunt (PDF) (Written speech). Pacific Division of the American Philosophical Association – Presidential Address . Retrieved 2022-07-07 .

v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐v5dst
Cached time: 20250812014351
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.484 seconds
Real time usage: 0.644 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1389/1000000
Revision size: 9937/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 132194/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12525/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37903/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.293/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7628858/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  470.466      1 -total
 27.16%  127.771      1 Template:Game_theory
 26.73%  125.750      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 24.17%  113.715      2 Template:Reflist
 18.52%   87.152      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 16.18%   76.107      1 Template:Cite_web
 13.84%   65.124      1 Template:Short_description
 12.30%   57.869      3 Template:Ambox
  9.18%   43.200      1 Template:Original_research
  7.80%   36.684      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1563701:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014351 and revision id 1292217043. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stag_hunt&oldid=1292217043 " Categories : Non-cooperative games Evolutionary game theory Social science experiments Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from November 2018 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from November 2018 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles that are too technical from July 2018 All articles that are too technical Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 20:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stag hunt 15 languages Add topic

