Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Content 3 Influence 4 Contemporaries mentioned in The Law 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The Law (Bastiat book) 7 languages العربية Español Français Italiano Magyar Português Shqip Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1850 book by Frédéric Bastiat The Law Title page for La Loi ("The Law", 1850) Author Frédéric Bastiat Original title La Loi Language French Publication date 1850 The Law ( French : La Loi ) is an 1850 book by Frédéric Bastiat .  It was written at Mugron two years after the third French Revolution and a few months before his death of tuberculosis at age 49.  The essay was influenced by John Locke 's Second Treatise on Government and in turn influenced Henry Hazlitt 's Economics in One Lesson .

[ 1 ] It is the work for which Bastiat is most famous, followed by the candlemaker's petition and the parable of the broken window .

Overview [ edit ] In The Law , Bastiat wrote that "each of us has a natural right – from God – to defend his person, his liberty, and his property." He described the State as a "substitution of a common force for individual forces" to defend this right. He contended that law becomes perverted when it is used to violate the rights of the individual, when it punishes one's right to defend himself against an effort of others to legislatively enact laws which plunder his wealth/property.

Bastiat asserted that whereas justice has precise limits, philanthropy is limitless and thus government can grow endlessly when that becomes its function. The resulting statism , he argued, is "based on this triple hypothesis: the total inertness of mankind, the omnipotence of the law, and the infallibility of the legislator."  The relationship between the public and the legislator becomes "like the clay to the potter." Bastiat stated, "I do not dispute their right to invent social combinations, to advertise them, to advocate them, and to try them upon themselves, at their own expense and risk. But I do dispute their right to impose these plans upon us by law – by force – and to compel us to pay for them with our taxes." [ 2 ] Content [ edit ] Bastiat argues in the work that a government consists only of the people within or authorizing it, therefore it has no legitimate powers beyond those that people would individually have: Socialism, like the ancient ideas from which it springs, confuses the distinction between government and society. As a result of this, every time we object to a thing being done by government, the socialists conclude that we object to its being done at all. We disapprove of state education. Then the socialists say that we are opposed to any education. We object to a state religion. Then the socialists say that we want no religion at all. We object to a state-enforced equality. Then they say that we are against equality. And so on, and so on. It is as if the socialists were to accuse us of not wanting persons to eat because we do not want the state to raise grain.

He goes on to describe the rights that those individuals do have, which he recognizes as natural rights , based on natural law . He summarizes these as life, liberty, and private property, explaining that government's only legitimate role is to protect them: Life, liberty, and property do not exist because men have made laws. On the contrary, it was the fact that life, liberty, and property existed beforehand that caused men to make laws in the first place.

Therefore, government is simply an extension of these specific natural rights to a collective force, and its main purpose is the protection of these rights. Any government that oversteps beyond this role, acting in ways that an individual would not have the right to act, places itself at war with its own purpose: But, unfortunately, law by no means confines itself to its proper functions. And when it has exceeded its proper functions, it has not done so merely in some inconsequential and debatable matters. The law has gone further than this; it has acted in direct opposition to its own purpose. The law has been used to destroy its own objective: It has been applied to annihilating the justice that it was supposed to maintain; to limiting and destroying rights which its real purpose was to respect. The law has placed the collective force at the disposal of the unscrupulous who wish, without risk, to exploit the person, liberty, and property of others. It has converted plunder into a right, in order to protect plunder. And it has converted lawful defense into a crime, in order to punish lawful defense.

Bastiat thus also points out that those who resist plunder, as is their natural right, become targets of the very law that was supposed to protect their rights in the first place. Laws are passed saying that opposing plunder is illegal, with punishments that will accumulate to death, if resisted consistently.

Though living in France, Bastiat wrote this book when slavery was still legal in the United States and was very controversial there, as it was in Europe. In the U.S. at that time, there was a dramatic struggle between the agricultural southern states and the industrialized northern. Globally famous were the two key components of this, with the northern states imposing crippling tariffs that impoverished the South while trying to ban slavery. Bastiat pointedly describes both slavery and tariffs as forms of "legal plunder".

There is no country in the world where the law is kept more within its proper domain: the protection of every person's liberty and property. As a consequence of this, there appears to be no country in the world where the social order rests on a firmer foundation. But even in the United States, there are two issues—and only two—that have always endangered the public peace.

What are these two issues? They are slavery and tariffs. These are the only two issues where, contrary to the general spirit of the republic of the United States, law has assumed the character of a plunderer.

Slavery is a violation, by law, of liberty. The protective tariff is a violation, by law, of property.

Bastiat goes on to describe other forms of plunder, both legalized by the state and banned. He then concludes that the problem of it must be settled once and for all. He says that there are three ways to do so: The few plunder the many.

Everybody plunders everybody.

Nobody plunders anyone.

He points out that, given these options, what is obviously the best for society is the last one, with all plunder being ended.

Influence [ edit ] The Law has been cited by many thinkers from a broad range of ideologies.

Ron Paul describes it as one of the main books that influenced him.

[ 3 ] Ronald Reagan cited it as a deep influence.

The Federalist Society includes it on their pre-law reading list.

[ 4 ] Milton Friedman frequently recommended it as a reference.

[ 5 ] Contemporaries mentioned in The Law [ edit ] François-Noël Babeuf Jacques Nicolas Billaud-Varenne Louis Blanc Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet Étienne Cabet Étienne Bonnot de Condillac Victor Prosper Considérant Charles Dupin François Fénelon Charles Fourier Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu Morelly Robert Owen Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Guillaume Thomas François Raynal Maximilien Robespierre Jean-Jacques Rousseau Louis de Saint-Just Claude Henri de Rouvroy, comte de Saint-Simon Adolphe Thiers References [ edit ] ^ Even though Hazlitt was more influenced by Ce qu'on voit et ce qu'on ne voit pas ( That Which Is Seen and That Which Is Unseen ), he mentions The Law in the foreword to Economics in One Lesson .

^ All quotations are from translation of The Law ^ Ron Paul Talks about One of His Favorite Books: “The Law” by Frédéric Bastiat ^ Conservative & Libertarian Pre-Law Reading List ^ Dear Milton Friedman External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Law The Law at Project Gutenberg The Law public domain audiobook at LibriVox Portal : Liberalism NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐65tkh
Cached time: 20250817060906
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.359 seconds
Real time usage: 0.466 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1836/1000000
Revision size: 9510/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 23072/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9275/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 10674/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.219/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15592617/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  425.191      1 -total
 22.83%   97.081      1 Template:Langx
 22.28%   94.726      1 Template:Wikisource
 21.68%   92.186      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
 20.93%   88.982      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
 20.57%   87.474      1 Template:Sister_project
 20.24%   86.065      1 Template:Side_box
 16.81%   71.469      1 Template:Short_description
 16.65%   70.791      1 Template:Infobox_book
 13.20%   56.138      1 Template:ISO_639_name Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9027995:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817060906 and revision id 1302072822. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Law_(Bastiat_book)&oldid=1302072822 " Categories : 1850 non-fiction books Books about political philosophy Classical liberalism Law and economics Books about conservatism Hidden categories: Articles containing French-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 05:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Law (Bastiat book) 7 languages Add topic

