Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early examples 2 Plunderphonics (EP) 3 Plunderphonic (album) 4 Later works 5 Notable works by others 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Plunderphonics 8 languages Català Español Français 한국어 Italiano Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Music genre This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Plunderphonics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( September 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Plunderphonics Stylistic origins Sound collage electronic hip hop turntablism sampledelia library music spoken word public broadcasting found sound musique concrete film score Cultural origins 1980s Typical instruments Sampler tape recorder Derivative forms Hauntology vaporwave Plunderphonics is a music genre in which tracks are constructed by sampling recognizable musical works. The term was coined by composer John Oswald in 1985 in his essay "Plunderphonics, or Audio Piracy as a Compositional Prerogative", [ 1 ] and eventually explicitly defined in the liner notes of his Grayfolded album. Plunderphonics is a form of sound collage . Oswald has described it as a referential and self-conscious practice which interrogates notions of originality and identity .

[ 2 ] Although the concept of plunderphonics is broad, in practice there are many common themes used in what is normally called plunderphonic music. This includes heavy sampling of educational films of the 1950s, news reports, radio shows , or anything with trained vocal announcers . Oswald's contributions to this genre rarely used these materials, the exception being his rap -like 1975 track "Power", which combined a Led Zeppelin instrumental with a sermon of a Southern US evangelist.

The process of sampling other sources is found in various genres (notably hip-hop and especially turntablism ), but in plunderphonic works, the sampled material is often the only sound used. These samples are usually uncleared and sometimes result in legal action being taken due to copyright infringement. Some plunderphonic artists use their work to protest what they consider to be overly restrictive copyright laws. Many plunderphonic artists claim their use of other artists' materials falls under the fair use doctrine.

Development of the process is when creative musicians plunder an original track and overlay new material and sounds on top until the original piece is masked and then removed, though often using scales and beats. It is a studio-based technique used by such groups as the American experimental band the Residents (who used Beatles tracks), and other noted exponents including Negativland , the Dust Brothers , DJ Shadow and the Avalanches .

Early examples [ edit ] Although the term plunderphonics tends to be applied only to music made since Oswald coined it in the 1980s, there are several examples of earlier music made along similar lines. Notably, Dickie Goodman and Bill Buchanan 's 1956 single " The Flying Saucer ", features Goodman as a radio reporter covering an alien invasion interspersed with samples from various contemporary records.

[ citation needed ] According to Chris Cutler , "It wasn't until 1961 that an unequivocal exposition of plunderphonic techniques arrived in James Tenney 's celebrated Collage No. 1 ('Blue Suede') , a manipulation of Elvis Presley 's hit record ' Blue Suede Shoes '. The gauntlet was down; Tenney had picked up a 'non art', lowbrow work and turned it into 'art'; not as with scored music by writing variations on a popular air, but simply by subjecting a gramophone record to various physical and electrical procedures." [ 3 ] According to Oswald, "the difference with 'Blue Suede' is how it audaciously used a very recognizable existing recording of another musical work. This blatant appropriation pioneered the discovery, for myself and many others, of an ocean of sampling and plunderphonics in following decades." [ 4 ] The Residents ' "Beyond The Valley Of A Day In The Life" consists of excerpts from Beatles records. Various club DJs in the 1970s re-edited the records they played, and although this often consisted of nothing more than extending the record by adding a chorus or two, this too could be considered a form of plunderphonics.

Some classical composers have performed a kind of plunderphonia on written , rather than recorded, music. Perhaps the best-known example is the third movement of Luciano Berio 's Sinfonia , in which multiple quotations from the music of other composers are superimposed on a complete performance of the second movement from Mahler's second symphony .

Alfred Schnittke and Mauricio Kagel have also made extensive use of earlier composers' works. Earlier composers who often plundered the music of others include Charles Ives (who often quoted folk songs and hymns in his works) and Ferruccio Busoni (a movement from his 1909 piano suite An die Jugend includes a prelude and a fugue by Johann Sebastian Bach played simultaneously). During the '90s Oswald composed many such scores for classical musicians which he classified with the term Rascali Klepitoire .

In France, Jean-Jacques Birgé has been working on "radiophonies" since 1974 (for his film "La Nuit du Phoque"), capturing radio and editing the samples in real-time with the pause button of a radio-cassette. His group Un Drame Musical Instantané recorded "Crimes parfaits" on LP "A travail égal salaire égal" in 1981, explaining the whole process in the piece itself and calling it "social soundscape". He applied the same technique to TV in 1986 on the "Qui vive?" CD and published on the 1998 CD  "Machiavel" [ 5 ] with Antoine Schmitt , an interactive video scratch using 111 very small loops from his own past LPs.

Plunderphonics (EP) [ edit ] Plunderphonics was used as the title of an EP release by John Oswald. Oswald's original use of the word was to indicate a piece that was created from samples of a single artist and no other material. Influenced by William S. Burroughs ' cut-up technique , he began making plunderphonic recordings in the 1970s. In 1988 he distributed copies of the Plunderphonics EP to the press and to radio stations . It contained four tracks: [ 6 ] "Pretender" featured a single of Dolly Parton singing "The Great Pretender" progressively slowed down on a Lenco Bogen turntable so that she eventually sounds like a man; "Don't" was Elvis Presley 's recording of the titular song overlaid with samples from the recording and overdubs by various musicians, including Bob Wiseman , Bill Frisell and Michael Snow ; "Spring" was an edited version of Igor Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring , shuffled around and with different parts played on top of one another; "Pocket" was based on Count Basie 's "Corner Pocket", edited so that various parts loop a few times.

Plunderphonic (album) [ edit ] In 1989 Oswald released a greatly expanded CD version of Plunderphonics with twenty-five tracks.

[ 6 ] As on the EP, each track used material by just one artist. It reworked material by both popular musicians like The Beatles , and classical works such as Ludwig van Beethoven 's Symphony No. 7 . Like the EP, it was never offered for sale. A central idea behind the record was that the fact that all the sounds were " stolen " should be quite blatant. The packaging listed the sources of all the samples used, but authorization for them to be used on the record was neither sought nor given. All undistributed copies of plunderphonic were destroyed [ 7 ] after a threat of legal action from the Canadian Recording Industry Association on behalf of several of their clients (notably Michael Jackson , whose song " Bad " had been chopped into tiny pieces and rearranged as "Dab") who alleged copyright abuses. Various press statements by record industry representatives revealed that a particular item of contention was the album cover art which featured a transformed image of Michael Jackson as a naked woman derived from his Bad cover.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Later works [ edit ] Plexure (1993) featured what Oswald coined "electroquotations" (exact clones of portions of commercial digital soundfiles, as found on audio CDs, of over 1,000 tracks that were commercially released between 1982 and 1993, the first decade of the CD era. Thousands of these "electroquotated" fragments are layered according to their position in a tempo spectrum that, after introductory material, accelerates throughout the piece.

Oswald was subsequently approached by Phil Lesh to use Grateful Dead material on what became the album Grayfolded (1994/5).

[ 10 ] Plunderphonics 69/96 (2001) [ 11 ] [ 12 ] is a compilation of Oswald's work, from 1969 to 1996, including tracks from the original plunderphonic CD.

Notable works by others [ edit ] The term "plunderphonic" is used today in a looser sense to indicate any music completely—or almost completely—made up of samples.

DJ Shadow has often been referred to as a pivotal figure in plunderphonics starting with his 1996 album Endtroducing.....

, with his work being seminally used by later proponents.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Other notable DJs include Mr Scruff (Andy Carthy). His hit " Get a Move On !", from his 1999 album Keep It Unreal , is built around "Bird's Lament (In Memory of Charlie Parker)" by Moondog [ 5 ] and has been used in several commercials, ranging from Lincoln and Volvo automobiles to France Télécom and GEICO insurance. The song also sampled vocals from T-Bone Walker 's "Hypin' Woman Blues", and contains samples of the song "That's the Blues" by Rubberlegs Williams .

The Avalanches have also been referred to as seminal artists in the genre, in particular with their album Since I Left You , released in 2000, [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 15 ] [ 19 ] which has been noted as an important pivotal work.

[ 20 ] [ 14 ] [ 16 ] Both Philip Sherburne writing for Rhapsody and Joseph Krol, writing in Varsity , said that Endtroducing.....

and Since I Left You were the two most important plunderphonics albums, [ 21 ] with Krol also including J Dilla 's Donuts which followed in 2006.

[ 22 ] In 1992, French noise rock band Paneuropean Architecture released the album Toi Jeune!

, [ 23 ] referring to John Oswald's work. The album was reissued in 2006 and titled "plundernoize".

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Pogo (musician) – often referred to as a musician in the plunderphonics genre References [ edit ] ^ Oswald, John (1985).

"Plunderphonics, or Audio Piracy as a Compositional Prerogative" . Retrieved April 15, 2019 .

^ Reynolds, Simon (1995). "JOHN OSWALD / GRAYFOLDED".

The Wire .

^ Cutler, Chris. (1994) 2004. “Plunderphonia.” Musicworks 60 (Fall): 6–19. Reprinted in Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music , edited by Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner, 138–56. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group.

^ Wannamaker, Robert. 2021.

The Music of James Tenney, Volume 1: Contexts and Paradigms , University of Illinois Press. 40–41.

^ a b "Machiavel" .

Machiavel.net .

^ a b Sanjek, David (1993).

The Construction of Authorship: Textual Appropriation in Law and Literature . Duke University Press. p. 358.

ISBN 0822314126 .

^ Collins, Nick (2009).

Introduction to Computer Music . Wiley. p. 66.

ISBN 978-0470714553 .

^ "Plunderphonic - Plunderphonic" .

Discogs . 1989.

^ Taking Sampling 50 Times Beyond the Accepted: an interview with John Oswald, Part 2, by Norman Igma. Musicworks # 48 ^ "GRAYFOLDED, by Grateful Dead" .

^ "Plunderphonic songs, by plunderphonics" .

^ "Plunderphonic tunes, by plunderphonics" .

^ Kai Chai, Yeow (August 10, 2016). "A thrilling listen of high and low".

The Straits Times .

^ a b "Take A Byte Out: DJ Shadow, the Avalanches and the History of Plunderphonics" .

KEYMAG . September 6, 2019 . Retrieved May 4, 2023 .

^ a b "The Quietus | Features | Anniversary | Been Around The World: The Magical Odyssey Of The Avalanches' Since I Left You" .

The Quietus . November 23, 2020 . Retrieved May 4, 2023 .

^ a b Oganesson (September 28, 2021).

"Plunderphonics Part 1: The Art of Musical Collage" .

The Vault Publication . Retrieved May 4, 2023 .

^ staff, Treble (July 21, 2016).

"10 Essential Plunderphonics Tracks" .

Treble . Retrieved May 4, 2023 .

^ Riddler, Kat (July 20, 2016). "The Avalanches Newest Release, "Wildflower" ".

U Wire .

^ "Plunderphonics Greatest Album of All Time" .

NME . Retrieved May 9, 2023 .

^ DeLuca, Dan (July 16, 2016). "Wildflower".

The Nation .

^ "Since I Left You : The Avalanches : Rhapsody" . July 18, 2013. Archived from the original on July 18, 2013 . Retrieved May 4, 2023 .

^ "Welcome to Paradise: The Timeless Unreality of Since I Left You?" .

Varsity Online . Retrieved May 4, 2023 .

^ "Paneuropean Architecture Discography" .

Discogs.com . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Toi, jeune!, by Paneuropean Architecture" .

Paneuropean.bandcamp.com . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Interview with John Oswald (2010) for Ràdio Web MACBA [1] Radio Feature The Some Assembly Required Interview with John Oswald (2001) "Plunderphonics, or Audio Piracy as a Compositional Prerogative" – an essay by John Oswald plunderphonics.com – website created by Oswald cohort Phil Strong pfony.com – Oswald's record label: includes some current info on his other activities ccutler.co.za A comprehensive history and analysis of plunderphonia by Chris Cutler.

detritus.net – deals with recycled art in all areas, especially music Illegal Art We Edit Life (Vicki Bennett's Movie) Variations A series on Sampling Music by Jon Leidecker for Ràdio Web MACBA v t e Appropriation in the arts By field Music Bootleg recording Chopped and screwed Contrafact list Contrafactum Cover version DJ mix Interpolation Medley Music mashup Music plagiarism Musical quotation Nightcore Parody music Pasticcio Plunderphonics Potpourri Quodlibet Remix Riddim Sampling Sound collage Standard Tribute act Trope Variation Vaporwave Literature / theatre Assemblage Cut-up technique Flarf poetry Found poetry Jukebox musical Trope Verbatim theatre Visual arts Collage Combine painting Photographic mosaic Readymades of Marcel Duchamp Swipe By source material Mona Lisa Michelangelo's David Michelangelo's Pietà Statue of Liberty Cinema / television / video Abridged series Anime music video Collage film Found footage Literal music video Parody film Re-cut trailer Remake Shot-for-shot Supercut TV format Vidding Video mashup YouTube Poop Other arts In-joke Internet meme Joke theft Parody advertisement Revivalism (architecture) Video game modding General concepts Intertextual figures Allusion Calque Parody Pastiche Plagiarism Quotation Translation Adaptation Film Literary Theatre Other concepts After (art) Assemblage (art) Bricolage Citation Détournement Found object Homage Imitation in art Mashup Reprise Satire Source criticism in the arts Related artistic concepts Aesthetic interpretation Anti-art Archetypal literary criticism Artistic inspiration " The Death of the Author " Divine inspiration Afflatus Genius (literature) Muses Fan labor Fan fiction Genre Genre studies Originality Simulacrum Western canon Standard blocks and forms Archetype Formula fiction Genre fiction Jazz standard Plot device Stock character Story structure Epoch-marking works L.H.O.O.Q.

(1919) " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " (1939) Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010) Theorization Dada De Copia Rerum Diegesis Dionysian imitatio Mimesis Nachahmung Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree The Pictures Generation Pop art Postmodernism Russian formalism Related non- artistic concepts Academic dishonesty Appropriation in sociology Articulation in sociology Cultural appropriation History of printing Information society Intellectual property Copyright infringement Derivative work Fair use Meme Open source Participatory culture Pirate politics Recontextualisation Remix culture v t e Electronic -based music styles Electronic dance music · Electronica Genres by decade of origin Early Amplified guitar Electric blues Hawaiian guitar Jùjú Rock List of rock genres Western swing Biomusic Computer music Electroacoustic music Acousmatic music Musique concrète Tape music Elektronische Musik Live electronics Noise Sound system (Jamaican) Space age pop 1960s Ambient Drone Dub Electronic rock Jazz-funk Krautrock New-age music Progressive rock Psychedelic music Psychedelic funk Psychedelic rock Sampledelia Space music Space rock 1970s Afro/cosmic music Space disco Boogie Chiptune Dancehall Electropunk Eurodisco Hi-NRG Industrial Industrial rock Japanoise New wave Cold wave Dark wave Minimal wave Post-disco Dance-punk Dance-rock Italo disco Reggae fusion Synth-pop 1980s Alternative dance Baggy Ambient pop Breakbeat Florida breaks Contemporary R&B New jack swing Dark ambient Dubtronica Electro Freestyle Electro-industrial Electronic body music Electropop Ethnic electronica Funk carioca Kuduro Kwaito Tecnocumbia Turbo-folk Eurobeat Eurodance Grebo House Acid Ambient Balearic beat Chicago Deep Garage Funky Italo Jersey sound Hip house Latin Tech Tribal Industrial hip hop Industrial metal Martial industrial Miami bass New beat Power electronics Ragga Sophisti-pop Synth-metal Techno Acid techno Bleep techno Detroit techno Tracker music 1990s Ambient dub Ambient techno Asian underground Baltimore club Bhangragga Big beat Bitpop Breakbeat hardcore Darkcore Happy hardcore Toytown techno Broken beat Changa tuki Chopped and screwed Dark electro Denpa song Digital hardcore Disco polo Diva house Hardbag Downtempo Bristol sound Psybient Trip hop Drum and bass Heavy Darkstep Hardstep Neurofunk Techstep Jungle Ragga jungle Light Atmospheric Intelligent Jazzstep Liquid funk Dub techno Dungeon synth Electroclash Folktronica French house Nu disco Funkot Futurepop Ghetto house Footwork Ghettotech Glitch Hardcore Belgian techno Bouncy techno Breakcore Free tekno Frenchcore Gabber Hardstyle Lento violento J-core Mákina Speedcore Harsh noise wall Illbient Indietronica Industrial techno Intelligent dance music Drill 'n' bass Kidandali Livetronica Merenhouse Microhouse Minimal techno Schaffel Nu jazz Electro swing Nu metal Nu skool breaks Post-rock Power noise Progressive house Psydub Reggaeton Dembow Trance Acid Balearic Dream Goa Hands Up Hard Progressive Psy Tech Uplifting Vocal UK garage 2-step Breakstep Speed garage UK hard house Hardbass Hard NRG 2000s Afrobeats Bassline Budots Christian electronic dance music Cloud rap Coupé-décalé Crunk Crunkcore Dancehall pop Dubstep Reggaestep Electro house Complextro Dutch house Fidget house Electronicore Future garage Grime Grindie Hauntology Hypnagogic pop Chillwave Glo-fi Jersey club Juke house Jumpstyle Mainstream hardcore Nightcore Nintendocore Nortec Phonk Post-punk revival New rave Rabòday Reductionism Lowercase Onkyokei Russ music Sambass Shangaan electro Skweee Synthwave Sovietwave Tecno brega Trival UK bass UK funky Funkstep Vocaloid music Witch house Wonky Wonky pop 2010s Afroswing Algorave Amapiano Azonto Big room house Black MIDI Brazilian bass Bro-country Deconstructed club Dreampunk Funktronica Future bass Kawaii future bass Future house Future soul Hyperpop Gqom Jungle terror Lofi hip hop Mahraganat Melbourne bounce Moombahton Moombahcore Moombahsoul Mumble rap Outsider house Plugg Post-dubstep Brostep Riddim Rara tech Seapunk Shamstep EDM trap Tropical house Vaporwave Hardvapour Mallsoft Slowed and reverb Wave Hardwave Weird SoundCloud 2020s Drift phonk Hyperpop microgenres Plugg microgenres Rage Lowend Jerk Sigilkore Other topics Culture Beat drop Club drug Disc jockey DJ mix Sound system Turntablism Mashup Microgenre Nightclub Rave Acid house party Circuit party Doof EDM festival Free party Teknival Remix Sampling Plunderphonics Rare groove Riddim Street dance House dance Rave dance Genres Bass music Celtic fusion Chill-out music Lounge music Disco Doujin music Lo-fi music Madchester Progressive electronica Rave music Reggae Sound collage Video game music Adaptive music Tools Bass Data sonification Digital audio workstation Drum break List Electronic musical instrument Drum machine Sampler Synthesizer Electronics in rock music MIDI Music technology (electronic and digital) Recording studio as an instrument v t e Experimental music Related contemporary classical music genres Aleatoric indeterminacy Avant-garde Drone Electroacoustic Acousmatic music Tape music Minimal Musique concrete Noise Danger Experimental popular music genres By style Avant-garde jazz Avant-garde metal Post-metal Avant-pop Avant-prog Avant-punk Biomusic Deconstructed club Experimental pop Experimental rock krautrock math rock neo-prog no wave noise rock post-punk post-rock Intelligent dance music Neofolk Wave Related Art pop Art punk Art rock Avant-funk Ambient Drone metal Free improvisation Free jazz Glitch Hyperpop Industrial Progressive jazz Punk jazz Witch house Extended techniques 3rd bridge Circuit bending Frippertronics Plunderphonics Prepared guitar Prepared piano Scordatura Turntablism Related concepts Cymatics Dada Data sonification Experimental musical instrument Experimental luthier Fluxus Progressive music Sound art Sound collage Sound installation Sound sculpture Soundscape Electroacoustic improvisation Events and lists List of experimental music festivals List of electronic music festivals List of experimental musicians Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plunderphonics&oldid=1305391567 " Categories : Musical techniques Sampling (music) Electronic music genres Experimental music Sound collages Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2016 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2018 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use mdy dates from May 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Wikipedia external links cleanup from March 2020 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 20:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plunderphonics 8 languages Add topic

