Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Zoroastrian eschatology 2 Jewish eschatology 3 Christian eschatology 4 Hindu eschatology 5 Islamic eschatology 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents World to come 8 languages العربية বাংলা Español Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Português Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief that the current age will be replaced by a better world, age, or paradise "The world to come" redirects here. For the 2020 film, see The World to Come .

Part of a series on Salvation in Christianity General concepts Christian universalism Divine judgment Eschatology Immortality Last Judgment Particular judgment Resurrection ( universal ) Transcendence Universal reconciliation Justification Monergism Synergism Unlimited atonement Particular concepts Conditionalism Entering heaven alive Intermediate state One true faith Punishment Hell ( Christian views , Problem of Hell ) Purgatory Soul death Reward Heaven in Christianity World to come v t e The world to come , age to come , heaven on Earth , and the Kingdom of God are eschatological phrases reflecting the belief that the current world or current age is flawed or cursed and will be replaced in the future by a better world, age, or paradise .

The concept is related to, but differs from, the concepts of heaven or the afterlife in that heaven is another place or state of existence generally seen as above the world, and the afterlife is generally an individual's continued existence after death.

[ citation needed ] The following section reviews religions chronologically by date of the composition of various religious texts, from oldest to most recent, although the chronology of ancient religions is not known with certainty. Later dates are more certain than earlier dates.

Zoroastrian eschatology [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "World to come" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) In Zoroastrian eschatology , the world to come is the frashokereti , where the saoshyant will bring about a resurrection of the dead in the bodies they had before they died. This is followed by a last judgment . The yazatas Airyaman and Atar will melt the metal in the hills and mountains, and the molten metal will then flow across the earth like a river. All humankind—both the living and the resurrected dead—will be required to wade through that river, but for the righteous ( ashavan ) it will seem to be a river of warm milk, while the wicked will be burned. The river will then flow down to hell , where it will annihilate Angra Mainyu and the last vestiges of wickedness in the universe. The saoshyant is first mentioned as a savior in the Yashts written around 625 and 225 BCE, according to some interpretations.

[ 1 ] Jewish eschatology [ edit ] Main article: Jewish eschatology § World to come Resurrection of the dead , fresco from the Dura-Europos synagogue HaOlam haBa ( Hebrew : העולם הבא , lit.

'the world to come') is an important part of the afterlife in Jewish eschatology, which also encompasses Gan Eden (the Heavenly Garden of Eden), Gehinom and Sheol .

[ 2 ] According to the Talmud , any non-Jew who lives according to the Seven Laws of Noah is regarded as a "righteous gentile", and is assured of a place in the world to come, the final reward of the righteous.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] There is much Aggadic material relating to this topic. Much of this has been collected in popular form in Legends of the Jews , by Louis Ginzberg , discussing esoteric and mystical kabbalistic concepts such as Paradise, and the "higher" Gan Eden .

[ 5 ] Christian eschatology [ edit ] Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse , an 1887 painting by Viktor Vasnetsov . The Lamb of God is visible at the top.

Main article: Christian eschatology In Christianity, the phrase is found in the Nicene Creed (current Ecumenical version) : "We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come." [ 6 ] It is also found in the King James Version of the New Testament at Matthew 12:32 , Mark 10:30 , Luke 18:30 , Hebrews 2:5 , Hebrews 6:5 . Other related expressions are "age to come" which is typically found in more recent translations, Kingdom of God , Messianic Age , Millennial Age , Golden Age , the New Earth and New Jerusalem , and dispensation of the fulness of times and possibly also eternal life .

Hindu eschatology [ edit ] Kalki with his white horse Main article: Hindu eschatology In Hindu eschatology the current age is the Kali Yuga , a period of decline.

Kalki will appear to purge all evil, beginning a golden age of Satya Yuga .

There have been a range of dates predicted, purportedly from different methods of calculation.

[ 7 ] Pothuluru Veerabrahmendra , for example, wrote 400 years ago in his Divya Maha Kala Gnana, or Divine Knowledge of the Time , that Kalki would arrive when the moon, sun, Venus and Jupiter entered the same sign. This is not a rare occurrence and last happened in early 2012, passing without event.

[ 8 ] The time of arrival of Kalki has not been consistently asserted by astrologers.

[ 7 ] The earliest copies of the Mahabharata that exist dates from 200 CE and is the first text to mention Kalki but was likely written in its final form around 400 CE. Kalki is also mentioned in the Vishnu Purana which has a contested date of composition ranging from 400 BCE to 1000 CE.

Islamic eschatology [ edit ] See also: Islamic eschatology , Messianic Age § Islam , and Messiah § Islam Both Sunni Islam and Shia Twelve Imams beliefs hold that before the Last Judgment , the Mahdi and Jesus appears and defeats the Antichrist False Messiah ( Al-Masih ad-Dajjal ). The Mahdi's rule will be paradise on Earth, which will last for seventy years until his death, though other traditions state 7, 19, or 309 years.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Messiah Messianism New world order (Baháʼí) Otherworld Possible world Problem of evil Technological singularity References [ edit ] ^ Livius ^ Jews are told to live their lives on earth to the full, as their bodies will stay there but their souls live on.

Jewish Afterlife Beliefs at SimpleToRemember.com ^ Mishneh Torah , Hilkhot M'lakhim 8:11 ^ Encyclopedia Talmudit (Hebrew edition, Israel, 5741/1981, entry Ben Noah , end of article); note the variant reading of Maimonides and the references in the footnote ^ Ginzberg, Louis (1909).

"Chapter I: The Creation of the World" .

The Sacred Texts: Legends of the Jews .

^ "The Nicene Creed" . Christian-bible.com . Retrieved 2012-01-08 .

^ a b Chandra, Suresh (Aug 15, 2012).

Encyclopaedia of Hindu Gods and Goddesses . Kindle Edition.

^ Santanu Acharya.

"Hindu Prophecies: Translations from the Kalki Purana" . Ww-iii.tripod.com . Retrieved 2013-01-20 .

^ "How long will the Imam of Time, Imam Mahdi (AS), will this world rule after he reappears?" .

v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐q68xm
Cached time: 20250814223513
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.490 seconds
Real time usage: 0.641 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1215/1000000
Revision size: 11506/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 69148/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1632/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 42543/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.311/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22041199/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  540.238      1 -total
 19.32%  104.348      1 Template:Reflist
 17.91%   96.731      1 Template:Transliteration
 15.23%   82.269      1 Template:Salvation
 14.88%   80.376      1 Template:Sidebar
 14.06%   75.968      2 Template:Cite_book
 12.28%   66.330      1 Template:Short_description
 10.41%   56.246      1 Template:Doomsday
 10.29%   55.616      3 Template:Navbox
  9.28%   50.144      1 Template:One_source Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8163829:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814223513 and revision id 1288822856. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_to_come&oldid=1288822856 " Categories : Eschatology Biblical phrases Religious cosmologies Nicene Creed Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Hebrew-language text This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 22:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents World to come 8 languages Add topic

