Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Economics 2 Criticisms 3 Counter-criticisms 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Profit motive 9 languages Català Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Motivation for businesses to maximize profits For profit in economics and political economy, see Profit (economics) . "Maximization (economics)" redirects here. For utility maximization, see Utility .

Part of a series on Finance Markets Assets Asset (economics) Bond Asset growth Capital asset Commodity Derivatives Domains Equity Foreign exchange Money Over-the-counter Private equity Real estate Spot Stock Participants Angel investor Bull (stock market speculator) Financial planner Investor institutional Retail Speculator Locations Financial centres Offshore financial centres Conduit and sink OFCs Instruments Bond Cash Collateralised debt obligation Credit default swap Time deposit ( certificate of deposit ) Credit line Deposit Derivative Futures contract Indemnity Insurance Letter of credit Loan Mortgage Option ( call exotic put ) Performance bonds Repurchase agreement Stock Security Syndicated loan Synthetic CDO Corporate General Accounting Audit Capital budgeting Capital structure Corporate finance Credit rating agency Enterprise risk management Enterprise value Risk management Financial statements Transactions Leveraged buyout Mergers and acquisitions Structured finance Venture capital Taxation Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Corporate tax haven Tax inversion Tax haven Transfer pricing Personal Credit / Debt Employment contract Financial planning Retirement Student loan Public Government spending Final consumption expenditure Operations Redistribution Transfer payment Government revenue Taxation Deficit spending Budget ( balance ) Debt Non-tax revenue Warrant of payment Banking Central bank Deposit account Fractional-reserve Full-reserve Investment banking Loan Money supply Lists of banks Bank regulation Banking license Basel Accords Bank for International Settlements Financial Stability Board Deposit insurance Separation of investment and retail banking Regulation · Financial law International Financial Reporting Standards ISO 31000 Professional certification Fund governance Economic history Private equity and venture capital Recession Stock market bubble Stock market crash Accounting scandals Outline Business and Economics portal Money portal v t e Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Part of a series on Accounting Constant purchasing power Historical cost Management Tax Major types Audit Budget Cost Forensic Financial Fund Governmental Management Social Tax Key concepts Accounting period Accrual Constant purchasing power Economic entity Fair value Going concern Historical cost Matching principle Materiality Revenue recognition Unit of account Selected accounts Assets Cash Cost of goods sold Depreciation / Amortization (business) Equity Expenses Goodwill Liabilities Profit Revenue Accounting standards Generally-accepted principles Generally-accepted auditing standards Convergence International Financial Reporting Standards International Standards on Auditing Management Accounting Principles Financial statements Annual report Balance sheet Cash-flow Equity Income Management discussion Financial statement analysis Bookkeeping Bank reconciliation Debits and credits Double-entry system FIFO and LIFO Journal Ledger / General ledger Trial balance Auditing Financial Internal Firms Report Sarbanes–Oxley Act People and organizations Accountants Accounting organizations Luca Pacioli Development History Research Positive accounting Sarbanes–Oxley Act Misconduct Creative Earnings management Error account Hollywood Off-balance-sheet Two sets of books v t e In economics , the profit motive is the motivation of firms that operate so as to maximize their profits . Mainstream microeconomic theory posits that the ultimate goal of a business is "to make money" - not in the sense of increasing the firm's stock of means of payment (which is usually kept to a necessary minimum because means of payment incur costs, i.e. interest or foregone yields), but in the sense of "increasing net worth ". Stated differently, the reason for a business's existence is to turn a profit.

[ 1 ] The profit motive is a key tenet of rational choice theory , or the theory that economic agents tend to pursue what is in their own best interests. In accordance with this doctrine, businesses seek to benefit themselves and/or their shareholders by maximizing profits .

As it extends beyond economics into ideology , the profit motive has been a major matter of contention.

[ citation needed ] Economics [ edit ] Theoretically, when an economy is fully competitive (i.e. has no market imperfections like externalities, monopolies, information or power imbalances etc), the profit motive ensures that resources are being allocated efficiently . For instance, Austrian economist Henry Hazlitt explains, “If there is no profit in making an article, it is a sign that the labor and capital devoted to its production are misdirected: the value of the resources that must be used up in making the article is greater than the value of the article itself." [ 2 ] In other words, profits let companies know whether an item is worth producing. Theoretically in free and competitive markets, if an individual firm maximizes profits, it ensures that resources are not wasted. However, the market itself, should minimize profits as it is the cost to the value chain .  Competition is the key tool by which markets overcome the individual firm's profit maximization incentive. The profit motive is a good of value to the economy. According to free market economic theory, it is needed to provide incentive to generate efficiency and innovation.  However, over-remuneration of the profit motive creates profit inefficiency. With massive reductions in competition in many industries due to consolidation and mergers, the US economy has become profit inefficient, with record profits occurring in recent years.

[ 3 ] This creates a deadweight loss to the economy.

Criticisms [ edit ] The majority of criticisms against the profit motive center on the idea that profits should not supersede the needs of people or the protection of the environment .

Michael Moore's film Sicko , for example, attacks the healthcare industry for its alleged emphasis on profits at the expense of patients.

[ 4 ] Moore explains: We should have no talk of profit when it comes to helping people who are sick. The profit motive should be nowhere involved in this. And you know what? It's not fair to the insurance companies either because they have a fiduciary responsibility to make as much money as they can for their shareholders. Well, the way they make more money is to deny claims or to kick people off the rolls or to not even let people on the rolls because they have a pre-existing condition. You know, all of that is wrong.

[ 5 ] The Catholic Church 's Compendium on its social teaching argues that "environmental protection cannot be assured solely on the basis of financial calculations of costs and benefits. The environment is one of those goods that cannot be adequately safeguarded or promoted by market forces ." [ 6 ] Pope Francis , in his 2015 encyclical letter Laudato si' , adds a rhetorical question to this text: Is it realistic to hope that those who are obsessed with maximizing profits will stop to reflect on the environmental damage which they will leave behind for future generations ?

[ 7 ] Another common criticism of the profit motive is that it is believed to encourage selfishness and greed. Critics of the profit motive contend that companies disregard morals or public safety in the pursuit of profits.

[ 8 ] Counter-criticisms [ edit ] Free-market economists argue that the profit motive, coupled with competition, often reduces the final price of an item for consumption, rather than raising it. They argue that businesses profit by selling a good at a lower price and at a greater volume than the competition. Economist Thomas Sowell uses supermarkets as an example to illustrate this point: "It has been estimated that a supermarket makes a clear profit of about a penny on a dollar of sales. If that sounds pretty skimpy, remember that it is collecting that penny on every dollar at several cash registers simultaneously and, in many cases, around the clock." [ 9 ] Economist Milton Friedman has argued that greed and self-interest are universal human traits. On a 1979 episode of The Phil Donahue Show , Friedman states, "The world runs on individuals pursuing their separate interests." He continues by arguing that only in capitalist countries, where individuals can pursue their own self-interest, people have been able to escape from "grinding poverty".

[ 10 ] Author and philosopher Ayn Rand defended selfishness on ethical grounds. Her nonfiction work, The Virtue of Selfishness , argues that selfishness is a moral good and not an excuse to act with disregard for others: The Objectivist ethics holds that the actor must always be the beneficiary of his action and that man must act for his own rational self-interest. But his right to do so is derived from his nature as man and from the function of moral values in human life—and, therefore, is applicable only in the context of a rational, objectively demonstrated and validated code of moral principles which define and determine his actual self-interest. It is not a license “to do as he pleases” and it is not applicable to the altruists’ image of a “selfish” brute nor to any man motivated by irrational emotions, feelings, urges, wishes or whims.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Incentive References [ edit ] ^ Compare: Duska, Ronald F. (1997). "The Why's of Business Revisited".

Contemporary Reflections on Business Ethics . Issues in Business Ethics. Vol. 23. Dordrecht: Springer Science & Business Media (published 2007). p. 41.

ISBN 9781402049842 . Retrieved 8 July 2019 .

In microeconomics courses, profit maximization is frequently given as the goal of the firm. [...] In microeconomics, profit maximization functions largely as a theoretical goal, with economists using it to prove how firms behave rationally to increase profit. Unfortunately, it ignores many real-world complexities.

^ Joseph T. Salerno,Jeffrey A. Tucker (2008).

"The Function of Profits" .

Ludwig Von Mises Institute .

Recorded during the 2008 Mises University, Jeffrey Tucker interviews leading Austrian Economists on the topic of Henry Hazlitt's classic book Economics in One Lesson.

^ "Corporate Profits Reached Record High of Nearly $3 Trillion in 2021" .

truthout.org . April 1, 2022.

^ "Press Room", Michaelmoore.com. Michael Moore. Web. 22 Apr. 2013.

^ Ballasy, Nicholas. "Michael Moore: 'It's Absolutely a Good Thing' for Government to Drive Private Health Insurance Out of Business." Michael Moore: 'It's Absolutely a Good Thing' for Government to Drive Private Health Insurance Out of Business. CNS News, 02 Oct. 2009. Web. 22 Apr. 2013.

^ Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace , Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church , paragraph 470, published 29 June 2004, accessed 4 May 2024 ^ Pope Francis, Laudato si' , paragraph 190, published 24 May 2015, accessed 6 May 2024 ^ Baldor, Lolita C.; Press, Associated (2011-10-05).

" 'Occupy Wall Street' Protests Give Voice to Anger Over Greed, Corporate Culture" .

PBS NewsHour . Retrieved 2018-06-19 .

^ Sowell, Thomas. "Profit Motive Underrated By Intelligentsia." Sun-sentinel.com. Sun-Sentinel, 26 Dec. 2003. Web. 22 Apr. 2013.

^ Travis Pantin (2007).

"Milton Friedman Answers Phil Donahue's Charges" .

The New York Sun . Retrieved 2018-06-19 .

^ Ayn Rand ; Nathaniel Branden (1964). "Introduction".

The Virtue of Selfishness: A New Concept of Egoism (PDF) (Ix. Print ed.). New York: Signet Book. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-11-12 . Retrieved 2018-06-19 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Profit_motive&oldid=1304555958 " Categories : Profit Motivation Accounting Finance Microeconomics Conservatism Liberalism Nationalism Neoliberalism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 19:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Profit motive 9 languages Add topic

