Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Family Toggle Family subsection 2.1 Parents 2.2 Consorts and offspring 3 Mythology Toggle Mythology subsection 3.1 West Wind 3.2 Other myths 4 In ancient culture Toggle In ancient culture subsection 4.1 Iconography 4.2 Cult 5 Favonius 6 Genealogy 7 Gallery 8 See also 9 Footnotes 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Zephyrus 40 languages Alemannisch العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia West wind god in Greek mythology Zephyrus God of the West Wind Zephyrus on an antique fresco in Pompeii Greek Ζέφυρος Abode Sky Animals Horse, swan Genealogy Parents Astraeus and Eos Siblings Winds ( Boreas , Eurus , and Notus ), Eosphorus , the Stars, Memnon , Emathion , Astraea Consort Iris or Flora Children Pothos , Balius and Xanthus , Carpus , tigers Equivalents Roman Favonius In Greek mythology and religion , Zephyrus ( / ˈ z ɛ f ə r ə s / ) ( Ancient Greek : Ζέφυρος , romanized : Zéphuros , lit.

'westerly wind'), also spelled in English as Zephyr ( / ˈ z ɛ f ə r / ), is the god and personification of the West wind , one of the several wind gods, the Anemoi . The son of Eos (the goddess of the dawn) and Astraeus , Zephyrus is the most gentle and favourable of the winds, associated with flowers, springtime and even procreation.

[ 1 ] In myths, he is presented as the tender breeze, known for his unrequited love for the Spartan prince Hyacinthus . Alongside Boreas , the two are the most prominent wind gods with relatively limited roles in recorded mythology.

[ 2 ] Zephyrus, similarly to his brothers, received a cult during ancient times although his worship was minor compared to the Twelve Olympians . Still, traces of it are found in Classical Athens and surrounding regions and city-states, where it was usually joint with the cults of the other wind gods.

His equivalent in Roman mythology is the god Favonius .

Part of a series on Ancient Greek religion Origins Ancient Greek religion Mycenaean Greece , Mycenaean religion and Mycenaean deities Minoan Civilization , Minoan religion Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece , Hellenistic religion Sacred places Sacred islands Delos Ithaca Naxos Kythira Samothrace Crete Lemnos Sacred mountains Mount Lykaion Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Olympus Mount Kyllini Mount Othrys Sanctuaries Aornum Delphi Didyma Dion Dodona Eleusis Olympia Other Cave of Zeus Troy Deities Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Chthonic deities Hades Persephone Erinyes Gaia Hecate Iacchus Melinoë Triptolemus Trophonius Lesser deities Alpheus Amphitrite Asclepius Boreas Circe Cybele Deimos Eileithyia Enyo Eos Eris Eros Harmonia Hebe Hecate Helios Heracles Iris Leto Maia Metis Nemesis Nereus Nike Nyx Pan Persephone Phobos Priapus Proteus Rhea Scamander Selene Thanatos Themis Thetis Triton Zephyrus Concepts Worldview Greek mythology Orphic Egg Underworld and afterlife Miasma Daimon Ages of Man , Golden Age , Heroic Age Divine and reality Apeiron Monism Polytheism Pantheism Form of the Good Theory of forms Mind Anamnesis Ataraxia Apatheia Episteme Epoche Eudaimonia Katalepsis Logos Nous Phronesis Soul Anima mundi Metempsychosis Henosis Plato's theory of soul Ethics Agape Arete Asebeia Eusebeia Hubris Xenia Ethic of Reciprocity Delphic maxims Adiaphora Kathekon Oikeiosis Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Orphism Dionysian Mysteries Practices Worship Agalma Dithyramb Paean Orgion Hiera Orgas Hero Cult Oracle and Pythia Sacrifices and offerings Holokaustos Libation Votive offering Animal Sacrifice Temples and holy sites Temple Temenos Priesthood and religious service Hiereia Meditation and charity Eusebeia Meditation Euergetism Rites of passage Amphidromia Marriage Funeral Rites Festivals Thesmophoria Dionysia Daphnephoria Anthesteria Arrephoria Kronia Genesia Elaphebolia Pyanopsia Khalkeia Haloa Halieia Thargelia Monthly festivals Noumenia Religious games Panathenaia Herakleia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Nemean Games Pythian Games Isthmian Games Philosophy Pythagoreanism Neopythagoreanism Platonism Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Philosophers Ancient Hesiod Homer Pherecydes of Syros Pythagoras Xenophanes Parmenides Empedocles Socrates Plato Aratus Plutarch Plotinus Iamblichus Julian (emperor) Texts Argonautica Bibliotheca Corpus Hermeticum Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Epic Cycle Homeric Hymns Iliad Odyssey Orphic Hymns Theogony Works and Days Other topics Pilgrimage sites Calendar Decline of Greco-Roman polytheism Julian restoration Modern Restoration Religion portal Ancient Greece portal v t e Etymology [ edit ] The ancient Greek noun ζέφυρος is the word for the wind that blows from the west.

[ 3 ] His name is attested in Mycenaean Greek as ze-pu 2 -ro ( Linear B : 𐀽𐁆𐀫 ), [ 4 ] which points to a possible Proto-Hellenic form *Dzépʰuros .

[ 5 ] Further attestation of the god and his worship as part of the Anemoi is found in the word-forms 𐀀𐀚𐀗𐀂𐀋𐀩𐀊 , a-ne-mo-i-je-re-ja , 𐀀𐀚𐀗𐄀𐀂𐀋𐀩𐀊 , a-ne-mo i-je-re-ja . That is, "priestess of the winds", found on the KN Fp 1 and KN Fp 13 tablets.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Traditionally, 'Zephyros' has been linked to the word ζόφος (zóphos) meaning "darkness" or "west". Both in turn have been connected to the Proto-Indo-European root *(h₃)yebʰ- , meaning "to enter, to penetrate" (from which οἴφω (oíphō), meaning 'to have sex', also derives).

[ 8 ] It has been noted however that a development *Hi̯- → ζ- is unlikely, and most evidence in fact points to the contrary.

[ 9 ] It could also be of pre-Greek origin, though Beekes is not sure either way.

[ 9 ] Due to his role as the west wind, his name and various derivatives of it were used to mean 'western', [ 9 ] for example the Greek colony of Epizephyrian Locris in southern Italy , west of Greece .

Family [ edit ] Zephyr and Flora , c. 1720, by Antonio Corradini, Victoria and Albert Museum .

Parents [ edit ] Zephyrus, like the rest of the wind gods Anemoi ( Boreas , Eurus and Notus ), was said to be the son of Eos , goddess of the dawn, by her husband and first cousin Astraeus , a minor god related to the stars.

[ 10 ] The poet Ovid dubs the four of them 'the Astraean brothers' in reference to their paternity.

[ 11 ] He is thus brother to the rest of Eos and Astraeus's children, namely the five star-gods and the justice goddess Astraea . His mortal half-brothers include Memnon and Emathion , sons of his mother Eos by the Trojan prince Tithonus . The Athenian playwright Aeschylus in his fifth-century BC play Agamemnon writes that Zephyrus is the son of the goddess Gaia (the mother earth). The father, if one exists at all, is not named.

[ 12 ] Consorts and offspring [ edit ] Zephyrus with Chloris in Primavera by Sandro Botticelli , ca. 1470s–1480s, oil on canvas.

In Greek tradition, Zephyrus became the consort of Iris , the goddess of the rainbow and messenger of the gods. According to Nonnus , a late-antiquity poet, together they became the parents of Pothos , [ 13 ] the god of desire, and according to Alcaeus of Mytilene (a six-century BC poet from the island of Lesbos ), of Eros as well, though he is more commonly a son of Ares and Aphrodite .

[ 14 ] In the same passage, Zephyrus is described as having golden hair.

By the Harpy Podarge (who is Iris's sister) he became the father of Balius and Xanthus , the two fast, talking horses that were given to Achilles , [ 15 ] [ 16 ] when he mated with her while she was grazing on a meadow near the banks of the Ocean, implied in the form of a mare.

[ 17 ] Quintus Smyrnaeus also says that by a Harpy he had Arion , the talking horse.

[ 18 ] Like with the case of Eros, Arion's more common parentage is different, in this case the Olympians Demeter and Poseidon .

[ 19 ] In some sources Zephyrus has a son named Carpus ("fruit") by a nymph Hora , who drowned in the Maeander river when the wind drove a wave right into his face, driving his lover Calamus into despair, who went on to take his life.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] According to Pseudo-Oppian , he also became the genitor of tigers by an unnamed consort.

[ 23 ] Mythology [ edit ] West Wind [ edit ] Zephyrus relief from the Tower of the Winds , Athens .

Zephyrus, along with his brother Boreas, is one of the most prominent of the Anemoi; they are frequently mentioned together by poets, and along with a third brother, Notus (the south wind) they were seen as the three useful and favourable winds (the east wind, Eurus, seen as bad omen).

[ 1 ] They are the three wind gods mentioned by Hesiod , as ancient Greeks avoided talking about Eurus.

[ 2 ] Zephyrus and Boreas were thought to dwell together in a palace in Thrace .

[ 15 ] In the Odyssey however, they all seem to dwell on the island of Aeolia , as Zeus has tasked Aeolus with the job of the keeper of the winds.

[ 24 ] Aeolus receives Odysseus and his wretched crew, and hosts them for a month gracefully.

[ 25 ] As they part, Aeolus gives Odysseus a bag containing all the winds, except for Zephyrus himself, who is let free to blow Odysseus's ship gently back to Ithaca ; Odysseus's crewmates foolishly open the bag, thinking it to contain treasure, and set free all the other winds, blowing the ships back to Aeolia.

[ 24 ] Many years later, right after Odysseus left Calypso , the sea-god Poseidon in rage unleashed all four of them to cause a storm and raise great waves in order to drown Odysseus in the sea.

[ 26 ] Zéphyr rapting Psyché , 1814 by Henri-Joseph Ruxthiel .

In the Iliad , Zephyrus is visited by his wife Iris in his home as he dines with his wind brothers. He wishes to summon him and Boreas to blow on Patroclus 's funeral pyre following his death, as Achilles prayed for their help when the pyre failed to kindle.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] In the Dionysiaca , all four live together with their father Astraeus; Zephyrus plays sweet notes with an aulos for Demeter when she pays them a visit.

[ 29 ] In the myth of Eros and Psyche , Zephyrus serves Eros , the god of love, by transporting his bride-to-be, the mortal princess Psyche with his soft breeze from the cliff (where she had been left in an oracle's suggestion) to Eros's palace.

[ 30 ] Later, he also helps rather reluctantly Psyche's two sisters transport the same way to the palace as well, when Psyche wishes to see them again.

[ 31 ] After Eros abandons Psyche over her betrayal, both sisters take advantage of the situation and each independently goes to the cliff (having both been lied to by Psyche that Eros wished to maker her his new wife), calling for Eros to make them his bride, and Zephyrus to take them to the palace. But this time Zephyrus does not act when they jump, and thus they both fall to their deaths, torn limb to limb and made food for the birds of prey and wild beasts below.

[ 32 ] Zephyrus seems to have had a connection to swans; in Philostratus the Elder 's works, he joins them twice in their song, once while they are carrying the Erotes and another when the young Phaethon is killed driving his father Helios 's fiery chariot.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] This apparently symbolizes the belief that swans took to singing when the mild west wind blew.

[ 35 ] Other myths [ edit ] Zephyr and Hyacinth engaging in intercrural sex on a red-figure vase (5th century BCE) In his most notable myth, Zephyrus fell in love with a beautiful Spartan prince named Hyacinthus , who nevertheless rejected him [ 36 ] and became the lover of another god, Apollo .

[ 37 ] One day when the prince and Apollo were playing at discus-throwing , Zephyrus deflected the course of Apollo's discus, redirecting it right onto Hyacinthus's head and fatally wounding him. Hyacinthus' blood then became a new flower, the hyacinth.

[ a ] In some versions, Zephyrus is supplanted by his brother Boreas as the wind-god who bore a one-sided love for the beautiful prince.

[ 40 ] Zephyrus's role in this myth reflects his connection to flowers and springtime as the gentle west wind, who, in spite of his traditional gentleness, is nonetheless a harsh lover, like all the winds.

[ 37 ] Not every version of this tale features Zephyrus, however, and his participation is a secondary narrative; in many of them he is absent, and Hyacinthus's death stems from a genuine accident on Apollo's part.

[ 17 ] [ 37 ] On another occasion, another beautiful youth named Cyparissus ("cypress") and Zephyrus became lovers.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] The youth, wanting to preserve his beauty, fled to Mount Cassium in Syria , where he became transformed into a cypress tree.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] This myth, which might be of Hellenistic origin, seems to have been modeled after that of Apollo and Daphne .

[ 44 ] It also, along with Zephyrus's role in Hyacinthus's story, fits the pattern–also fit by his brother Boreas–of a wind god appearing in the story of the origin of a plant.

[ 43 ] In all other narratives, however, Zephyrus is absent, and the role of Cyparissus's divine partner is filled by Apollo; furthermore, Cyparissus is transformed into a cypress by Apollo at his own request after accidentally killing his own pet deer, which caused him much sorrow.

[ 43 ] Zephyrus also features in some of the dialogues by the satirical author Lucian of Samosata ; in the Dialogues of the Sea Gods , he appears in two dialogues with his brother Notus, the god of the south wind. In the first, they discuss the Argive princess Io and how she was loved and got turned into a heifer by Zeus in order to hide from his jealous wife Hera , [ 45 ] while in the second, Zephyrus enthusiastically recounts the scene he has just witnessed of how Zeus transformed into a bull, tricked another princess, the Phoenician Europa , into riding him, transported her to Crete and then mated with her while Notus expresses his jealousy and complains of seeing nothing noteworthy.

[ 46 ] In ancient culture [ edit ] Iconography [ edit ] The horses on the Pergamon Altar, Berlin.

Like all the other wind gods, Zephyrus is represented in ancient Greek art with wings, [ 47 ] due to which he is sometimes hard to distinguish from Eros, another winged youthful god, though tellingly unlike Zephyrus Eros is not depicted pursuing males.

[ 48 ] In ancient vases, he is most commonly pursuing the young Hyacinthus or already holding him in his arms in an erotic and sexual manner; on a red-figure vase in the Boston Museum of Fine Arts , Zephyrus's erect penis thrusts into the folds of the young man's clothes as they fly together, [ 49 ] while vase 95.31 from the same museum depicts intercrural sex between the two.

[ 50 ] Various other vases also show scenes of Zephyrus grabbing and seizing Hyacinthus.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] On the Tower of the Winds , a clocktower/horologion in the Roman agora of Athens, the frieze depicts Zephyrus alongside seven more of the wind gods above the sundials. Zephyrus is presented as a beardless youth carrying a cloak full of flowers.

[ 53 ] On the Pergamon Altar , which depicts the battle of the gods against the Giants (known as the Gigantomachy), Zephyrus and the other three wind gods are shown in the shape of horses who pull the chariot of the goddess Hera in the eastern frieze of the monument; [ 54 ] [ 55 ] the equine forms of the Anemoi are also found in Quintus Smyrnaeus 's works, where the four brothers pull Zeus's chariot instead.

[ 56 ] Cult [ edit ] Ancient cult of the wind gods is attested in several ancient Greek states.

[ 57 ] According to the geographer Pausanias , the Winds were jointly worshipped in the town of Titane , in Sicyon , where the local priest offered sacrifice to them, [ 58 ] [ 59 ] and in Coronea , a town in Boeotia .

[ 60 ] It is also known that the citizens of Laciadae in Attica had erected an altar for Zephyrus.

[ 61 ] According to a fragment doubtfully attributed to the fifth-century BC poet Bacchylides , a Rhodian farmer named Eudemus built a temple in honour of the west wind god, in gratitude for his help.

[ 62 ] Favonius [ edit ] Detail of Zephyrus with Aura from Sandro Botticelli 's The Birth of Venus .

Zephyrus's Roman equivalent was called Favonius (the "favouring") who held dominion over plants and flowers, however 'Zephyrus' was also commonly used by Romans. Some later authors would also describe him as having wings in his head.

[ 63 ] The Roman poet Horace writes: [ 64 ] quid fles, Asterie, quem tibi candidi primo restituent vere Favonii?

Why do you weep, Asterie, for the man whom the bright west winds will restore to you at the beginning of spring?

Unlike Greek authors, Roman writers held that Zephyrus/Favonius married not Iris but rather a local vegetation and fertility goddess named Flora (identified and linked by Ovid with a minor Greek nymph named Chloris and her legend [ 65 ] ) after abducting her while she tried to run away and escape him; he gave her dominion over flowers, thus making amends for his violence and abduction of her.

[ 1 ] [ 66 ] Some analysts have suggested that Carpus, the son Zephyrus had by Hora/a Hora (season goddess), is supposed to have been actually mothered by Flora/Chloris instead, although this is not confirmed in any ancient text.

[ 67 ] Genealogy [ edit ] Zephyrus's family tree [ 68 ] Uranus Gaia Pontus Oceanus Tethys Hyperion Theia Crius Eurybia The Rivers The Oceanids Helios Selene [ 69 ] Eos Astraeus Pallas Perses ZEPHYRUS Anemoi Astraea [ 70 ] Stars Cronus Rhea Coeus Phoebe Hestia Hera Hades Zeus Leto Asteria Demeter Poseidon Iapetus Clymene (or Asia ) [ 71 ] Mnemosyne (Zeus) Themis Atlas [ 72 ] Menoetius Prometheus [ 73 ] Epimetheus The Muses The Horae Gallery [ edit ] Zephyrus in Art Flora and Zephyr by William-Adolphe Bouguereau , oil on canvas.

Statue of Zephyrus in Hermitage Hall.

Zephyrus and Boreas surround Oceanus in a mosaic from Portugal.

Zephyrus, Psyche and Eros, statue by John Gibson .

Zephyrus, 1878 engraving.

Statue of Zephyrus in Poland.

Zephyrus, Flora and Cupid by Antonio Balestra.

Zephyrus with Venus, Ariadne and Bacchus, eighteenth century.

Zephyrus and Hyacinthus red-figure, 440–420 BC.

Hyacinthus and Zephyrus. Attic Red Figure Kylix. Attributed to Manner of Douris Painter , 500–450 B.C.

Statue of Zephyrus in the gardens of Peterhof.

Zéphyr et Flore by Sebastiano Ricci , oil on canvas.

Engraving of Zephyrus.

Zéphyr et Flore , by Giambattista Tiepolo , ca. 1730–1735 in Ca' Rezzonico , Venice .

See also [ edit ] Ancient Greece portal Ancient Rome portal Mythology portal Bacab Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr and Duraþrór Norðri, Suðri, Austri and Vestri Vayu List of wind deities Footnotes [ edit ] ^ The flower that the ancient Greeks believed Hyacinthus turned into was not however what is today known as the hyacinth, as the ancient description does not match.

[ 38 ] The flower most likely to have been the ancient hyacinth is the larkspur , while other candidates include the iris and gladiolus italicus .

[ 39 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Rausch, Sven (2006).

"Zephyrus" . In Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.).

Brill's New Pauly . Translated by Christine F. Salazar. Hamburg: Brill Reference Online.

doi : 10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e12216400 . Retrieved April 13, 2023 .

^ a b Kerenyi 1951 , p.

205 .

^ Liddell & Scott 1940 , s.v.

Ζέφυρος .

^ Казанскене, В. П.; Казанский, Н. Н (1986). "ze-pu₂-ro".

Предметно-понятийный словарь греческого языка. Крито-микенский период (in Russian). Leningrad (Saint Petersburg), Russia: Nauka. p. 64.

^ Davis & Laffineur 2020 , p.

12 .

^ Raymoure, K. A.

"a-ne-mo" .

Linear B Transliterations . Deaditerranean. Dead Languages of the Mediterranean. Archived from the original on 2019-02-12 . Retrieved 2014-03-28 .

"KN Fp 1 + 31" .

"KN 13 Fp(1) (138)" .

^ "DĀMOS: Database of Mycenaean at Oslo – Department of Philosophy, Classics, History of Art and Ideas" .

^ Rix 2001 , p.

309 .

^ a b c Beekes 2009 , p.

499 .

^ Hesiod , Theogony 378 , Hyginus Preface ; Apollodorus 1.2.3 ; Nonnus , Dionysiaca 6.28 ^ Ovid , Metamorphoses 14.545 ^ Aeschylus , Agamemnon 690 ^ Nonnus , Dionysiaca 47.340 ^ Alcaeus of Mytilene fragment 149 [Page, p.

82 .] ^ a b Smith 1873 , s.v.

Zephyrus .

^ Grimal 1987 , s.v.

Balius .

^ a b Hard 2004 , p.

58 .

^ Quintus Smyrnaeus , Fall of Troy 4.569 ^ Graf, Fritz (2006).

"Areion" . In Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.).

Brill's New Pauly . Translated by Christine F. Salazar. Columbus, Ohio: Brill Reference Online.

doi : 10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e133590 . Retrieved May 28, 2023 .

^ Servius On Eclogues 5.48 ; Nonnus , Dionysiaca 11.385–481 ^ Frey, Alexandra; Folkerts, Menso (2006).

"Carpus" . In Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.).

Brill's New Pauly . Translated by Christine F. Salazar. Hamburg: Brill Reference Online.

doi : 10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e609540 . Retrieved April 14, 2023 .

^ Forbes Irving 1990 , pp. 278–279.

^ Oppian , Cynegetica 1.320 , 3.350 ^ a b Myrsiades 2019 , p.

104 .

^ Homer , Odyssey 1–45 ^ Hard 2004 , p.

100 .

^ Homer , the Iliad 23.192–225 ^ Hard 2004 , p.

48 .

^ Nonnus , Dionysiaca 6.28 ^ Kenney 1990 , p.

49 .

^ Kenney 1990 , p.

57 .

^ Kenney 1990 , pp.

81–83 .

^ Roman & Roman 2010 , p.

521 .

^ Ferrari 2008 , p.

58 .

^ Poetica . Vol.

3– 6. Sanseido International. 1975. p. 51.

^ Lucian , Dialogues of the Gods 14: Apollo and Hermes ^ a b c Forbes Irving 1990 , pp. 280–281.

^ Raven, J. E. (2000), Plants and Plant Lore in Ancient Greece , Oxford: Leopard Head Press, pp.

26– 27, ISBN 978-0-904920-40-6 ^ Dunagan, Patrick James; Lazzara, Marina; Whittington, Nicholas James (2020).

Roots and Routes: Poetics at New College of California .

Delaware , United States: Vernon Press. pp.

71–76 .

ISBN 978-1-64889-052-9 .

^ Smith 1873 , s.v.

Hyacinthus .

^ Servius , On the Aeneid 3.680 ^ Rosemary M. Wright.

"A Dictionary of Classical Mythology: Summary of Transformations" .

mythandreligion.upatras.gr .

University of Patras . Retrieved January 3, 2023 .

^ a b c Forbes Irving 1990 , pp. 260–261.

^ a b Hard 2004 , p.

571 .

^ Lucian , Dialogues of the Sea Gods 7: South Wind and West Wind I ^ Lucian , Dialogues of the Sea Gods 15: South Wind and West Wind II ^ Boardman, John (1985).

The Athenian Red-Figure Vases: The Archaic Period . London, UK: Thames & Hudson. p. 230.

ISBN 9780500201435 .

^ Gantz 1996 , p.

94 .

^ Dover 1989 , p.

98 .

^ Beazley 1918 , p.

98 .

^ Dover 1989 , p.

75 .

^ Dover 1989 , p.

93 .

^ Noble, Joseph V.; de Solla Price, Derek J. (1968).

"The Water Clock in the Tower of the Winds" .

American Journal of Archaeology .

72 (4): 345– 355.

doi : 10.2307/503828 .

ISSN 0002-9114 .

JSTOR 503828 .

S2CID 193112893 .

^ LIMC 617 (Venti) ^ Kunze, Max (1988).

Der grosse Marmoraltar von Pergamon [ The Large Marble Altar of Pergamon ] (in German). Berlin: Staatliche Museem zu Berlin. pp.

23– 24.

^ Quintus Smyrnaeus , Fall of Troy 12.189 ^ Farnell 1909 , p.

416 .

^ Farnell 1909 , p.

417 .

^ Pausanias , Description of Greece 2.12.1 ^ Pausanias , Description of Greece 9.34.3 ^ Pausanias , Description of Greece 1.37.2 ^ Silver, Isidore (1945).

"Du Bellay and Hellenic Poetry" .

PMLA .

60 (4).

Cambridge University Press : 949– 50.

doi : 10.2307/459286 .

JSTOR 459286 .

S2CID 163633516 . Retrieved May 25, 2023 .

^ Smith 1873 , s.v.

Venti .

^ Horace , Odes 3.7.

^ Grimal 1987 , s.v.

Flora .

^ Ovid , Fasti 5.195–212 ^ Guirand & Graves 1987 , p.

138 .

^ Hesiod , Theogony 132–138 , 337–411 , 453–520 , 901–906, 915–920 ; Caldwell, pp. 8–11, tables 11–14.

^ Although usually the daughter of Hyperion and Theia, as in Hesiod , Theogony 371–374 , in the Homeric Hymn to Hermes (4), 99–100 , Selene is instead made the daughter of Pallas the son of Megamedes.

^ Astraea is not mentioned by Hesiod, instead she is given as a daughter of Eos and Astraeus in Hyginus Astronomica 2.25.1 .

^ According to Hesiod , Theogony 507–511 , Clymene, one of the Oceanids , the daughters of Oceanus and Tethys , at Hesiod , Theogony 351 , was the mother by Iapetus of Atlas, Menoetius, Prometheus, and Epimetheus, while according to Apollodorus , 1.2.3 , another Oceanid, Asia was their mother by Iapetus.

^ According to Plato , Critias , 113d–114a , Atlas was the son of Poseidon and the mortal Cleito .

^ In Aeschylus , Prometheus Bound 18, 211, 873 (Sommerstein, pp.

444–445 n. 2 , 446–447 n. 24 , 538–539 n. 113 ) Prometheus is made to be the son of Themis .

Bibliography [ edit ] Aeschylus , Aeschylus , with an English translation by Herbert Weir Smyth, Ph.D. in two volumes. 2.Agamemnon. Herbert Weir Smyth, Ph.D. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press , 1926.

Apollodorus , Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.

Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Beazley, John Davidson (1918).

Attic red-figured vases in American museums . London: Harvard University Press .

Beekes, Robert S. P.

(2009). Lucien van Beek (ed.).

Etymological Dictionary of Greek . Leiden Indo-European Etymological Dictionary Series. Vol. 1. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill Publications .

ISBN 978-90-04-17420-7 .

Davis, Brent; Laffineur, Robert, eds. (2020).

Neoteros: Studies in Bronze Age Aegean Art and Archaeology in Honor of Professor John G. Younger on the Occasion of his Retirement . ISD LLC.

ISBN 978-90-429-4179-3 .

Dover, Kenneth James (1989).

Greek Homosexuality . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 0-674-36270-5 .

Farnell, Lewis Richard (1909).

The Cults of the Greek States . Vol. V.

Oxford at the Clarendon Press .

Ferrari, Gloria (2008).

Alcman and the Cosmos of Sparta . Illinois: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0-226-66867-3 .

Forbes Irving, Paul M. C. (1990).

Metamorphosis in Greek Myths . Oxford, New York, Toronto: Oxford University Press , Clarendon Press .

ISBN 0-19-814730-9 .

Gantz, Timothy (1996).

Early Greek Myth: A guide to literary and artistic sources . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press; in two volumes: (Vol. 1) ISBN 978-0-8018-5360-9 ; (Vol. 2) ISBN 978-0-8018-5362-3 .

Grimal, Pierre (1987).

The Dictionary of Classical Mythology . Translated by A. R. Maxwell-Hyslop. New York: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 0-631-13209-0 .

Guirand, Felix; Graves, Robert (1987).

New Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology . Translated by Richard Aldington; Delano Ames. Crescent Books.

ISBN 0517004046 .

Hard, Robin (2004).

The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose's "Handbook of Greek Mythology" .

Psychology Press .

ISBN 9780415186360 .

Hesiod , Theogony , in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White , Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Homer , The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PhD in two volumes . Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Homer ; The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes . Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Kenney, Edward J.

(1990).

Apuleius: Cupid and Psyche . Cambridge Greek and Latin Classics. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 0-521-26038-8 .

Kerenyi, Karl (1951).

The Gods of the Greeks .

London : Thames and Hudson.

Kunze, Max (1994).

Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC) . Vol. VII.1. Zürich and Munich: Artemis Verlag.

ISBN 3-7608-8751-1 .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert (1940).

A Greek-English Lexicon , revised and augmented throughout by Sir Henry Stuart Jones with the assistance of Roderick McKenzie . Oxford: Clarendon Press .

Online version at Perseus.tufts project.

Lucian , The Works of Lucian of Samosata , translated by H. W. Fowler and F. G. Fowler, Oxford: The Clarendon Press , 1905.

Maurus Servius Honoratus , In Vergilii carmina comentarii. Servii Grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii; recensuerunt Georgius Thilo et Hermannus Hagen. Georgius Thilo. Leipzig. B. G. Teubner. 1881.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Myrsiades, Kostas (2019).

Reading Homer's Odyssey . Pennsylvania, US: Bucknell University Press .

ISBN 9781684481361 .

Nonnus , Dionysiaca ; translated by Rouse, W H D , III Books XXXVI–XLVIII.

Loeb Classical Library No. 346, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1940.

Internet Archive .

Oppian , Cynegetica in Oppian , Colluthus , Tryphiodorus . Oppian, Colluthus, and Tryphiodorus. Translated by A. W. Mair. Loeb Classical Library 219. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1928.

Online version at Internet Archive.

Ovid , Ovid's Fasti : With an English translation by Sir James George Frazer , London: W. Heinemann LTD; Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1959.

Internet Archive .

Page, Denys Lionel (1968).

Lyrica Graeca Selecta . Oxford Classical Texts. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-814567-5 .

Pausanias , Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.

Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Quintus Smyrnaeus , Quintus Smyrnaeus: The Fall of Troy , translated by A.S. Way, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press , 1913.

Internet Archive .

Rix, Helmut (2001).

Lexikon der indogermanischen Verben [ Lexicon of Indo-European Verbs ] (in German) (2 ed.). Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag.

ISBN 3895002194 .

Roman, Luke; Roman, Monica (2010).

Encyclopedia of Greek and Roman Mythology . Infobase Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-8160-7242-2 .

Smith, William (1873).

A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . London: John Murray, printed by Spottiswoode and Co.

Online version at the Perseus.tufts library.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zephyrus .

ZEPHYRUS from the Theoi Project The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Zephyrus) Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (ca 40 images of Flora and Zephyrus) v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis Authority control databases International VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany Israel People DDB Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n8rv6
Cached time: 20250817043704
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.289 seconds
Real time usage: 1.588 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9849/1000000
Revision size: 47345/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 588050/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6481/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 224046/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.655/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19191763/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1082.711      1 -total
 17.04%  184.460     27 Template:Navbox
 17.00%  184.077      2 Template:Reflist
 15.42%  166.993      1 Template:Infobox_deity
 12.44%  134.673      1 Template:Infobox
 11.84%  128.165     42 Template:Sfn
 11.64%  125.983     25 Template:Cite_book
 11.24%  121.649      9 Template:Lang
  9.33%  101.049      1 Template:Ancient_Greek_religion
  7.41%   80.260      3 Template:Cite_encyclopedia Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:78161:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043704 and revision id 1306209640. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zephyrus&oldid=1306209640 " Categories : Anemoi LGBTQ themes in Greek mythology Children of Gaia Deeds of Apollo Deeds of Eros Spring deities Summer deities Cupid and Psyche Deeds of Poseidon Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Mycenaean Greek-language text CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 14:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zephyrus 40 languages Add topic

