Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Research centres 3 Academic courses 4 Notable people 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Institute of Criminology Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia University department Institute of Criminology Type Department of the University of Cambridge Established 1959 ( 1959 ) Parent institution Faculty of Law Director Professor Manuel Eisner Address Sidgwick Site , Cambridge , United Kingdom Website www .crim .cam .ac .uk The Institute of Criminology is the criminological research institute within the Faculty of Law at the University of Cambridge .

[ 1 ] The Institute is one of the oldest criminological research institutes in Europe, and has exerted a strong influence on the development of criminology .

[ 2 ] Its multidisciplinary teaching and research staff are recruited from the disciplines of law , psychiatry , psychology , and sociology . It is located on the Sidgwick Site in the west of Cambridge, England . The Institute of Criminology building was designed by Allies and Morrison .

[ 3 ] The Institute is also home to the Radzinowicz Library, which houses the most comprehensive criminology collection in the United Kingdom.

[ 4 ] The Institute has approximately 50 PhD students, 30-40 M.Phil. students, and 200 M.St students.  The Institute also offers courses to Cambridge undergraduates, particularly in law, but also in human social and political sciences and in psychology and behavioural sciences.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] During World War II , Sir Leon Radzinowicz established the Department of Criminal Science in the Faculty of Law at the University of Cambridge .

[ 6 ] In 1959, as the field of criminology was met with increasing interest and success, Sir Leon Radzinowicz founded the Institute of Criminology with the support of a benefaction from the Wolfson Foundation and the Howard League for Penal Reform .

[ 7 ] Research centres [ edit ] The Institute publishes the Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CCHI), which is the first system that measures the seriousness of crime harm to victims.

[ 8 ] Centre for Analytic Criminology Centre for Community, Gender and Social Justice Centre for Penal Theory and Penal Ethics Jerry Lee Centre for Experimental Criminology Prisons Research Centre Violence Research Centre Academic courses [ edit ] The Institute offers a number of different courses, [ 9 ] including: a nine-month taught M.Phil. Degree in criminology; a twelve-month M.Phil. Degree in criminological research; a two-year M.St Degree in applied criminology, penology and management (Cambridge Penology Programme), which is a postgraduate programme; a two-year M.St Degree in applied criminology and police management (Police Executive Programme), which is a postgraduate programme; a Ph.D. programme in Criminology; various undergraduate courses for Cambridge students in law, psychology, and sociology, including a joint sociology/criminology degree.

[ 10 ] Notable people [ edit ] Sir Leon Radzinowicz : [ 11 ] the Founder of the Institute of Criminology and the first Wolfson Professor of Criminology .

Sir Anthony Bottoms : [ 12 ] Emeritus Wolfson Professor of Criminology , former Director of the Institute, Director of the Centre for Penal Theory and Penal Ethics.

Ben Crewe: [ 13 ] Professor of Penology and Criminal Justice, Prisons Research Centre.

Manuel Eisner: [ 14 ] Director of the Institute, Wolfson Professor of Criminology and Professor of Comparative and Developmental Criminology, Director of the Violence Research Centre.

David Farrington: Emeritus Professor of Psychological Criminology Loraine Gelsthorpe: [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Emerita Professor of Criminology and Criminal Justice, former Director of the Institute, Director of the Centre for Community, Gender and Social Justice.

Alison Liebling: [ 17 ] Professor of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Director of the Prisons Research Centre.

Lawrence Sherman : [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Director of the Cambridge Police Executive Programme.

Heather Strang: [ 20 ] Director of the Lee Centre of Experimental Criminology.

Per-Olof Wikström: [ 21 ] Professor of Ecological and Developmental Criminology.

References [ edit ] ^ "Faculty of Law" .

Faulty of Law .

^ "About the Institute of Criminology" .

University of Cambridge . University of Cambridge. 12 November 2017 . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ "Institute of Criminology Cambridge Architecture" .

e-architect . e-architect. February 2010 . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ "About the Institute of Criminology" .

University of Cambridge . University of Cambridge. 12 November 2017 . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ "History" .

University of Cambridge . University of Cambridge. 5 January 2017 . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ "Institute of Criminology, University of Cambridge" .

ART UK . ART UK . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ "Raven login" .

raven.cam.ac.uk .

^ "The Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CCHI)" .

University of Cambridge . University of Cambridge. 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ "Graduate Admissions" .

University of Cambridge, Graduate Admissions . 17 July 2014.

^ "Undergraduate Courses in Criminology" .

University of Cambridge . University of Cambridge. 29 November 2018 . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ "Radzinowicz, Leon, 1906-1999" .

The British Academy . The British Academy . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ "The British Academy - Professor Sir Anthony Bottoms" .

The British Academy .

^ Crewe, Ben (April 2019).

"The prison as a reinventive institution" .

Theoretical Criminology .

24 (4): 568– 589.

doi : 10.1177/1362480619841900 .

S2CID 150683533 .

^ "Research Gate" .

Research Gate, Manuel Eisner .

^ "ResearchGate" .

ResearchGate, Loraine Gelsthorpe .

^ "Cambridge Forum for Sustainability and the Environment" .

Cambridge Forum for Sustainability and the Environment . 26 April 2017.

^ "The British Academy - Alison Liebling" .

The British Academy .

^ "Outer Temple Chambers, Professional Associate" .

Outer Temple Chambers .

^ Sherman, Lawrence (January 2018). "Reducing Fatal Police Shootings as System Crashes: Research, Theory, and Practice".

Annual Review of Criminology .

1 : 421– 449.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-criminol-032317-092409 .

^ "Dr Heather Strang Appointed As AEC President — Institute of Criminology" . 7 March 2019 – via www.crim.cam.ac.uk.

^ "The British Academy - Per-Olof Wikstrom" .

The British Academy .

External links [ edit ] Institute of Criminology v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_Institute_of_Criminology&oldid=1292210263 " Category : Departments of the University of Cambridge Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles using infobox university This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 19:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Institute of Criminology Add languages Add topic

