Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview and context 2 Sinocentric system 3 Responses of other countries Toggle Responses of other countries subsection 3.1 Korea 3.2 Vietnam 3.3 Japan 3.4 Burma 3.5 Thailand 3.6 Sri Lanka 3.7 Europe 4 Cultural Sinocentrism Toggle Cultural Sinocentrism subsection 4.1 Indigenous criticism 5 Today 6 Related concepts 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Sinocentrism 22 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Tagalog Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Worldview centred on or biased towards Chinese civilisation This article is about the diplomatic system and state ideology. For ethnocentric attitudes among ethnic Han within China, see Han chauvinism . For Han ethnic-related nationalism, see Han nationalism .

This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( May 2022 ) Sinocentrism Traditional Chinese 中國中心主義 Simplified Chinese 中国中心主义 Literal meaning China -centric doctrine Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōngguó zhōngxīn zhǔyì Bopomofo ㄓㄨㄥ ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄓㄨㄥ ㄒㄧㄣ ㄓㄨˇ ㄧˋ Wade–Giles Chung1-kuo2 chung1-hsin1 jih-yi4 Hakka Pha̍k-fa-sṳ Chung-ke̍t Chung-sîm Chú-ngi Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Zung1 Gwok3 Zung1 Sam1 Zyu2 Ji6 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Tiong-kok Tiong-sim Chú-gī Tâi-lô Tiong-kok Tiong-sim Tsú-gī Sinocentrism refers to a worldview that China is the cultural, political, or economic center of the world.

[ 1 ] Sinocentrism was a core concept in various Chinese dynasties . The Chinese considered themselves to be "all-under-Heaven", ruled by the emperor, known as Son of Heaven . Those that lived outside of the Huaxia were regarded as " barbarians ". In addition, states outside of China, such as Vietnam, Japan or Korea, were considered to be vassals of China.

[ 2 ] Overview and context [ edit ] Depending on the historical context, Sinocentrism can refer to either the ethnocentrism of the Han society and culture, or the modern concept of zhonghua minzu ,  popular among the Korean elites up to the final demise of the Qing dynasty . The concept came to an end in the 19th century and suffered several more blows in the 20th century, and as a result is not as widely popular among Chinese people in the present day.

[ 1 ] In pre-modern times, it often took the form of viewing China as the most advanced civilization in the world, and external ethnic groups or foreign nations as being uncivilized to various degrees, a distinction known in Chinese as the Hua–Yi distinction .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Sinocentric system [ edit ] Zhou dynasty cosmography of Huaxia and the Siyi : Dongyi in the east, Nanman in the south, Xirong in the west, and Beidi in the north.

The Sinocentric system was a hierarchical system of international relations that prevailed in East Asia before the adoption of the Westphalian system in modern times. Surrounding states such as Japan (which cut off its vassal relationship with China during the Asuka period , because it regarded itself as an equal and individual culture), Korea, the Ryukyu Kingdom , and Vietnam were regarded as vassals of China. Relations between the Chinese Empire and these peoples were interpreted as tributary relationships under which these countries offered tributes to the Emperor of China .

[ 5 ] Areas not under Sinocentric influence were called Huawai zhi di ( 化外之地 ; "lands outside of civilization").

At the center of the system stood China, ruled by a dynasty that had gained the Mandate of Heaven . This " Celestial Dynasty ", distinguished by its Confucian codes of morality and propriety, regarded itself as the most prominent civilization in the world; the Emperor of China was considered the only legitimate emperor of the entire world (all lands under heaven ).

Under this scheme of international relations, only China could use the title of emperor whereas other states were ruled by kings.

[ 6 ] Chinese emperors were considered the Son of Heaven . The Japanese use of the term Tennō ( 天皇 ; "heavenly sovereign") for the rulers of Japan was a subversion of this principle. Throughout history, Koreans have sometimes referred to their rulers as king, conforming with traditional Korean belief of the Posterity of Heaven.

Identification of the heartland and the legitimacy of dynastic succession were both essential aspects of the system. Originally the center was synonymous with the Zhongyuan , an area that was expanded through invasion and conquest over many centuries. The dynastic succession was at times subject to radical changes in interpretation, such as the period of the Southern Song when the ruling dynasty lost the traditional heartland to the northern barbarians . Outside the center were several concentric circles. Local ethnic minorities were not regarded as "foreign countries". However, they were governed by their native leaders called tusi , subject to recognition by the Chinese court, and were exempt from the Chinese bureaucratic system.

Outside this circle were the tributary states which offered tributes to the Chinese emperor and over which China exercised suzerainty . Under the Ming dynasty , when the tribute system entered its peak, these states were classified into a number of groups. The southeastern barbarians (category one) included some of the major states of East Asia and Southeast Asia , such as Korea, Japan, the Ryukyu Kingdom, Vietnam, Thailand, Champa , and Java. A second group of southeastern barbarians covered countries like Sulu , Malacca , and Sri Lanka.

[ 7 ] Many of these are independent states in modern times.

The situation was complicated by the fact that some tributary states had their own tributaries. Laos was a tributary of Vietnam while the Ryukyu Kingdom paid tribute to both China and Japan.

Tsushima Island was also a tributary of the Goryeo and Joseon dynasties of Korea.

Beyond the circle of tributary states were countries in a trading relationship with China. The Portuguese, for instance, were allowed to trade with China from leased territory in Macau but did not officially enter the tributary system. During the Qing dynasty's rule of Taiwan , some Qing officials have used the term Huawai zhi di to refer to Taiwan (Formosa), specifically to areas in Taiwan that have yet to be fully cultivated, developed and under the control of the Qing government.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] While Sinocentrism tends to be identified as a politically inspired system of international relations, in fact it possessed an important economic aspect. The Sinocentric tribute and trade system provided Northeast and Southeast Asia with a political and economic framework for international trade. Countries wishing to trade with China were required to submit to a suzerain-vassal relationship with the Chinese sovereign . After investiture ( 冊封 ; cèfēng ) of the ruler in question, the missions were allowed to come to China to pay tribute to the Chinese emperor. In exchange, tributary missions were presented with return bestowals ( 回賜 ; huícì ). Special licences were issued to merchants accompanying these missions to carry out trade. Trade was also permitted at land frontiers and specified ports. This Sinocentric trade zone was based on the use of silver as a currency with prices set by reference to Chinese prices.

The Sinocentric model was not seriously challenged until contact with the European powers in the 18th and 19th century, in particular after the First Opium War .

[ citation needed ] This was partly due to the fact that sustained contact between the Chinese Empire and other empires of the pre-modern period was limited. By the mid 19th century, imperial China was well past its peak and was on the verge of collapse.

In the late 19th century, the Sinocentric tributary state system in East Asia was superseded by the Westphalian multi-state system.

[ 10 ] Responses of other countries [ edit ] See also: Little China (ideology) and Hua–Yi distinction § Conceptualisation of the Hua–Yi distinction in the Sinosphere Within Asia , the cultural and economic centrality of China was recognized, and most countries submitted to the Sinocentric model, if only to enjoy the benefits of a trading relationship. However, clear differences of nuance can be discerned in the responses of different countries.

Korea [ edit ] Until the era of the Three Kingdoms of Korea , Southern Korean states had been protected from Chinese invasions by militarily powerful Northern Korean states such as Goguryeo which ruled the northern region of Korean peninsula and Manchuria . Goguryeo considered itself as an equally supreme state as China and adopted its own centric system to adjacent countries. Refusing to pay any tributes and continuing to conquer eastern territories of China altogether incurred a series of massive Chinese invasions of Goguryeo from 598 to 614, which ended disastrously, and they mainly contributed to the fall of Chinese Sui dynasty in 618. Such numerous defeats of the Chinese raised the sense of ethnic superiority in Goguryeo and further expansions into the Chinese territories continued.

[ citation needed ] After Goguryeo was collapsed by the allied forces of Silla , one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, and the Tang dynasty in 668, Silla, now being the sole ruler of Korean peninsula, more readily started the tribute system between Silla and Tang. However, such ties between two countries were weakened after Silla's submission to Goryeo who claimed to succeed Goguryeo.

[ citation needed ] In the mid-Goryeo period, Korea idealized the Song dynasty and actively sought cultural assimilation into the Sinosphere .

[ 11 ] The relationship continued until the Mongol invasions of Korea and the Mongol conquest of the Song dynasty where the two kingdoms fell, leading to the rise of the Yuan dynasty .

[ 12 ] After 30 years of fierce resistance, both Goryeo and Mongols finally sued for peace and Goryeo became a dependency of the Yuan dynasty . Soon after the weakening of Yuan dynasty, Goryeo retook their lost territories from the Yuan dynasty by military campaigns and regained her sovereign rights.

[ citation needed ] The Joseon dynasty (1392–1910) encouraged the entrenchment of Korean Confucian ideals and doctrines in Korean society and again willingly entered into the Sinocentric system. After the Ming dynasty, which regarded itself as huá (華), cultured civilization was considered to have collapsed under the invasion of the Qing , where the dominant Manchus were considered barbarian (夷) by Koreans.

[ 13 ] The Ming was thought of as the last true Sino culture (中華).

[ 14 ] Sinocentrism waned further after Britain militarily defeated Qing China in the Second Opium War , creating an influx of Western culture with the decline of the Qing dynasty. Some Koreans especially those who studied abroad saw a need for reforms and associated Western civilization with modernization.

[ 11 ] Vietnam [ edit ] The Painting of Foreign Countries (外國圖) in the 18th century with Revival Lê dynasty as "middle state" (中國).

Vietnam ( Đại Việt ) had an intimate but not always peaceful relationship with China . Vietnam, originally independent, was part of various Chinese dynasties and kingdoms for approximately 900 years before gaining independence in the 10th century. In subsequent centuries the Vietnamese drove out Chinese invaders on a number of occasions, to the extent that conflict with China may be seen as one of the main themes of Vietnamese history .

However, Vietnam was also heavily Sinicized , adopting most aspects of Chinese culture , including the administrative system, architecture, philosophy, religion, literature of China, and even a general cultural outlook. Classical Chinese ( Chữ Hán ) was adopted as national writing system since the Triệu dynasty . Vietnamese merchants along with Chinese merchants had the important roles in spreading of Hanzi and Confucianism to the world. First Vietnamese reached the Persian shores in the late 1st century. Vietnam persistently identified itself in relation to China, regarding itself as the kingdom of the south as against China in the north, as seen in this line from a poem (in Classical Chinese) by General Lý Thường Kiệt (李常傑) (1019–1105): Nam Quốc sơn hà Nam Đế cư . (南國山河南帝居), which means "Over mountains and rivers of the South reigns the Emperor of the South".

In adopting Chinese customs, the Vietnamese court also began to adopt Sinocentric world view during the expanding Later Lê and Nguyễn dynasties. "Trung Quốc" 中國 was used as a name for Vietnam by Emperor Gia Long in 1805.

[ 15 ] It was said "Hán di hữu hạn" 漢夷有限 (" the Vietnamese and the barbarians must have clear borders ") by the Gia Long Emperor (Nguyễn Phúc Ánh) when differentiating between Khmer and Vietnamese.

[ 16 ] Minh Mang implemented an acculturation integration policy directed at minority non-Vietnamese peoples.

[ 17 ] Thanh nhân 清人 was used to refer to ethnic Chinese by the Vietnamese while Vietnamese called themselves as Hán nhân 漢人 in Vietnam during the 1800s under Nguyễn rule.

[ 18 ] Cambodia was regularly called Cao Man Quốc (高蠻國), the country of "upper barbarians". In 1815, Gia Long claimed 13 countries as Vietnamese vassals, including Luang Prabang , Vientiane , Burma, Tran Ninh in eastern Laos, and two countries called "Thủy Xá Quốc" and "Hỏa Xá Quốc", which were actually Malayo-Polynesian Jarai tribes living between Vietnam and Cambodia. Mirroring the Chinese model, the Vietnamese court attempted to regulate the presentation of tribute to the Vietnamese court, participation in New Year and emperor's birthday ceremonies, as well as the travel routes and size of tributary missions.

[ 19 ] Vietnamese Nguyen Emperor Minh Mạng sinicized ethnic minorities such as Khmer and Cham, claimed the legacy of Confucianism and China's Han dynasty for Vietnam, and used the term Han people 漢人 (Hán nhân) to refer to the Vietnamese.

[ 20 ] Minh Mang declared that "We must hope that their barbarian habits will be subconsciously dissipated, and that they will daily become more infected by Han [Sino-Vietnamese] customs." [ 21 ] These policies were directed at the Khmer and hill tribes.

[ 22 ] The Nguyen lord Nguyen Phuc Chu had referred to Vietnamese as "Han people" in 1712 when differentiating between Vietnamese and Chams.

[ 23 ] The Nguyen Lords established đồn điền after 1790. It was said "Hán di hữu hạn" 漢夷有限 (" the Vietnamese and the barbarians must have clear borders ") by the Gia Long Emperor (Nguyễn Phúc Ánh) when differentiating between Khmer and Vietnamese.

[ 16 ] Minh Mang implemented an acculturation integration policy directed at minority non-Vietnamese peoples.

[ 17 ] Thanh nhân 清人 or Đường nhân 唐人 were used to refer to ethnic Chinese by the Vietnamese while Vietnamese called themselves as Hán dân 漢民 and Hán nhân 漢人 in Vietnam during the 1800s under Nguyễn rule.

[ 18 ] Chinese style clothing was forced on Vietnamese people by the Nguyễn.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Trousers have been adopted by White H'mong.

[ 30 ] The trousers replaced the traditional skirts of the females of the White Hmong.

[ 31 ] The tunics and trouser clothing of the Han Chinese on the Ming tradition was worn by the Vietnamese. The Áo dài was created when tucks which were close fitting and compact were added in the 1920s to this Chinese style.

[ 32 ] Trousers and tunics on the Chinese pattern in 1774 were ordered by the Nguyễn Phúc Khoát to replace the sarong type Vietnamese clothing.

[ 33 ] The Chinese clothing in the form of trousers and tunic were mandated by the Vietnamese Nguyen government. It was up to the 1920s in Vietnam's north area in isolated hamlets wear skirts were worn.

[ 34 ] The Chinese Qin and Han dynasty state clothing was ordered to be adopted by Vietnamese military and bureaucrats since Vietnam under Triệu rule Triệu Đà (179 BC).

[ 35 ] Chinese influence waned as French influence rose in the 19th century, and Vietnam eventually abolished the Imperial examinations and stopped using Chữ Hán and the related Chữ Nôm script in the 20th century in official.

Japan [ edit ] In Japan , an ambivalent tone was set early in its relationship with China.

Shōtoku Taishi (574–622), Prince Regent of Japan, is famous for having sent a letter to the Emperor of China starting with the words: "The Emperor of the land where the sun rises sends a letter to the Emperor of the land where the sun sets to ask if you are healthy" (日出處天子致書日沒處天子無恙云云). This is commonly believed as the origin of the name Nihon (source of the sun), although the actual characters for Nihon (日本) were not used.

Not long after this, however, Japan remodeled its entire state and administrative apparatus on the Chinese system under the Taika Reform (645), the beginning of a period of Chinese influence on many aspects of Japanese culture until Imperial Japanese embassies to China were abolished in 894.

In 1401, during the Muromachi period (室町時代), the shōgun Yoshimitsu (足利義満) restarted the lapsed tribute system (1401), describing himself in a letter to the Chinese Emperor as "Your subject, the King of Japan" while also a subject of the Japanese Emperor. The benefit of the tribute system was a profitable trade. The trade was called Kangō [ 36 ] trade (means tally trade [ 36 ] ) and Japanese products were traded for Chinese goods. This relationship ended with the last envoy of Japanese monk Sakugen Shūryō in 1551, [ 37 ] [ 38 ] which was Ashikaga Yoshiteru 's era, including a 20 years suspension by Ashikaga Yoshimochi .

[ clarification needed ] These embassies were sent to China on 19 occasions.

During the Mongol -led Yuan dynasty of China, Japan thought of China as no longer a genuine Chinese land.

[ 39 ] Subsequently, Japan often used the names "China" and " Huaxia " to refer to itself.

[ 39 ] In the years 1592–1593, Toyotomi Hideyoshi , having unified Japan, tried to conquer Korea as a prelude to conquering Ming China. The attempt to conquer " all under heaven " (itself a sinocentric concept identifying China as "the world") ended in failure.

Japanese responses to Sinocentric concepts have not always been so straightforward. The Mongol invasions in 1274 and 1281 evoked a national consciousness of the role of the kamikaze (神風) in defeating the enemy. Less than fifty years later (1339–43), Kitabatake Chikafusa wrote the Jinnō Shōtōki (神皇正統記, 'Chronicle of the Direct Descent of the Divine Sovereigns') emphasizing the divine descent of the imperial line. The Jinnō Shōtōki provided a Shinto view of history stressing the divine nature of Japan and its spiritual supremacy over China and India.

In the Tokugawa era, the study of Kokugaku ( 国学 ) arose as an attempt to reconstruct and recover the authentic native roots of Japanese culture, particularly Shinto, excluding later elements borrowed from China. In 1657, Tokugawa Mitsukuni established the Mito School , which was charged with writing a history of Japan as a perfect exemplar of a "nation" under Confucian thought, with the emphasis on unified rule by the emperors and respect for the imperial court and Shinto deities.

In an ironic affirmation of the spirit of Sinocentrism, claims were even heard that the Japanese, not the Chinese, were the legitimate heirs of Chinese culture. Reasons included that the Imperial House of Japan never died out comparing to the rise and fall of Chinese monarchs in the past, and that Japan was free of barbarism like Qing dynasty's forced adoption of Manchu queue and clothing on Han Chinese after 1644. Combined with Shinto, came the concept of "Shinkoku/the Divine Kingdom ( 神國 ). In the early Edo period, neo-Confucianist Yamaga Sokō asserted that Japan was superior to China in Confucian terms and more deserving of the name " Chūgoku ". Other scholars picked this up, notably Aizawa Seishisai , an adherent of the Mito School, in his political tract Shinron (新論 New Theses) in 1825.

As a country that had much to gain by eclipsing Chinese power in East Asia, Japan in more recent times has perhaps been most ardent in identifying and demolishing what it dismissively calls Chūka shisō (中華思想), loosely meaning " Zhonghua ideology". One manifestation of Japanese resistance to Sinocentrism was the insistence for many years in the early 20th century on using the name Shina ( 支那 ) for China, based on the Western word 'China', in preference to Chūgoku (中国 Central Country) advocated by the Chinese themselves.

[ citation needed ] Burma [ edit ] Unlike East Asian states, which communicated in written Chinese, Burma used a different written language in its communications with China. While China consistently regarded Burma as a vassal, Burmese records indicate that Burma considered itself as China's equal. Under the Burmese interpretation, Burma was the "younger brother" and China was the "elder brother".

[ 40 ] Thailand [ edit ] Thailand was subordinate to China as a tributary state from the Sui dynasty until the Taiping Rebellion of the late Qing dynasty in the mid-19th century.

[ 5 ] The Sukhothai Kingdom established official relations with the Yuan dynasty during the reign of King Ram Khamhaeng .

[ 41 ] Wei Yuan , the 19th century Chinese scholar, considered Thailand to be the strongest and most loyal of China's Southeast Asian tributaries, citing the time when Thailand offered to directly attack Japan to divert the Japanese in their planned invasions of Korea and the Asian mainland, as well as other acts of loyalty to the Ming dynasty.

[ 42 ] Thailand was welcoming and open to Chinese immigrants, who dominated commerce and trade, and achieved high positions in the government.

[ 43 ] Sri Lanka [ edit ] Main article: Ming–Kotte War The last Sri Lankan kingdom, the Kingdom of Kandy (1469–1815), did not establish any significant relationships with imperial China. However, the preceding Kotte kingdom (1412–1597) had significant interactions with Ming China.

Parakramabahu VI of Kotte , the founder of Kotte, established a significant alliance with Ming China during his reign, resulting in noteworthy political and economic consequences for the region. This alliance led to the removal of Vira Alakesvara of Gampola from the throne in favor of Parakramabahu VI, with documented details found in Chinese records.

[ 44 ] Historical accounts reveal that Parakramabahu VI's legitimacy was fortified through a selection process at the Ming court. He was nominated by the Yongle Ming emperor and subsequently installed into power by Admiral Zheng He. This transition was ensured by the commanding presence of Zheng He's formidable fleet.

[ 44 ] This collaboration marked the beginning of an era characterized by increased economic interaction between the Ming dynasty and the Kotte kingdom. In order to strengthen these relations, Parakramabahu VI initiated several diplomatic missions, totaling at least five, to China. These missions aimed to affirm the cessation of sea piracy within the Sea of Kotte.

[ 44 ] A notable legacy of Parakramabahu VI's reign is attributed to Admiral Zheng He, who made a lasting impact on Sri Lanka. This is exemplified by the installation of the Galle Trilingual inscription, serving as an artifact that attests to the interactions between the two nations during this historical period.

[ 44 ] Sri Lanka, like Japan, was considered yuanyi (remote foreigners; 遠夷) in jueyu (remote territories; 絕域) under the Imperial Chinese Tributary System .

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Europe [ edit ] One of the most historically well-known official encounter between Sinocentric attitudes and Europeans was the Macartney Embassy of 1792–93, which sought to establish a permanent British presence in Peking and establish official trade relations.

[ 47 ] The rejection of the Chinese Emperor to the British overtures and the British refusal to kowtow to the Emperor has passed into legend in British and Chinese folklore. In response to the British request to recognise Macartney as official ambassador , the Emperor wrote: [ 46 ] The Celestial Empire, ruling all within the four seas, simply concentrates on carrying out the affairs of Government properly ... We have never valued ingenious articles, nor do we have the slightest need of your country's manufactures, therefore O King, as regards to your request to send someone to remain at the capital, which it is not in harmony with the regulations of the Celestial Empire – we also feel very much that it is of no advantage to your country.

Cultural Sinocentrism [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in China Ideologies Authoritarian Capitalism Party-state Chiangism Communitarianism Cultural Dai Jitao Thought Monarchism Nationalist Han Neo Ultra Neoauthoritarianism Social Traditionalist Confucianism Neo New Legalism Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Asian values Authority Bureaucracy Civilization state Chinese culture Genealogy book Great Unity Duty Elitism Meritocracy Exceptionalism Familialism Filial piety Mandate of Heaven Hierarchy Humaneness Irredentism Law and order Rectification of names Respect Sinicization Sinocentrism Social order Sovereignty Tradition Technocracy Zhonghua minzu History 1992 Consensus Boluan Fanzheng Boxer Rebellion Chinese Civil War Chinese Cultural Renaissance Dang Guo Dynasties of China Han Empire of China (1915–1916) History of the Kuomintang Nationalist government Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Imperial China Imperial examination Tributary system Manchu Restoration Nanjing decade Martial law in Taiwan Language policy New Life Movement Project National Glory Reform and opening up Republic of China (1912–1949) Shanghai massacre Strike Hard Against Crime Campaign Tongzhi Restoration Self-Strengthening Movement White Terror in Taiwan Xueheng School Intellectuals Bell Chang (Ya-chung) Chen (Yuan) Chao Confucius Dai Dong Gan Gu Hu (Hanmin) Hu (Xijin) Jaw Jiang (Qing) Jiang (Shigong) Jin Kang Li (Ao) Li (Hongzhi) Li (Zehou) Liang Liu Pan Liu Shang Tam Tan Wang Wu Xiao Xiong Zhang (Weiwei) Zheng (Yongnian) Zhu Zou Politicians Imperial China Chao Duke Shao Wen Emperor Wu (Han) Yang Yongle Yuan Zhang Duke Zhou Republic of China (before 1949) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Dai (Jitao) Dai (Li) Hu (Hanmin) Li Lin Soong Yuan People's Republic of China (Mainland) Hu Huang Jiang Wang Xi Hong Kong Chan (Gary) Chan (Joephy) Chow Fok Ho Ip (Kwok-him) Ip (Regina) Kwok Lam Lee (Dominic) Lee (John) Lee (Starry) Leung Liao Quat Tsang (Donald) Tsang (Yok-sing) Tung Yung Macau Chui Ho (Edmund) Ho (Iat Seng) Sam Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wan-an) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Chiu Chu Gou Han Hau (Lung-pin) Hau (Pei-tsun) Hung Jaw Lee Lien Lin Ma Soong (James) Soong (Mei-ling) Sun Yu Extant parties Mainland China Chinese Communist Party ( factions ) Hong Kong Business and Professionals Alliance Civil Force Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress Federation of Public Housing Estates Hong Kong Federation of Education Workers Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions Kowloon West New Dynamic Liberal Party New Century Forum New People's Party New Prospect New Territories Association of Societies Politihk Social Strategic Roundtable Silent Majority Macau Alliance for Change Macau-Guangdong Union New Macau Development Union United Citizens Association Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese New Party Chinese Unification Promotion Party For Public Good Party Patriot Alliance Association People First Party Young China Party Overseas Malaysian Chinese Association Historical parties Progressive Party Republican Party Royalist Party Unity Party Hong Kong Co-operative Resources Centre Federation for the Stability Hong Kong Alliance of Chinese and Expatriates Hong Kong Progressive Alliance Liberal Democratic Federation New Hong Kong Alliance Professional Forum Progressive Hong Kong Society Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Congress Party Alliance Republican Party The Motorists' Party of ROC Overseas Ryukyu Guomindang Tibet Improvement Party Alliances Pro-Kuomintang camp Republic of China mainland China Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Hong Kong Macau Literature America Against America Analects Classic of Filial Piety The China Wave Farewell to Revolution Organisations Active China Youth Service & Recreation Center Institute of Revolutionary Practice Defunct Blue Shirts Society Group of 89 National Revolutionary Army Tsotanhui Clique Western Hills Group Media Mainland China Economic Daily Global Times Guancha Hong Kong Headline Daily Hong Kong Economic Times Oriental Daily News Sing Tao Daily The Standard Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chung T'ien Television China Television China Times Commercial Times TVBS United Daily News Overseas The Epoch Times Former Central Daily News Shen Bao By region Hong Kong Taiwan (Republic of China) Variants and movements Anti-communism Conservative localism in Hong Kong Hanfu Movement Related ideologies Authoritarian capitalism Fascism Han chauvinism Hui pan-nationalism Imperialism State nationalism Related topics Anti-national sentiments Japanese Taiwanese Tibetan Baizuo Falun Gong Four big families of Hong Kong Liberalism in China (opposing) Pro-ROC sentiment " Straight man cancer " Taishang Taiwanese nationalism (opposing) World League for Freedom and Democracy Conservatism portal China portal Hong Kong portal Taiwan portal v t e In a cultural sense, Sinocentrism can refer to the tendency among both Chinese and foreigners to regard the culture of China as more ancient than or superior to other cultures. This often involves regarding neighboring countries as mere cultural offshoots of China. The geographical dimension of traditional Sinocentrism was highlighted by Chinese reactions to the publication of the first world map by the Jesuit missionary Matteo Ricci (1552–1610): Lately Matteo Ricci utilized some false teachings to fool people, and scholars unanimously believed him...The Map of the World which he made contains elements of the fabulous and mysterious, and is a down right attempt to deceive people on things which they personally cannot go to verify for themselves...We need not discuss other points, but just take for example the position of China on the map. He puts it not in the center but slightly to the West and inclined to the north. This is altogether far from the truth, for China should be in the center of the world , which we can prove by the single fact that we can see the North Star resting at the zenith of the heaven at midnight.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] In the late Ming and Qing dynasties, there was a belief in Chinese cultural circles that knowledge entering China from the West had already existed in China in the past. This trend of thought was known in Chinese as xi xue zhong yuan ( Chinese : 西學 中 源 ; pinyin : Xīxué Zhōng yuán ; lit.

'Western knowledge has Chinese origins').

Xi xue zhong yuan was a way to not only enhance the prestige of ancient Chinese learning, but also that of Western learning and make it more acceptable to the Chinese at that time.

[ 46 ] One notable example was Chouren Zhuan ( Chinese : 疇人 傳 ; pinyin : Chóurén zhuàn ; lit.

'Biographies of Astronomers and Mathematicians'), a book by the Qing dynasty scholar Ruan Yuan which adopted the point of view that some Western sciences had an ancient Chinese origin. Scholars such as Ruan saw astronomy and mathematics as a key to deciphering the ancient classics. Until the Sino-Japanese War , some intellectuals believed that some of the sciences and technologies coming from Europe were actually lost ancient Chinese knowledge.  The Chinese have abandoned the idea of xi xue zhong yuan since the early 20th century.

[ 46 ] Cultural Sinocentrism was the political and cultural core of the region: traditional Chinese language and writing system , ideological frames of the Confucian social and familial order; legal and administrative systems; Buddhism and the art of historiography were used in China , the Korean peninsula ( Korean Confucianism ) and also Vietnam .

[ 48 ] Indigenous criticism [ edit ] Followers of Chinese Buddhism were some of the fiercest critics of Sinocentrism, since they followed a religion that originated in India , rather than China. The monk Zhiyi (538–597 CE) referred to China as "Zhendan" ( 震旦 ; Zhèndàn ), rather than by any epithet for China that emphasized China's centrality, such as Zhōngguó (the modern name of China, 中國 ; 中国 ; Zhōngguó ) or Zhonghua ( 中華 ; 中华 ; Zhōnghuá ). "Zhendan" originated in a transcription of the Sanskrit word for China, चीनस्थान , cīnasthāna . Another anti-Sinocentric name for China used by Buddhists was "country of the Han " ( 漢國 ; 汉国 ; Hàn-guó ) or "region of the Han".

[ 50 ] Reacting to an insecurity against China's indigenous religions of Confucianism and Daoism , Buddhists in China asserted [ when?

] that Confucius and Yan Hui were avatars of the Buddha, and that Confucianism was merely an offshoot of Buddhism.  When Buddhists had influence in the court, such as in the minority-led Yuan dynasty , they successfully persuaded the imperial governments to censor and destroy Daoist texts . They especially hated the Huahujing , which made the opposite argument to that of the Buddhists; that Buddhism was an offshoot of Daoism.

[ 51 ] Liu Ji , one of the key advisors of the Ming-dynasty founder Zhu Yuanzhang , generally supported the idea that while the Chinese and the non-Chinese are different, they are actually equal . Liu was therefore arguing against the idea that the Chinese were and are superior to other people.

[ 52 ] Culturally, one of the most famous attacks on Sinocentrism and its associated beliefs was made by the author Lu Xun in The True Story of Ah Q , in which the protagonist is humiliated and defeated; satirizing the ridiculous way in which he claimed "spiritual victories" in spite of this.

[ 53 ] Today [ edit ] The influence of the Sinocentric model of political relations and Sinocentric belief in cultural superiority (especially against the West) declined in the 19th century. The Sinocentric ideology suffered a further blow when Imperial Japan , having undergone the Meiji Restoration , defeated China in the First Sino-Japanese War. As a result, China adopted the Westphalian system of equal independent states.

[ 46 ] In modern Chinese foreign policy , the People's Republic of China has repeatedly stated that it will never seek to establish hegemony beyond its borders ( Chinese : 永不称霸 ).

[ 54 ] However, some historians, such as John Friend and Bradley Thayer believe there are individuals in the Chinese government who doggedly hold onto Sinocentric beliefs.

[ 55 ] Chinese Communist Party (CCP) general secretary Xi Jinping has called for a 'pan-Asian security concept', which has been compared to Imperial Japan by commentators.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Related concepts [ edit ] Successive peoples from the north, such as the Xianbei , Jurchens , Mongols , [ 58 ] or Manchus , were quite willing to place themselves at the center of the model, although they were not always successful. The Xianbei empires during the Northern and Southern dynasties , for example, regarded the Han regimes of southern China as "barbarians" because they refused to submit to Xianbei rule. Similarly, the Manchu-led Qing dynasty regarded the Westerners they encountered in the mid-19th century as "barbarians" due to their "uncouth manners".

[ 46 ] Sinocentrism is not synonymous with Chinese nationalism . The successive dynasties in China's history were Sinocentric in the sense that they regarded Chinese civilization to be universal in its reach and application.

[ citation needed ] Chinese nationalism, in contrast, is a more modern concept ( nationalism ) focused primarily on the idea of a unified, cohesive, and powerful Chinese nation state , as one of the nations of the world.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] China portal History portal Asia portal Politics portal Adoption of Chinese literary culture Afrocentrism Chinese Century Chinese exceptionalism Chinese expansionism Chinese imperialism Emperor at home, king abroad Five thousand years of Chinese civilization Indocentrism Khan of Heaven Language Atlas of China List of recipients of tribute from China List of tributary states of China Little China (ideology) Pax Sinica Secession in China Sinology Eurocentrism References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b "Beneath the Facade of China".

School of Contemporary Chinese Studies . NG8 1BB. 30 May 2007.

^ Tan Chung (September 1973).

"On Sinocentrism: A Critique" .

China Report .

9 (5): 38– 50.

doi : 10.1177/000944557300900507 .

ISSN 0009-4455 .

^ von Falkenhausen (1999), 544.

^ Shelach (1999), 222–223.

^ a b Lee, Seokwoo; Lee, Hee Eun (1 January 2016).

1 Korea's Encounter with the Modern International Legal System .

Brill Nijhoff .

ISBN 978-90-04-31575-4 .

^ Schmid, Andre (1997), "Rediscovering Manchuria: Sin Ch'aeho and the Politics of Territorial History in Korea", Journal of Asian Studies , 56 (1): 29, doi : 10.2307/2646342 , JSTOR 2646342 , S2CID 162879663 ^ Hamashita, Takeshi (2013).

China, East Asia and the Global Economy: Regional and Historical Perspectives .

Routledge . p. 15.

ISBN 978-1-134-04029-2 .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 .

^ "History in The Mutan Village Incident" . Twhistory.org.tw. 11 June 2001.

Archived from the original on 7 August 2007 . Retrieved 11 April 2011 .

^ Chinataiwan history (历史) of Taiwan area Archived 29 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine (Chinese) ^ Kang, David C. (2010).

East Asia Before the West: Five Centuries of Trade and Tribute, p. 160.

, p. 160, at Google Books ^ a b Kwon Hee Young (2010).

"From Sinocentrism to Civilization Discourse" (PDF) .

The Review of Korean Studies .

13 (3).

Academy of Korean Studies : 13– 30.

doi : 10.25024/review.2010.13.3.001 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 November 2022 – via Korea Citation Index .

^ Smithsonian Institution (23 April 2021).

"Yuan dynasty (1279–1368), an introduction" .

Smarthistory .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2022.

^ Daniel Sun (February 1997).

"Road to East Asia" .

York University .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2019.

^ Han, Young-woo (1992), "The Establishment and Development of Nationalist History", Seoul Journal of Korean Studies , 5 : 62– 64 ^ Alexander Woodside (1971).

Vietnam and the Chinese Model: A Comparative Study of Vietnamese and Chinese Government in the First Half of the Nineteenth Century .

Harvard University Asia Center . pp. 18–.

ISBN 978-0-674-93721-5 .

Archived from the original on 18 February 2020 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ a b Choi Byung Wook (2004).

Southern Vietnam Under the Reign of Minh Mạng (1820-1841): Central Policies and Local Response .

SEAP Publications . pp. 34–.

ISBN 978-0-87727-138-3 .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 June 2016 .

^ a b Choi Byung Wook (2004).

Southern Vietnam Under the Reign of Minh Mạng (1820-1841): Central Policies and Local Response (illustrated ed.).

SEAP Publications . pp. 136–.

ISBN 978-0-87727-138-3 .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 June 2016 .

^ a b Choi Byung Wook (2004).

Southern Vietnam Under the Reign of Minh Mạng (1820-1841): Central Policies and Local Response .

SEAP Publications . pp. 137–.

ISBN 978-0-87727-138-3 .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 June 2016 .

^ Vietnam and the Chinese Model , Alexander Barton Woodside, Council on East Asian Studies Harvard, Cambridge (Massachusetts) and London 1988: P236-237 ^ Norman G. Owen (2005).

The Emergence Of Modern Southeast Asia: A New History . University of Hawaii Press. pp. 115–.

ISBN 978-0-8248-2890-5 .

^ A. Dirk Moses (1 January 2008).

Empire, Colony, Genocide: Conquest, Occupation, and Subaltern Resistance in World History .

Berghahn Books . pp. 209–.

ISBN 978-1-84545-452-4 .

^ Randall Peerenboom; Carole J. Petersen; Albert H.Y. Chen (27 September 2006).

Human Rights in Asia: A Comparative Legal Study of Twelve Asian Jurisdictions, France and the USA . Routledge. pp. 474–.

ISBN 978-1-134-23881-1 .

^ "Vietnam-Champa Relations and the Malay-Islam Regional Network in the 17th–19th Centuries" . Archived from the original on 17 June 2004 . Retrieved 2 February 2019 .

^ Alexander Woodside (1971).

Vietnam and the Chinese Model: A Comparative Study of Vietnamese and Chinese Government in the First Half of the Nineteenth Century . Harvard Univ Asia Center. pp. 134–.

ISBN 978-0-674-93721-5 .

^ Nguyen, Thuc-Doan T. (2008).

Globalization: A View by Vietnamese Consumers Through Wedding Windows . University of Utah. pp. 34–.

ISBN 978-0-549-68091-8 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Vietnam's National Dress" .

angelasancartier.net .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2016 . Retrieved 2 February 2019 .

^ Ashley Nguyen (14 March 2010).

"#18 Transcultural Tradition of the Vietnamese Ao Dai" .

Beyond Victoriana .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2010 . Retrieved 2 February 2019 .

^ Marie, Ann (4 October 2013).

"Ao Dai" .

Fashion-history.lovetoknow.com .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2016 . Retrieved 2 February 2019 .

^ "The Ao Dai and I: A Personal Essay on Cultural Identity and Steampunk" .

Tor.com . 20 October 2010.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 February 2019 .

^ Vietnam . Michelin Travel Publications. 2002. p. 200.

^ Gary Yia Lee; Nicholas Tapp (16 September 2010).

Culture and Customs of the Hmong . ABC-CLIO. pp. 138–.

ISBN 978-0-313-34527-2 .

^ Anthony Reid (2 June 2015).

A History of Southeast Asia: Critical Crossroads .

John Wiley & Sons . pp. 285–.

ISBN 978-0-631-17961-0 .

^ Anthony Reid (9 May 1990).

Southeast Asia in the Age of Commerce, 1450-1680: The Lands Below the Winds . Yale University Press. pp. 90–.

ISBN 978-0-300-04750-9 .

^ A. Terry Rambo (2005).

Searching for Vietnam: Selected Writings on Vietnamese Culture and Society . Kyoto University Press. p. 64.

ISBN 978-1-920901-05-9 .

^ Jayne Werner; John K. Whitmore; George Dutton (21 August 2012).

Sources of Vietnamese Tradition .

Columbia University Press . pp. 295–.

ISBN 978-0-231-51110-0 .

^ a b Grossberg, Kenneth A. (1981).

Japan's Renaissance: The Politics of the Muromachi Bakufu . Council on East Asian Studies, Harvard University. p. 81.

ISBN 9780674472518 .

^ Page 80, Tanegashima Archived 3 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Olof G. Lidin ^ Page 1232, Flow cytometry and cell sorting Archived 10 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Andreas Radbruch ^ a b Fang, Weigui (2019).

Modern Notions of Civilization and Culture in China . Springer. p. 31.

ISBN 9789811335587 .

^ Laichen Sun.

"Suzerain and Vassal, or Elder and Younger Brothers: The Nature of the Sino-Burmese Historical Relationship" .

Association for Asian Studies .

University of Michigan . Archived from the original on 17 February 2009 . Retrieved 3 January 2006 .

^ Chinvanno, Anuson (18 June 1992).

Thailand's Policies towards China, 1949–54 . Springer. p. 24.

ISBN 9781349124305 .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2017 . Retrieved 19 July 2016 .

^ Leonard, Jane Kate (1984).

Wei Yuan and China's Rediscovery of the Maritime World .

Harvard University Asia Center . pp.

137– 138.

ISBN 9780674948556 .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2017 . Retrieved 19 July 2016 .

^ Gambe, Annabelle R. (2000).

Overseas Chinese Entrepreneurship and Capitalist Development in Southeast Asia . LIT Verlag Münster. pp.

100– 101.

ISBN 9783825843861 .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2020 . Retrieved 19 July 2016 .

^ a b c d China–Sri Lanka: Two Millennia of Mutually Enriching Relations ^ Lung, Rachel (7 September 2011).

Interpreters in Early Imperial China - Rachel Lung - Google Books .

John Benjamins Publishing . p. 44.

ISBN 9789027284181 .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2018 . Retrieved 2 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Stephen R. Platt , Imperial Twilight: the Opium War and the End of China's Last Golden Age (NY: Knopf , 2018), 166-73.

ISBN 9780307961730 ^ Stephen R. Platt, Imperial Twilight: the Opium War and the End of China's Last Golden Age (NY: Knopf, 2018), 166-73.

ISBN 9780307961730 ^ a b "... Cultural Sinocentrism was the basso ostinato of East Asia for more than a millennium: the classical Chinese language and writing system; ideological frames of the Confucian social and familial order; legal and administrative systems; Buddhism, which was transmitted to Korea, Vietnam, and China via Chinese translations of canonical texts and Chinese versions of Buddhist prac- tice; and the art of historiography itself" The Oxford History of Historical Writing. Volume 3. Jose Rabasa, Masayuki Sato, Edoardo Tortarolo, Daniel Woolf - 1400-1800, page 2.

^ Wei Chün, On Ricci's Fallacies to Deceive the World (Li shuo huang-t'ang huo-shih p'ien), quoted in: George H. C. Wong, “China's Opposition to Western Science during Late Ming and Early Ch'ing”, Isis , Vol. 54, No. 1. (Mar., 1963), pp. 29-49 (44) ^ Abramson, Marc (2011).

Ethnic Identity in Tang China . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 76.

^ Pregadio, Fabrizio, ed. (2004). "Huahu jing".

The Encyclopedia of Taoism . Psychology Press. p. 494.

^ Zhou Songfang, "Lun Liu Ji de Yimin Xintai" (On Liu Ji's Mentality as a Dweller of Subjugated Empire) in Xueshu Yanjiu no.4 (2005), 112-117.

^ Lu Xun [鲁迅] (1981), Lu Xun Quanji (鲁迅全集, Collected Works of Lu Xun), 16 volumes, Renmin Chubanshe, Beijing ^ "胡锦涛：中国坚持和平发展,永不称霸永不搞扩张" (in Chinese). China News.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2014.

^ John M. Friend; Bradley A. Thayer (1 November 2018).

How China Sees the World: Han-Centrism and the Balance of Power in International Politics .

University of Nebraska Press .

ISBN 978-1-64012-137-9 .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2020 . Retrieved 7 June 2019 .

^ Hanson, Victor Davis.

"China's New Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere" .

RealClearPolitics . Retrieved 21 July 2020 .

^ Chin, Curtis (14 July 2014).

"Xi Jinping's 'Asia for Asians' mantra evokes imperial Japan" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 21 July 2020 .

^ "Kublai Khan" . Hyperhistory.net. 21 September 1999. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011 . Retrieved 11 April 2011 .

Sources [ edit ] Kang, David C. (2010).

East Asia Before the West: Five Centuries of Trade and Tribute.

New York : Columbia University Press.

ISBN 9780231153188 / ISBN 9780231526746 ; OCLC 562768984 Shelach, Gideon (1999).

Leadership Strategies, Economic Activity, and Interregional Interaction : Social Complexity in Northeast China . Springer.

ISBN 0-306-46090-4 , ISBN 978-0-306-46090-6 von Falkenhausen, Lothar . "The Waning of the Bronze Age: Material Culture and Social Developments, 770–481 B.C." In Michael Loewe and Edward L. Shaughnessy (editors), The Cambridge History of Ancient China : From the Origins of Civilization to 221 B.C.

, pp. 450–544. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-47030-7 / ISBN 978-0-521-47030-8 .

External links [ edit ] Look up Sinocentrism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Library resources about Sinocentrism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Public Secrets: Geopolitical Aesthetics in Zhang Yimou's Hero Origin of Vietnam name (archived February 5, 2005) Arrighi, Giovanni (15 January 1997).

"The Rise of East Asia and the Withering Away of the Interstate System" . Binghamton University (Department of Sociology). Archived from the original on 17 February 2009.

< Sinocentrism or Paranoia?

Suzerain and Vassal, or Elder and Younger Brothers: The Nature of the Sino-Burmese Historical Relationship v t e Ethnocentrism Regional variants Afrocentrism Americentrism Asiacentrism Indocentrism Sinocentrism Little China Eurocentrism Anglocentrism Germanocentrism Hellenocentrism Related phenomena Anthropocentrism Chronocentrism Colonial mentality Exceptionalism Template Geocentrism Religiocentrism Sentiocentrism Xenocentrism v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xskdx
Cached time: 20250817044428
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.534 seconds
Real time usage: 1.842 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11886/1000000
Revision size: 55656/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 510251/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15078/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 61/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 239915/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.881/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23821022/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1434.511      1 -total
 29.98%  430.123      1 Template:Reflist
 17.83%  255.831     17 Template:Navbox
 14.86%  213.109      1 Template:Infobox_Chinese
 14.69%  210.694      1 Template:Historiography
 14.43%  206.979      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 11.23%  161.039     25 Template:Cite_book
  9.54%  136.858      1 Template:Conservatism_in_China
  9.39%  134.630      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.22%  117.961     36 Template:Ill Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:195545:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044428 and revision id 1292074355. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sinocentrism&oldid=1292074355 " Categories : Chinese nationalism Culture of East Asia Ethnocentrism Asiacentrism Geocultural perspectives Han Chinese Political terminology Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from May 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use dmy dates from February 2019 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2018 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sinocentrism 22 languages Add topic

