Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Principle Toggle Principle subsection 1.1 Types 1.2 Data processing 2 Frequency of reporting 3 Limitations 4 Enhancements 5 References Toggle the table of contents Present weather sensor 2 languages Euskara Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Present weather sensor" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) National Weather Service Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS) present weather sensor The present weather sensor (PWS) is a component of an automatic weather station that detects the presence of hydrometeors and determines their type ( rain , snow , drizzle , etc.) and intensity. It works on a principle similar to a bistatic radar , noting the passage of droplets, or flakes, between a transmitter and a sensor. These instruments in automatic weather stations are used to simulate the observation taken by a human observer. They allow rapid reporting of any change in the type and intensity of precipitation, but include interpretation limitations.

Principle [ edit ] Types [ edit ] There are at least two types of devices used to detect precipitation: A light emitting diode weather identifier ( LEDWI ) sensor measures the scintillation pattern of the precipitation falling through the sensor's infrared beam (approximately 50 millimeters in diameter) and determines from a pattern analysis of the particle size and fall velocity whether the precipitation is rain or snow .

[ 1 ] The POSS ( Precipitation Observation Sensor System ) is a small bistatic Doppler radar . The transmitter aims upwards at a certain angle from a receiver oriented towards the volume probed and which picks up the signal backscattered by hydrometeors or other reflective particles in its detection volume.

[ 2 ] The device can thus measure the fall speed of targets by the Doppler effect and its intensity by its reflectivity . An analyzer then takes a weighted average of the last 15 polls over one minute to draw significant information.

Data processing [ edit ] With the speed of fall and the size of the particles, it is then possible to determine the type of precipitation (rain falls much faster than snowflakes for example) with a contingency table . The detector will report the type of precipitation with the largest population in the samples.

[ 2 ] However, in some cases, the characteristics of two types of precipitation may be similar (drizzle and snow fall at speeds very close to each other), or there may be a mixture of precipitation (e.g. rain and melting snow).

To refine detection in the event of ambiguity, these devices use the dew point temperature (or, if missing, environmental temperature) and the icing detector output. Thus, if the detector identifies the falling speed for the dual snow/drizzle at an ambient dew point greater than 1 °C (34 °F) it will classify it as drizzle, and below −1 °C (30 °F), it will be snow.

[ 2 ] The icing detector will also be used to determine if rain or drizzle is freezing when the temperature is below freezing.

When these additional data still do not make it possible to differentiate (e.g. if the dew point of the previous example is between −1 and 1 °C), the type is then reported as "unknown". Thus at the moment, these devices cannot report hail , ice pellets , and various other intermediate forms of precipitation.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The instantaneous intensity of precipitation is calculated by the intensity of the scintillation (LED sensor) or the reflectivity (POSS). It is reported as very weak, weak, moderate or strong.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Frequency of reporting [ edit ] Automatic stations report on a regular schedule depending on their use, most reporting hourly. However, they will issue a special report if one or more of their sensors detects a significant change in weather conditions. Such specials are issued when precipitation of at least low intensity starts or stops, or the type of precipitation changes.

The present weather sensor takes samples every minute and the automatic station processing system stores them for 15 minutes. A special will be broadcast when at least three precipitation detections are made in 15 minutes for the start, if at least 12 minutes pass without precipitation, or if the intensity variation corresponds to a significant change.

Limitations [ edit ] The detail of mixed precipitation is not generally possible as the sensor is giving only the dominant one. The report is only valid at the sensor position, it will thus miss precipitation further afield that can be significant. Finally, it cannot by itself distinguish showers from continuous rain/snow.

False observations of precipitation are generally due to: [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Interference by radio frequency or light beams; Birds or insects passing through the beam; Blowing dust, snow or sand lifted by the wind; Thermal bubbles .

Ambiguous situations where the contingency table cannot correctly determine the type.

Enhancements [ edit ] Thundershowers and continuous precipitation can be separated by using a lightning detector with the sensor result. Ground-based and mobile detectors obtain the direction and severity of lightning .

Scatterometers and transmissometers , where the extinction of a visual signal through air from a source to a receiver is noted, will give the horizontal visibility. In case there is no precipitation reported by the PWS, this will be revert the conclusion to fog or haze .

Lightning sensor.

Airport scatterometer (or diffusometer).

Transmissometer providing runway visual range (RVR) information.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Wade, Charles G. (June 2003).

"A Multisensor Approach to Detecting Drizzle on ASOS" .

Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology .

20 (6).

American Meteorological Society : 820.

Bibcode : 2003JAtOT..20..820W .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0426(2003)020<0820:AMATDD>2.0.CO;2 . Retrieved March 23, 2020 .

^ a b c d e f "Precipitation - Occurance [ sic ];" .

Automated Weather Observation System - AWOS .

Meteorological Service of Canada . Archived from the original on May 10, 2006 . Retrieved March 23, 2020 .

v t e Earth-based meteorological equipment and instrumentation Anemometer Atmometer Barograph Barometer Ceiling balloon Ceiling projector Ceilometer Dark adaptor goggles Dewcell Disdrometer Dropsonde Field mill Heat flux sensor Hygrometer Ice accretion indicator Lidar Lightning detector Nephelometer Nephoscope Pan evaporation Pyranometer Pyrheliometer Present weather sensor Radiosonde Rain gauge Snow gauge Snowboard Snow pillow SODAR Solarimeter Sounding rocket Stevenson screen Sunshine recorder Tethersonde Thermo-hygrograph Thermometer Tide gauge Transmissometer Weather balloon Weather buoy Weather radar Weather vane Whole sky camera Wind profiler Windsock Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Present_weather_sensor&oldid=1296436047 " Category : Meteorological instrumentation and equipment Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2020 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 00:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Present weather sensor 2 languages Add topic

