Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 National use Toggle National use subsection 1.1 China 1.2 Commonwealth usage 1.2.1 United Kingdom 1.2.2 Federal government in Commonwealth realms 1.2.3 Australian states 1.2.4 Canadian provinces 1.3 Germany 1.4 Japan 1.5 Netherlands 1.6 Singapore 1.7 Switzerland 1.8 United States 2 Chairmen 3 Religion Toggle Religion subsection 3.1 Catholic Church 3.2 Eastern Orthodox Churches 3.3 Lutheran Churches 3.4 Anglican Communion 3.5 Reformed and Presbyterianism 4 See also 5 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 5.1 Footnotes 5.2 References Toggle the table of contents Primus inter pares 37 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Lombard Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latin phrase meaning "first among equals" This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Primus inter pares" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "First among equals" redirects here. For other uses, see First Among Equals .

For the cognitive bias sometimes known as the "primus inter pares effect", see illusory superiority .

Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Primus inter pares is a Latin phrase meaning first among equals .

[ a ] It is typically used as an honorary title for someone who is formally equal to other members of their group but is accorded unofficial respect, traditionally owing to their seniority in office.

[ 1 ] Historically, the princeps senatus of the Roman Senate was such a figure and initially bore only the distinction that he was allowed to speak first during debate . After the fall of the Republic , Roman emperors initially referred to themselves only as princeps despite having enormous power.

Various modern figures such as the prime minister in parliamentary systems , the president of the Swiss Confederation , the chief justice of the United States , the chief justice of the Philippines , the archbishop of Canterbury of the Anglican Communion , the chair of the Federal Reserve in the United States and the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople of the Eastern Orthodox Church fall under both senses: Bearing higher status and various additional powers while remaining still merely equal to their peers in important senses.

National use [ edit ] China [ edit ] In the People's Republic of China , which was placed under the collective leadership of the Politburo Standing Committee following the death of Chairman Mao Zedong , the term "first among equals" was often used to describe China's paramount leader at the zenith of Deng Xiaoping 's influence. This has fallen out of favour since the consolidation of power under the current core leader , General Secretary Xi Jinping .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Commonwealth usage [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Prime Minister of the United Kingdom The term "prime minister" can be compared to "primary minister" or "first minister".  Because of this, the prime ministers of many countries are traditionally considered to be "first among equals" – they are the chairman or "head" of a Cabinet rather than holding an office that is de jure superior to that of ministers.

[ citation needed ] The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom has frequently been described as "first among equals". In the UK , the executive is the Cabinet, and during Hanoverian times a minister had the role of informing the monarch about proposed legislation in the House of Commons and other matters. In modern times, however, although the phrase is still occasionally used, it understates the powers of the prime minister , which now include many broad, exclusive, executive powers over which cabinet members have little influence.

[ citation needed ] First Among Equals is the title of a popular political novel (1984) by Jeffrey Archer , about the careers and private lives of several men vying to become British Prime Minister. It was later adapted into a ten-part TV series , produced by Granada Television .

[ citation needed ] Federal government in Commonwealth realms [ edit ] In the federal Commonwealth realms in which King Charles III is head of state as constitutional monarch, a governor-general is appointed by the King-in-Council to represent the King during his absence. The governor-general typically appoints the leader of the political party holding at least a plurality of seats in the elected legislature to be prime minister , whose relationship with the other ministers of the Crown is in theory said to be that of a primus inter pares , or "first among equals".

[ citation needed ] Australian states [ edit ] In Australia , governors represent the Australian monarch in each of the states of Australia that comprise the federal Commonwealth of Australia , making them "head of state" in each of their own states.

[ citation needed ] These are not envisaged as subordinate to the governor-general of Australia , although however the federal viceroy is "first among equals".

[ 4 ] The state governors appoint premiers , typically the leader of the political party holding at least a plurality of seats in the elected legislature.

[ citation needed ] Canadian provinces [ edit ] As federations in Canada , lieutenant-governors represent the Canadian monarch in each of the provinces, thus, acting as the "heads of state" in the provinces .

[ citation needed ] Lieutenant-governors in Canada are appointed by the governor general , on the advice of the prime minister of Canada , known as the Governor-in-Council . In each case, these lieutenant-governors are not envisaged as subordinate to the governor general who, as a federal viceroy, is "first among equals".

[ 5 ] A lieutenant governor as Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council appoints a leader of a provincial political party holding at least a plurality of seats in the elected provincial legislature to be provincial premier .

[ citation needed ] Germany [ edit ] Mayors of German city states have traditionally acted as primus inter pares . In Hamburg , Lübeck and Bremen , which had been Free Imperial Cities from the times of the Holy Roman Empire , the government was called Senate . The mayor was one senator amongst many, often referred to as president of the Senate rather than mayor. This ended in Lübeck with the incorporation into Prussia in 1937. While in a constitutional reform in 1996, the mayor of Hamburg was given broad powers to shape the politics of the Senate of Hamburg , thus, ending his status as primus inter pares . However, in the city state Free Hanseatic City of Bremen which was created after the Second World War, the mayor has had a similar role in the Senate of Bremen . The same was true until 1995 for the governing mayor of Berlin among his colleagues within the Senate of Berlin .

[ citation needed ] Japan [ edit ] Starting with the Meiji Constitution of 1885, as part of the "Cabinet System Act", and lasting until the revision of the modern constitution in 1947, the prime minister of Japan was legally considered to be of the same rank as the other ministers who formed the Cabinet . During this time, the prime minister was referred to as "同輩中の首席" dōhai-chū no shuseki ("chief among peers").

Netherlands [ edit ] The prime minister of the Netherlands (officially, the "minister-president") is the chairman of the Council of Ministers and active executive authority of the Dutch government . Although formally no special powers are assigned, the prime minister functions as the "face" of the cabinet of the Netherlands . Usually, the prime minister is also minister of General Affairs . Until 1945, the position of chairman of the Council of Ministers officially switched between the ministers, although practices differed throughout history. In 1945, the position was formally instituted. Although not formally necessary, the prime minister in practice is the leader of the largest party in the majority coalition in the House of Representatives , the lower house of parliament.

[ citation needed ] Singapore [ edit ] The phrase "first among equals" is often used to describe the political succession within the ruling People's Action Party leadership and future candidate for the prime minister of Singapore .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Switzerland [ edit ] Main article: President of the Swiss Confederation In Switzerland , the seven-member Federal Council constitutes the executive in the Swiss directorial system . Each year, the Federal Assembly elects a president of the Confederation . By convention, the positions of President and Vice President rotate annually, each Councillor thus becoming vice president and then President every seven years while in office.

The president is not the Swiss head of state , but is the highest-ranking Swiss official. The president presides over Council meetings and carries out certain representative functions that, in other countries, are the business of the head of state. In urgent situations where a Council decision cannot be made in time, the president is empowered to act on behalf of the whole Council. Apart from that, though, the president is a primus inter pares , having no power above and beyond the other six councillors.

United States [ edit ] Main article: Chief Justice of the United States The phrase "first among equals" has also been used to describe the Chief Justice of the United States .

The Chief Justice has no authority over the decisions of the other Justices, but holds one key administrative power: when the Chief Justice votes with the majority on a decision, they can either author the majority opinion or assign it to another Justice voting with the majority.

Chairmen [ edit ] In many private parliamentary bodies, such as clubs, boards, educational faculty, and committees, the officer or member who holds the position of chair or chairman is often regarded as a "first among equals". That is, while most rules of order will grant the chair special powers within the context of a meeting , the position of chair is usually temporary, rotating, and powerless in other contexts, making the occupant merely a temporary leader required to instil order. This is the case for mayors under a council–manager government , as the "mayor" has the same vote as all other council members and cannot override them, although their opinion may have more sway among other members.

Religion [ edit ] Catholic Church [ edit ] See also: Apostolic succession In Latin and Eastern Catholic Churches , the pope (bishop of Rome) is seen as the Vicar of Christ and "first among equals", the successor of Saint Peter , and leader of the Christian world, in accordance with the rules of apostolic succession to the apostles . In the Catholic Church , the pope holds the office with supreme authority in canon law over all other bishops.

[ 9 ] In the Catholic Church, the dean of the College of Cardinals is the first among equal princes of the Church in the college, which is the pope's highest-ranking council and elects the papal successor, generally from its own ranks.

[ 10 ] Various episcopal sees were granted or claim the title of primate (usually of a past or present political entity), which grants such a primas (usually a metropolitan archbishopric, often in a former/present capital) precedence over all other sees in its circumscription, outranking (other) metropolitan sees, but the incumbent primates can be trumped by personal ranks, as they rank below cardinals. More commonly, dioceses are geographically grouped in an ecclesiastical province , where only one holds the rank of metropolitan archbishop , which outranks his colleagues, who are therefore called his suffragans , even if these include (fairly rarely) another archbishop.

Eastern Orthodox Churches [ edit ] See also: Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople § Prerogatives of the Ecumenical Patriarchate This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Primus inter pares" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The phrase "first among equals" is also used to describe the role of the patriarch of Constantinople , who, as the "ecumenical patriarch", is the first among all the bishops of the Eastern Orthodox Church . He has no direct jurisdiction over the other patriarchs or the other autocephalous Orthodox churches and cannot interfere in the election of bishops in autocephalous churches, but he alone enjoys the right of convening extraordinary synods consisting of them or their delegates to deal with ad hoc situations, and he has also convened well-attended pan-Orthodox Synods in the last forty years. His title is an acknowledgement of his historic significance and of his privilege to serve as primary spokesman for the Eastern Orthodox Communion .

Eastern Christians considered the bishop of Rome to be the "first among equals" during the first thousand years of Christianity [ 11 ] according to the ancient, first millennial order (or "taxis" in Greek) of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, known as the Pentarchy that was established after Constantinople became the eastern capital of the Byzantine Empire.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The canons relative to the universal primacy of honor of the patriarch of Constantinople are the 9th canon of the synod of Antioch [ 13 ] [ non-primary source needed ] and the 28th canon of the Council of Chalcedon .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Lutheran Churches [ edit ] In the Lutheran Church of Sweden , the Archbishop of Uppsala is considered by the church as primus inter pares .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] As such, the Archbishop of Uppsala has no powers over the other 13 bishops but has some additional administrative and spiritual duties, as specified in the Church Order of the Church of Sweden.

[ 19 ] According to the chapter 8 of the Church Order, only the Archbishop of Uppsala can ordain a bishop. The other bishops of the Church of Sweden are peers, not subordinate, to the Archbishop of Uppsala. Among the Archbishop of Uppsala's other duties is the obligation to convene and chair the Episcopal Assembly. Unlike the other bishops, who are elected to office by members of their diocese, the Archbishop of Uppsala is elected by the entire body of the church. There is a peculiar regulation that stipulates that the total votes cast in the archdiocese of Uppsala, when electing an archbishop, "shall be divided by ten, with decimals removed", before being added to the national vote.

[ 19 ] In the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland , the Archbishop of Turku and Finland serves as the primus inter pares .

[ 20 ] The bishop of the Slovak Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Serbia is the primus inter pares of that denomination.

[ 21 ] Anglican Communion [ edit ] According to the Anglican Covenant , the archbishop of Canterbury is "first among equals" in his presidency over the Anglican Communion .

[ 22 ] The senior bishop of the seven diocesan bishops of the Scottish Episcopal Church bears the truncated title primus from primus inter pares . Leading bishops or primates in other Anglican 'national' churches are often said to be primus inter pares within their provinces (e.g. Church of Ireland), while the (first) primatial see of Canterbury remains primus among them.

However, on 20 February 2023, the Global South Fellowship of Anglican Churches declared the Archbishop of Canterbury had lost its mantle of first among equals due to him accepting the Church of England 's incorporation into the Anglican liturgy of blessings of same-sex unions .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] The International Anglican-Catholic Commission for Unity and Mission, in its 2007 agreed statement Growing Together in Unity and Mission, "urge[s] Anglicans and Catholics to explore together how the ministry of the Bishop of Rome might be offered and received in order to assist our Communions to grow towards full, ecclesial communion".

[ 26 ] Reformed and Presbyterianism [ edit ] The Moderator of the General Assembly in a Presbyterian church is similarly designated as a primus inter pares . This concept holds also for the Moderators of each Synod , Presbytery , and Kirk Session . As all elders are ordained – some for teaching and some for ruling – none sit in higher status, but all are considered equal behind the one and only head of the church Jesus Christ.

[ 27 ] In churches and denominations with a three office view (i.e., there are three ecclesiastical offices; namely minister, elder, and deacon), the minister does not hold more ruling authority than the elders, but has additional duties of administering the sacraments and preaching. He is also expected to lead the session or consistory of elders.

See also [ edit ] Animal Farm - origin of the expression some "are more equal than others." Egalitarianism Republicanism Notes [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Grammatically , the expression refers to a single male figure. A female would be prima inter pares and the plurals of both forms would be primi inter pares and primæ inter pares in the nominative case and primos inter pares and primas inter pares in the accusative . All these forms are exceedingly rare in English usage, however.

References [ edit ] ^ Hutchinson Encyclopedia . " Primus inter pares " . 2007. Hosted at Tiscali.

Archived November 29, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ^ Weatherhead, Timothy (28 February 2018).

"Xi is no longer 'the first among equals' in China; just the first" .

The Hill . Retrieved 24 June 2018 .

^ Jun Mai; Choi Chi-yuk (27 October 2016).

"Chinese Communist Party expands Xi Jinping's political power, anointing him 'core' leader" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 24 June 2018 .

^ Government House Archived 2012-08-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ Government House Archived 2012-08-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Lawrence Wong as 4G leader: From 'Fabulous Five' to first among equals" .

The Straits Times . 22 April 2022 . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ Jaipragas, Bhavan (28 November 2021).

" 'It's not a reality show': Singapore's Lee says decision on his successor will take 'a little longer' as 4G ministers search for 'first among equals' to be next PM" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ Low, Youjin (7 May 2021).

"Political succession not just an 'internal PAP problem', but a national issue: Goh Chok Tong" .

Today . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ Barbu, Stefanita.

Primus inter pares? A historical-theological analysis of the question of papal primacy in the Orthodox-Roman Catholic dialogue from an Orthodox perspective .

^ "Pope issues Motu proprio regarding Dean of College of Cardinals - Vatican News" .

www.vaticannews.va . 2019-12-21 . Retrieved 2025-01-17 .

^ a b Timothy Ware, The Orthodox Church (Oxford: Penguin, 1993), 214–17.

^ Ecclesiological and Canonical Consequences of the Sacramental Nature of the Church: Ecclesial Communion, Conciliarity and Authority (The Ravenna Document) , Joint International Commission for the Theological Dialogue between the Roman Catholic and the Orthodox Church , 13 October 2007, n. 35.

^ "Antiochean Council (341) - The Canons of the Eastern Orthodox Church" .

sites.google.com . Archived from the original on 2020-10-09 . Retrieved 2018-12-06 .

Canon 9. The presiding Bishop in a metropolis must be recognized by the Bishops belonging to each province (or eparchy), and undertake the cure of the entire province, because of the fact that all who have any kind of business to attend to are wont to come from all quarters to the metropolis. Hence it has seemed best to let him have precedence in respect of honor, and to let the rest of the Bishops do nothing extraordinary without him, in accordance with the ancient Canon of the Fathers which has been prevailing, or only those things which are imposed upon the parish of each one of them and upon the territories under it.

^ "Canons of the seven ecumenical councils: text - IntraText CT" .

www.intratext.com . Retrieved 2018-12-07 .

Everywhere following the decrees of the Holy Fathers, and aware of the recently recognized Canon of the one hundred and fifty most God-beloved Bishops who convened during the reign of Theodosius the Great of pious memory, who became emperor in the imperial city of Constantinople otherwise known as New Rome; we too decree and vote the same things in regard to the privileges and priorities of the most holy Church of that same Constantinople and New Rome . And this is in keeping with the fact that the Fathers naturally enough granted the priorities to the throne of Old Rome on account of her being the imperial capital. And motivated by the same object and aim the one hundred and fifty most God-beloved Bishops have accorded the like priorities to the most holy throne of New Rome, with good reason deeming that the city which is the seat of an empire, and of a senate, and is equal to old imperial Rome in respect of other privileges and priorities, should be magnified also as she is in respect of ecclesiastical affairs, as coming next after her, or as being second to her.

^ Cazabonne, Emma (2018-12-06).

" "Ukraine - Orthodoxy: The war of the patriarchs", interview with Father Jivko Panev" .

Orthodoxie.com . Retrieved 2018-12-06 .

^ " "Ukraine - Orthodoxy: The war of the patriarchs", interview with Father Jivko Panev" (PDF) .

orthodoxie.com . p. 5 . Retrieved 2018-12-07 .

^ "Vad gör en ärkebiskop? - Svenska kyrkan" .

Church of Sweden Website (in Swedish) .

^ "Church Structures and Regulations" .

www.svenskakyrkan.se . Archived from the original on 17 March 2008.

^ a b "Kyrkoordning för Svenska kyrkan (1 januari 2021)" (PDF) .

Church of Sweden Website (in Swedish) . Svenska kyrkan.

^ "The Archbishop" .

Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland . Retrieved 6 December 2024 .

^ "Serbia: Passing on the Slovak language and the message of faith" . 20 August 2021 . Retrieved 6 December 2024 .

^ "The Anglican Covenant" (PDF) .

Anglican Communion Website . Anglican Communion Office.

^ McKeown, Jonah (23 February 2023).

"Conservative Anglican leaders reject archbishop of Canterbury over same-sex union blessings" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 2023-02-25 .

^ Rocca, Francis X. (20 February 2023).

"Conservative Anglican Leaders Call for Break With Church of England Over Same-Sex Blessings" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 2023-02-25 .

^ Farley, Harry (2023-02-20).

"Justin Welby rejected as leader by conservative Anglicans over same-sex blessings" .

BBC News . Retrieved 2023-02-25 .

^ "Commentary and study guide on Growing Together in Unity and Mission: An Agreed Statement by the International Anglican – Roman Catholic Commission for Unity and Mission" (PDF) .

Anglican Communion .

^ Westminster Confession of Faith Chapter XXV, article vi v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Portals : Christianity Law NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cdqmm
Cached time: 20250817045854
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.837 seconds
Real time usage: 1.038 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5001/1000000
Revision size: 28103/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 172226/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17828/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 106327/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.531/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24198725/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  858.190      1 -total
 26.58%  228.070      2 Template:Reflist
 26.35%  226.096      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
 26.06%  223.614      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 25.82%  221.599      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.87%  119.030      7 Template:Cite_news
 11.77%  100.987      1 Template:Transliteration
  8.69%   74.605     12 Template:Fix
  7.80%   66.979      1 Template:Short_description
  7.73%   66.320      1 Template:More_sources Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:429857:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045854 and revision id 1305728942. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Primus_inter_pares&oldid=1305728942 " Categories : Latin political words and phrases Titles Primates (bishops) Christian terminology Roman Senate Latin mottos Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles lacking reliable references from May 2023 All articles lacking reliable references All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2023 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 19:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Primus inter pares 37 languages Add topic

