Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Worldwide 2 Africa 3 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 3.1 East Asia 3.1.1 Japan 3.2 Middle East 3.3 South Asia 3.3.1 India 3.3.2 Sri Lanka 3.4 Southeast Asia 4 Caribbean 5 Europe 6 Latin America Toggle Latin America subsection 6.1 Brazil 6.2 Chile 6.3 Mexico 7 United States Toggle United States subsection 7.1 History 7.2 Business 7.3 Technology 7.4 Criminal justice 7.4.1 Policing, arrests, and surveillance 7.4.2 Police killings and use of force 7.4.3 Charging decisions 7.4.4 Legal representation, bail decisions, trials, and convictions 7.4.5 Sentencing 7.4.6 Prison system, parole, and pardons 7.5 Education 7.6 Health 7.7 Housing and land 7.8 Labor market 7.9 Media 7.10 Politics 7.11 Beauty 7.12 Sports 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Discrimination based on skin tone 25 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa ಕನ್ನಡ മലയാളം Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Português Русский کوردی Tshivenda Українська Tiếng Việt Xitsonga 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of prejudice or discrimination Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Discrimination based on skin tone , also known as colorism or shadeism , is a form of prejudice and discrimination in which individuals of the same race receive benefits or disadvantages based on their skin tone.

[ 1 ] More specifically, colorism is the process of discrimination which marginalizes darker-skinned people over their lighter-skinned counterparts.

[ 2 ] Historically, colorism on a global scale has colonial roots, ranging from early class hierarchies in Asia to its impact on Latinos and African Americans through European colonialism and slavery in the Americas.

[ 3 ] Colorism focuses on how racism is expressed in the psychology of a people and how it affects their concepts of beauty, wealth, and privilege. A key difference between racism and colorism is that while racism deals with the subjugation of one group by another or the belief in racial supremacy, colorism deals with in-group discrimination in addition to between-group discrimination.

[ 4 ] Research has uncovered extensive evidence of discrimination based on skin color in criminal justice , business , the economy , housing , health care , the media , and politics in the United States and Europe . In addition, there has been research that evidently shows biases based on skin tone in the educational system. Students of color are facing higher education costs and inequalities in advanced programs and are targeted by their teachers or peers from other marginalized groups. In addition to this issue being documented in the United States, lighter skin tones have been considered preferable in many countries in Africa , Asia , and Latin America due to internalized colorism.

[ 5 ] Although less historically significant, prejudice within groups can also be directed toward lighter-skinned individuals, often due to the perception of albinism as a disease. This is referred to as reverse colorism .

[ 6 ] Worldwide [ edit ] Main article: Racism by country Racism affects almost every aspect of contemporary life. Research shows that ethnic minorities are offered fewer opportunities in higher education and employment, are subject to increased scrutiny by police, and are less likely to receive adequate care from physicians.

[ 7 ] Several meta-analyses find extensive evidence of ethnic and racial discrimination in hiring in the North American and European labor markets.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] A 2016 meta-analysis of 738 correspondence tests in 43 separate studies done in OECD countries in 1990–2015 finds that there is extensive racial discrimination within both the European and North American hiring processes.

[ 9 ] Equivalent minority candidates need to send around 50% more applications than majority candidates to be invited for an interview.

[ 9 ] Recent research in the U.S. shows that socioeconomic and health inequality among African Americans along the color-continuum is often similar or even larger in magnitude than what exists between whites and African Americans.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Africa [ edit ] Main article: Racism in Africa Skin-whitening treatments and colorism inside of own ethnicity is more common in West and South parts of Africa.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] In some parts of Africa , people with lighter skin are thought to be more attractive and likely to find more success than those with darker skin tones.

[ 15 ] In some countries, this barrier has resulted in millions of women and men turning to skin-lightening treatments, many of which are harmful to the body.

[ 16 ] Historically, skin lightening in Africa can be dated to European colonialism, where individuals with lighter skin received greater privilege than those of darker tones.

[ 17 ] European colonists in Rwanda established a color-based caste system that placed the Tutsi people above the Hutu people on the basis of their somewhat lighter skin, leading to the development of racialized political identities that had not existed in Rwanda before colonialism.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The racial hierarchy and color ranking within colonized African nations left psychological effects on many of the darker-skinned individuals.

[ 17 ] [ 16 ] In the 21st century, 77% of Nigerian women, 52% of Senegalese women, and 25% of Malian women are using lightening products.

[ 15 ] [ 17 ] Der Spiegel reports that in Ghana, "When You Are Light-Skinned, You Earn More", and that "[s]ome pregnant women take tablets in the hopes that it will lead their child to be born with fair skin. Some apply bleaching lotion [...] to their babies, in the hopes that it will improve their child's chances." [ 16 ] Asia [ edit ] Main article: Racism in Asia In South Asia , a preference for lighter skin is prevalent.

[ 20 ] However, East Asian countries tend to embrace their natural skin tone.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] East Asia [ edit ] The history of skin color discrimination in East Asia dates back to ancient times. In the ancient dynastic eras, being light-skinned implied wealth and nobility, because those privileged persons could stay indoors while servants had to labor outside.

[ 20 ] The old preference for light-skinned women in East Asia is quite different from Western culture, where women of tan and brown complexions are preferred. Bonnie Adrian writes that American culture makes white women feel inferior for having pale complexions and reddish features, and that she risked skin cancer and wrinkles trying to darken her pale skin.

[ 24 ] However, according to 21st-century research, women in China have recently asserted tan skin as the new female beauty ideal. According to Tai Wei Lim, Chinese women in the media now sport bronze complexions, and this is viewed as a reclamation of women's autonomy from the fading Chinese patriarchy.

[ 25 ] Japan [ edit ] Main articles: Racism in Japan and Light skin in Japanese culture Hiroshi Wagatsuma writes in Daedalus that Japanese culture has long associated skin color with other physical characteristics that signify degrees of spiritual refinement or degrees of primitiveness.

[ 26 ] In Japan, there is considerable discrimination and stigma against the skin color of white European women. Japanese women commonly state that white women's skin is too pale, or that it is rough, wrinkled , or has too many spots.

[ 27 ] Middle East [ edit ] Main article: Skin lightening in the Middle East Skin lightening is a common practice in Jordan .

[ 28 ] The use of skin lightening products in the Middle East has been attributed to the desire for upword social mobility and attractiveness.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] South Asia [ edit ] India [ edit ] Main article: Ethnic relations in India The implications of colorism in India have been apparent since the nation's conception. The legacies of Mughal , Northern, and European colonial rule on the Indian subcontinent have influenced modern relations between light skin and power dynamics.

[ 21 ] Multiple studies have concluded that preference for lighter skin in India is historically linked to both the caste system and centuries of rule by peoples from other areas: Persia , Mughal territory, and Europe .

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Although light skin is seen as beautiful within India, this only applies to 'Indian' light skin, which is not as light as European skin.

[ 34 ] Very light skin is considered abnormal within India, and neither light eyes nor light hair are considered beautiful.

[ 34 ] Channa writes that there is a folk-based prejudice against very light skin, and especially light eyes on women.

[ 34 ] Channa recalls how her grandmother told her that green or blue eyes are unattractive features for a woman to have, and further suggests that these features may be associated with ancient invaders or outsiders within India.

[ 34 ] Colorism in India was also fed by the attitudes of Europeans, who favored lighter-skinned people for administrative positions and other prominent social positions, so power was conceptually intertwined with light skin.

[ 35 ] Rich Indians often tend to be light-skinned due to less exposure to the sun. Also, individuals were judged by their occupation. Being born into a lineage of farmers, for example, would typically make one unable to leave said lineage. Migration between occupations was rare, and though the caste system's legality was altered in 1948, it is still influential and practiced in many parts of the country.

[ 36 ] As these factors generated the caste system, it grew to include both economic standing and societal positioning.

[ 37 ] Existing prejudices also influenced European officials. This sentiment remains.

Colorism has societal implications, many of which severely harm the socioeconomic mobility of darker-skinned Indians. These can manifest in gender stereotyping and regional discrimination. Studies of melanin index (MI) in individuals across regions show that there are variations in skin color, which contribute to the level of discrimination darker-skinned individuals face in these respective regions.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] In some regions of India, dark-skinned people are often seen as "dirty" and of lower status than lighter-skinned ones. A light complexion is equated with male and female beauty, racial superiority, and power and continues to have strong influences on marital prospects, employment, status, and income.

[ 40 ] Most of the girls were denied employment due to their darker skin tone. A few got jobs, but only as out-of-sight ground crew.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] According to Werdhani et al., persistent colorism is a legacy of the British colonization of India, during which Indian women were hyperfeminized and considered too demure for work by the colonizers, while Indian men were feminized and viewed as inferior to white men.

[ 43 ] Graphic of the Indian caste system, displaying social classes and subcategories Other forms of colorism in India can be seen in the cosmetic industry, where skin bleaching creams are popular.

[ 44 ] In the Indian film and media industry, most hires are light-skinned, and actors and actresses are often photoshopped to look lighter.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Skin lightening cosmetics are shown to have significant side effects, which increase in frequency over time.

[ 47 ] It is a burden on one's mental health in a societal setting; users of skin creams, on average, remain dissatisfied with their complexion even after using the product. Unregulated products can contain harmful chemicals that can cause dermatitis, chemical burns, and, in severe cases, increase the likelihood of skin cancer and melanoma. As these mechanisms interplay with the presence of existent capitalistic institutions that control much of today's world, the skin-lightening industry benefits this system through the exploitation of vulnerable individuals.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] A CNN article describes the situation where a woman uses a topical steroid known for its side effect of skin lightening. Steroids are used to combat skin issues like eczema and only under the supervision of a doctor for brief periods as it is bad for your skin.

[ 50 ] In the wake of the murder of George Floyd , an African-American man in the United States, which led to protests against racism worldwide, the debate about colorism and skin tone in India has been discussed in several media outlets.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] As part of the general critique, a big Indian matchmaking website, Shaadi.com , removed a filter where one could mark skin color preferences for their potential partner.

[ 53 ] Outside  India, dark-skinned individuals and immigrants are typically treated with the same low level of social respect and acceptance, similar to the experiences they endure within their country.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Sri Lanka [ edit ] Fair skin is a beauty ideal in contemporary Sri Lankan society but has its roots in ancient beauty ideals in the country. Fairness products and other products that include whitening agents are commonly sold in Sri Lanka and are popular among females.

[ 56 ] Fair-skinned actors and actresses feature prominently in Bollywood films and Korean dramas , both of which are widely popular and influential in Sri Lanka.

[ 57 ] Southeast Asia [ edit ] In certain Southeast Asian countries such as Malaysia , a common beauty ideal is the " Eurasian look", locally known as the "pan-Asian look" in Malaysia.

[ 58 ] The overuse of pan-Asian faces on billboards and on television screens has been a controversial issue in the country. The issue was highlighted in 2009 when Zainuddin Maidin , a Malaysian politician, called for the reduction of pan-Asian faces, which he claimed dominated TV and billboards, and instead to increase the number of Malay, Chinese, and Indian faces on local television.

[ 59 ] In Indonesia, the 'Eurasian look' can be traced to beauty ideals established by white male colonists from the Netherlands . White Dutch male colonists were enamored by the brown skin color and black hair of Indonesian women. They considered Eurasian Indonesian women's darker complexions as more beautiful than the pale-skinned, blond-haired complexions of white Dutch women.

[ 60 ] The frequency at which young Dutch men married Indo women was considered an embarrassment for the conservative element of Dutch society.

[ 61 ] The legacy of this 'Eurasian' beauty ideal continues to be reflected in local literature, as it was written in a popular novel that "a golden colored skin is the greatest gift Allah can
bestow upon a woman", in reference to a blonde-haired girl who did not inherit her grandmother's complexion.

[ 62 ] Despite the controversy surrounding the preference for Malaysians who are of mixed Asian (Malay, Chinese, or Indian) and European descent and possess features such as fair skin, some other experts in the industry have said that the use of pan-Asian faces can be used to promote the racial diversity of Malaysians. As the Minister of Information had suggested in 1993, such faces can also be used to promote a product to a diverse racial demographic because of their mixed appearance.

[ 63 ] Caribbean [ edit ] Main article: Colorism in the Caribbean In Haiti, skin bleaching to lighten one's skin, brown paper bag tests to verify one's skin tone, and degradation of darker-complected Haitians as ugly are contemporary manifestations of colorism.

[ 64 ] In the Dominican Republic , "Blackness" is often associated with the illegal Haitian migrant minority , who have a lower class status in the Dominican Republic. People who possess more African-like phenotypic features are often victims of discrimination, and are seen as foreigners.

[ 65 ] Europe [ edit ] Main article: Racism in Europe Native dark skinned African people living in the European Union have reported encountering discrimination based on skin color. Overall, reports of skin color discrimination did not vary by gender, with an equal percentage of men and women (38%) reporting skin color discrimination.

[ 66 ] A 2019 report by Universities UK found that students' race and ethnicity significantly affect their degree outcomes. According to this report from 2017 to 2018, there was a 13% gap between the likelihood of white students and Black and Minority Ethnic (BAME) students graduating with a first or 2:1 degree classification.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] A 2023 University of Cambridge survey that featured the largest sample of black people in Britain found that 88% had reported racial discrimination at work, 79% believed the police unfairly targeted black people with stop and search powers, and 80% definitely or somewhat agreed that racial discrimination was the biggest barrier to academic attainment for young black students .

[ 69 ] Latin America [ edit ] Main articles: Blanqueamiento and Racism in South America Brazil [ edit ] Main article: Racism in Brazil Brazil has the world's largest population of African descent outside Africa. Racially mixed individuals with lighter skin generally have higher rates of social mobility than mixed-race people with darker skin.

[ 70 ] There is a disproportionately higher number of people among the mostly European-descended elites than there is among those elites whose members are of visible African descent. There are large health, education, and income disparities between the races in Brazil.

[ 71 ] A recent study finds that skin color is a stronger predictor of social inequality in Brazil than 'race' (i.e., the 'race-color' categories used on the Brazilian census). This highlights the fact that socially perceived skin color and 'race' are not the same thing.

[ 72 ] Although browns/ mixeds and blacks comprise more than 50 percent of the population, they comprise less than 25 percent of all of the elected politicians.

[ 73 ] A 2016 study, using twins as a control for neighborhood and family characteristics, found that the nonwhite twin is disadvantaged in the educational system.

[ 74 ] A 2015 study on racial bias in teacher evaluations in Brazil found that Brazilian math teachers gave better grading assessments of white students than equally proficient and equivalently well-behaved black students.

[ 75 ] A 2018 paper found that discriminatory hiring and retention policies accounted for 6–8% of the overall racial wage gap.

[ 76 ] Chile [ edit ] Main article: Racism in Chile In Chile, there is a wide range of diversity from other cultures and ethnic backgrounds. The diversity in Chile sees colorism through social-economic status, accommodating the preexisting notion that darker skin complexions are less valued. A 2016 study found that Chilean schoolteachers expected less from their dark-skinned students ( morenos ) than they expected from their light-skinned students ( blancos ).

[ 77 ] Even the differences between being dark and being tanned carry different types of status: being tanned means that people have enough money to go to the beach and buy tanning products. Due to the history of colonization, being darker-skinned (and likely descended from enslaved Africans) means that people are automatically considered members of the lower classes. Current studies have revealed that many Chileans want to have lighter pigmentation. Whiteness is also associated with economic standing; a mixed-race person may be considered "white" if they are obviously educated and successful.

Mexico [ edit ] Main article: Racism in Mexico A 2017 study revealed a 45% gap in educational achievement between the darkest- and lightest-skinned Mexicans and that wealth in the country similarly correlated to skin color.

[ 78 ] Colorism in Mexico is an ongoing problem that strongly affects people of darker skin tones there. Color can affect Mexican citizens' daily lives, their ability to get jobs, and their  basic self-esteem. Mexicans have a long history of ancestry from sources other than indigenous peoples: Spanish, African, German, and other Europeans. The number of Mexicans who identify as mixed race increased from 3 million in 2010 to more than 20 million in 2020 as more individuals began to acknowledge mixed race. Skin color for Mexicans can range from white to black; more than half of Mexican citizens identify as mestizo or mixed race.

[ 79 ] A study by Vanderbilt University found that darker skin is strongly associated with decreased wealth and less education. According to Mexico's National Statistics and Geography Institute, the darker the skin tone, the less upward mobility a Mexican citizen may have. This study revealed that Mexicans with the darkest skin tones were the least likely to have finished elementary school. Simultaneously, those with lighter skin tones were more likely to have a university degree. Some of these differences are also attributed to economic differences between people's families of origin, which create gaps between groups.

These findings also indicate that skin tone appears to be associated with educational achievement. Mexicans with the lightest skin tones complete an average of 11 years of schooling, while dark-skinned Mexicans finish an average of 5.3 years of school. A maximal change in skin tone, from lightest to darkest, is associated with a decrease of almost 6 years of schooling, a 51.8% reduction in education.

[ 80 ] Lighter-skinned Mexicans were more likely to hold positions of power, while those with darker skin tones were more likely to have positions that required a lower level of qualifications.

[ 81 ] According to a study by Vanderbilt University, the average Mexican household income was about US$193 a month, while lighter-toned citizens reported an average income of US$220 a month.

[ 79 ] Darker-skinned citizens earned almost 42% less than their white counterparts: US$137 a month.

[ 79 ] Overall, Mexican populations with lighter skin fall into the highest wealth brackets in Mexico, while those with darker skin fall the lowest.

The average Mexican is located within the 3rd and 4th wealth quintiles, while Mexicans with darker skin tones are averaged below the 2nd wealth quintile. A maximal change in skin tone in Mexico, from lightest to darkest, is associated with a 51.5% decrease in material wealth.

[ 80 ] This study also found that while 2.5 percent of white Mexicans surveyed by Vanderbilt's pollsters don't have running water, upward of 11 percent of dark-skinned citizens said they lack this basic necessity. Similarly, 7.5 percent of white Mexicans reported lacking an in-home bathroom, while 20 percent of dark-skinned Mexicans lacked such convenience.

[ 79 ] Researchers concluded that not only does the color of one's skin in Mexico negatively predict economic and educational outcomes, but it is also among the strongest factors found in this study.

[ 80 ] Mexico had traditionally celebrated its " raza mestiza ", or mixed-race society. For example, in 2017, President Enrique Peña Nieto declared " el mestizaje " (mixed race) "the future of humanity." Although more than half of Mexico's population identifies as mixed race, race and skin color have a greater effect on Mexicans' human development and capital accumulation than any other variable. Vanderbilt's results show that the skin color gap in Mexico is two times the achievement gap between northern and southern Mexicans, something that is often referred to in Mexico.

[ 79 ] Vanderbilt's study shows that the skin color gap is five times greater than the urban/rural divide in Mexico. It has a significantly greater effect on wealth and education than ethnicity (indigenous versus white or mixed) does.

[ 79 ] When Aeromexico recruited new employees in 2013, they specified " nadie moreno ", or no dark-skinned people. This type of colorism and racism in Mexico is often ignored or explained by cultural divides. Because Mexico consists of ethnic, cultural, and linguistic diversity, many Mexicans argue that darker-skinned citizens tend to live in historically disadvantaged and highly indigenous areas.

[ 79 ] United States [ edit ] Main articles: Racism against African Americans and Racism in the United States History [ edit ] European colonizers created a racial hierarchy and a race-based ideology , which led to the formation of a structural system of oppression that benefited individuals of European descent over individuals of African descent. Biological differences in skin color were used to justify the enslavement and oppression of Africans and Native Americans , leading to the development of a social hierarchy that placed people of European descent at the top and people of African descent at the bottom. Enslaved people with lighter complexions (usually stemming from the sexual assault of enslaved African women) were allowed to perform less strenuous tasks, like domestic duties, while darker-skinned enslaved people were forced to engage in hard labor, which they usually performed outdoors.

[ 82 ] African-Americans with greater European ancestry and a lighter skin color were considered smarter than and therefore superior to their darker-skinned counterparts. As a result, they were given greater opportunities for education and the acquisition of land and property.

[ 83 ] Colorism was a device used by European colonists to create division between enslaved Africans and further the idea that being as close to white as possible was the ideal image. One of the first forms of colorism was slave owners deciding that only light-skinned enslaved people would work in the house while the darker-skinned ones were subjected to the harsh conditions of the fields.

[ 84 ] This practice led to a clear division between the slaves, undermining their solidarity against the slave owners.

A variety of specific cutoff tests for skin color emerged; the most famous one was the brown paper bag test .

[ 85 ] If people's skins were darker than the color of a brown paper bag, they were considered "too dark". While the origin of this test is unclear, it is best attested to in 20th-century black culture . During the time when African Americans were forced into slavery, slave owners would use the "paper bag test", which compared their skin color to a paper bag, to distinguish whether their complexion was too dark to work inside the house.

[ 86 ] African Americans' desire for lighter complexions and European features goes back to slavery. Enslaved people with lighter complexions would have the privilege of working indoors, while enslaved people with darker skin were required to work outside in the fields. The complexions of African American slaves reflected how they were treated and the severity of their punishments if they did not comply with the lifestyle that they were forced into.

[ 87 ] The access to and resources to purchase skincare products or services impacted the notions of colorism among African American women, since enslaved and impoverished black women were more limited in their grooming, which affected the way they were treated by their masters. For example, light-skinned black women were marketed as "Negroes fit for domestic service" in their masters' homes.

[ 88 ] In addition to the bag test, the comb test and the door test were also used.

[ 89 ] The comb test was used to measure the kinkiness of a person's hair. The objective was for the comb to be able to pass through the hair without stopping. The door test was popular in some African American clubs and churches. The people who were in charge of those clubs and churches would paint their doors a certain shade of brown, similar to the brown paper bag test, and if people's skins were darker than the color of the doors, they were not admitted into the establishments. These tests were used to measure what level of "blackness" was and was not acceptable in the world. Due to lighter-skinned slaves being allowed to work in the house, they were more likely to be educated than darker slaves were.

[ 90 ] Hence the stereotype that dark people are stupid and ignorant. Scholars predict that in the future, the preferred color of beauty will not be black or white but mixed.

[ 91 ] Scholars also predict that the United States will adopt a "multicultural matrix", which will help bridge the racial gap in efforts to achieve racial harmony, termed by some a " browning of America ". The matrix has four components: the mixed race will help fix racial issues; it serves as a sign of racial progress; it suggests that racism is a thing; and it also suggests that the focus on race is racist due to the lack of racial neutrality.

[ 91 ] At the same time, some Americans view this "browning" as a sort of demographic replacement , which has led to anxiety among some white Americans who feel that their identity and culture are under attack and will be displaced without changes to the US immigration system.

Eric Peter Kaufmann explored these views among American whites and internationally in the 2018 book Whiteshift: Populism, Immigration and the Future of White Majorities .

A parallel as well as an opposite critique of this theory is made by black scholars, who state that racial neutrality will not eliminate discrimination based on skin color as long as some races continue to be negatively perceived and unfairly treated. As such, racial "browning" would just be another way to erase dark skin without correcting the bad way in which it is perceived. From this point of view, racial harmonization is not a valid response to racism at all. In his 2008 book The Browning of America and the Evasion of Social Justice , Ronald R. Sundstrom writes: [ 92 ] ...African American intellectual elites and public figures, as well as other liberals and progressives [perceive] the browning of America to be a threat to long-existing, or even traditional, claims of social justice by Native Americans and especially African Americans. Moreover, not only are their claims somehow threatened, but the very meaning of the legal principles, such as " civil rights ," upon which their claims are based, is also experiencing transformation. For those who harbor such fears, the browning of America brings with it yet another opportunity for the nation to evade social justice.

Several authors have noted that a kind of reverse-colorism began to form within the African-American community after the end of slavery. Lighter-skinned African-Americans were seen by some darker-skinned people as being inauthentic, privileged, or even "poisoned" by whiteness. According to Greg Carter, this attitude was held by many prominent black nationalists, including W.E.B. Du Bois and Marcus Garvey .

[ 93 ] Ibram X. Kendi wrote that colorism is a "collection of racist policies [...] substantiated by racist ideas about Light and Dark people".

[ 94 ] Ronald Hall argues that a form of reverse-colorism may have emerged in the Northern Mariana Islands , where mixed-indigenous ethnic groups have sometimes been rejected as inauthentic or even stigmatized as degenerate, and where varying shades of brown skin have been valued over light skin.

[ 95 ] In Japan , reverse colorism has acted against white women, whose complexions are stigmatized as too pale or "spotted" in comparison to local Asian women.

[ 27 ] In Southeast Asia , beauty ideals created by Dutch white male colonists placed brown-skinned Asian women above white women in the female beauty standard , leading to the lower socioeconomic status of blond , light-skinned women in Indonesia .

[ 96 ] According to the Pew Research Center, 62% of US Latinos say that having a darker skin color affects their ability to get ahead.

[ 97 ] This study also showed that 59% of Latinos say that having a lighter skin color helps Hispanic people get ahead.

[ 97 ] 57% say that discrimination based on skin color towards Latinos is a "very big problem" in the US.

[ 97 ] Another survey by the Pew Research Center shows that Hispanics with darker skin color are more likely to have experienced at least one instance of discrimination than those with lighter skin color.

[ 97 ] This study also showed that 42% of Hispanics with darker skin have experienced discrimination or were treated with prejudice by someone who is not Hispanic, while only 29% of those with lighter skin say the same happened to them.

[ 97 ] Additionally, 41% of Hispanics with darker skin say they have experienced discrimination by someone who is Hispanic, while only 25% of those with lighter skin color say they have experienced the same.

[ 97 ] According to these findings, those with darker skin and lighter skin alike feel that skin color affects opportunities and life in the US. For example, 62% of darker-skinned Latinos feel that skin color shapes daily life, while 57% of lighter-skinned Latinos feel the same. Colorism can also affect how Hispanic Americans relate to one another. According to the Pew study, nearly half of Hispanic adults say they have often or sometimes heard a Hispanic friend or family member make comments about other Hispanics that might be considered racist or racially insensitive. About half of Latinos feel that discrimination based on race or skin color is a very big problem.

[ 97 ] Business [ edit ] A 2014 meta-analysis of racial discrimination in product markets found extensive evidence of minority applicants being quoted higher prices for products.

[ 8 ] A 1995 study found that car dealers "quoted significantly lower prices to white males than to black or female test buyers using identical, scripted bargaining strategies." [ 98 ] A 2013 study found that eBay sellers of iPods received 21 percent more offers if a white hand held the iPod in the photo than a black hand.

[ 99 ] A 2014 study in the Journal of Economic Growth found that anti-black violence and terrorism, as well as segregation laws , reduced the economic activity and innovation of African Americans.

[ 100 ] Today, the "thick" black female body is celebrated within the black community, but according to critical race theorist Gentles-Peart, this does not negate the persistence of white colonialist views that presented black women's stereotypically "thicker" bodies as unattractive.

[ 101 ] African-Americans have historically faced discrimination in terms of getting access to credit .

[ 102 ] A 2020 audit study of 17 banks found that black business owners who sought loans under the Paycheck Protection Program got substantially worse treatment than white business owners.

[ 103 ] Bus drivers engaged in substantial discrimination against black passengers relative to white passengers.

[ 104 ] Technology [ edit ] In 2018, a study was published by Dr. Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru evaluating the accuracy of several facial recognition technologies in identifying male and female individuals of varying skin tones. They based the skin tone differences in people included in the dataset on the Fitzpatrick Skin Type classification system , a standard dermatological system for skin tone classification.

[ 105 ] After their evaluation of three commercially available facial recognition software, Buolamwini and Gebru found that all three products performed better on lighter faces (Skin Types I-III) than darker faces (Skin Types IV-VI).

[ 105 ] In their evaluation, Microsoft's software had the least discrepancy, with an error rate of 12.9% for darker skinned people and 0.7% for fairer individuals. In contrast, IBM's software performed the worst with an identification error rate of 22.4%, which is "nearly 7 times higher than the IBM error rate on lighter faces".

[ 105 ] Buolamwini and Gebru also note that the Fitzpatrick Skin Type system is "skewed towards lighter skin and has three categories that can be applied to people perceived as White", implying that the superior performance of facial recognition software on lighter skin tones covers a smaller variety of skin tones than the inferior coverage of the darker skin tones.

[ 105 ] Criminal justice [ edit ] Research suggests that police practices such as racial profiling , over-policing in areas that are populated by minorities, and in-group bias may all result in disproportionately high numbers of racial minorities among crime suspects.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] Research also suggests that there is discrimination in the judicial system, which contributes to a higher number of convictions and unfavorable sentencing for racial minorities.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ excessive citations ] Further research indicates that even when controlling for income and all other factors, children from father-absent families (mother only, mother-stepfather, and relatives/other) were much more likely to be incarcerated.

[ 116 ] The disproportionate single-parent households of black youths to those in white family structures is 64% to 24% as of 2019.

[ 117 ] Policing, arrests, and surveillance [ edit ] A 2019 study, which made use of a dataset of the racial makeup of every U.S. sheriff over a 25-year period, found that "the ratio of Black-to-White arrests is significantly higher under White sheriffs" and that the effects appear to be "driven by arrests for less-serious offenses and by targeting Black crime types." [ 118 ] In-group bias has also been observed when it comes to traffic citations, as black and white cops are more likely to cite out-groups.

[ 119 ] A 2019 study by the National Institute of Standards and Technology found that facial-recognition systems were substantially more likely to misidentify the faces of racial minorities.

[ 120 ] Some ethnic groups, such as Asian-Americans and African-Americans, were up to 100 times more likely to be misidentified than white men.

[ 120 ] A 2018 study in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found that tall young black men are especially likely to receive unjustified attention by law enforcement.

[ 121 ] The authors furthermore found a "causal link between perceptions of height and perceptions of threat for Black men, particularly for perceivers who endorse stereotypes that Black people are more threatening than White people." [ 121 ] Analysis of more than 20 million traffic stops in North Carolina showed that blacks were more than twice as likely as whites to be pulled over by police for traffic stops and that blacks were more likely to be searched following the stop. There was no significant difference in the likelihood that Hispanics would be pulled over, but Hispanics were much more likely to be searched following a traffic stop than whites. When the study controlled for searches in high-crime areas, it still found that police disproportionately targeted black individuals. These racial disparities were particularly pronounced for young men. The study found that whites who were searched were more likely to carry contraband than blacks and Hispanics.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] A 2020 study in the journal Nature found that black drivers were stopped more often than white drivers and that the threshold by which police decided to search black and Hispanic drivers was lower than that for whites (judging by the rate at which contraband was found in searches).

[ 124 ] A 2021 study in the Quarterly Journal of Economics found similar results.

[ 125 ] A 2021 study in the American Economic Review found that minorities were significantly less likely to receive discounts on their traffic tickets than white drivers; the study estimated that 42% of Florida Highway Patrol officers practiced racial discrimination.

[ 126 ] A 2013 report by the American Civil Liberties Union found that blacks were "3.73 times more likely than whites to be arrested for marijuana possession", even though "blacks and whites use drugs, including marijuana, at similar rates." [ 127 ] Police killings and use of force [ edit ] "Black Lives Matter" protests Racism is also present in policing. For instance, the United Kingdom's "stop and search" laws have been disproportionately used against black people, specifically black men. Excessive force against black people is also common in the United States. Police in the United States disproportionately killed unarmed black Americans compared to unarmed white Americans.

[ 7 ] These discrepancies led to the creation of the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement. The movement began in the US in 2012, after the killing of Trayvon Martin , a 17-year-old unarmed African-American, by George Zimmerman . Zimmerman claimed self-defense and was acquitted of murder at trial. The movement skyrocketed after many high-profile killings of unarmed African Americans by the police, including the murder of George Floyd .

[ 7 ] However, BLM also faces criticism, and the " All Lives Matter " (ALM) movement emerged as a response. Thus, there is an ongoing debate on the motifs of the ALM. Former US President Donald Trump and some other Republicans [ which?

] declared the BLM as racist and the ALM as more inclusive and color-blind.

[ 7 ] A 2016 study by Roland G. Fryer, Jr.

, of the National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) found that while overall "blacks are 21 percent more likely than whites to be involved in an interaction with police in which at least a weapon is drawn" and that in the raw data from New York City's Stop and Frisk program , " blacks and Hispanics are more than fifty percent more likely to have an interaction with police which involves any use of force" after "[p]artitioning the data in myriad ways, we find no evidence of racial discrimination in officer-involved shootings." [ 129 ] The study did find bias against blacks and Hispanics in non-lethal and less-extreme lethal violence, stating that "as the intensity of force increases (e.g. handcuffing civilians without arrest, drawing or pointing a weapon, or using pepper spray or a baton), the probability that any civilian is subjected to such treatment is small, but the racial difference remains surprisingly constant", and noting that "[u]ntil recently, data on officer-involved shootings were extremely rare and contained little information on the details surrounding an incident".

[ 129 ] After the NBER study was published in the peer reviewed Journal of Political Economy , a comment on it by Steven Durlauf and Nobel Prize in Economics recipient James Heckman of the Harris School of Public Policy Studies at the University of Chicago said, "[i]n our judgment, this paper does not establish credible evidence on the presence or absence of discrimination against African Americans in police shootings." [ 130 ] The NBER study's author, Roland G. Fryer Jr.

, responded by saying Durlauf and Heckman erroneously claim that his sample is "based on stops." Further, he states that the "vast majority of the data [...] are gleaned from 911 calls for service in which a civilian requests police presence." [ 131 ] A 2018 study in the American Journal of Public Health found the mortality rate by police per 100,000 was 1.9 to 2.4 for black men, 0.8 to 1.2 for Hispanic men, and 0.6 to 0.7 for white men.

[ 132 ] Reports by the Department of Justice have also found that police in Baltimore, Maryland, and Ferguson, Missouri, systemically stop, search (in some cases, strip-search), and harass black residents.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] A January 2017 report by the DOJ concluded that the Chicago Police Department had "unconstitutionally engaged in a pattern of excessive and deadly force", and an independent task force created by the mayor of Chicago stated that police "have no regard for the sanctity of life when it comes to people of color." [ 135 ] A 2018 study found that minorities were disproportionately killed by police, but that white officers were no more likely to use lethal force on minorities than minority officers.

[ 136 ] A 2019 study in the Journal of Politics found that police officers were more likely to use lethal force on blacks, but that this was "most likely driven by higher rates of police contact among African Americans rather than racial differences in the circumstances of the interaction and officer bias in the application of lethal force." [ 137 ] A 2019 study in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found that blacks and American Indian/Alaska Natives are more likely to be killed by police than whites, and that Latino men are more likely to be killed than white men.

[ 138 ] According to the study, "for young men of color, police use of force is among the leading causes of death." [ 138 ] A separate Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ( PNAS ) study found that there were no racial disparities in police shootings by white police; [ 139 ] the findings of the study were disputed by Princeton University scholars, who argued that the study's method and dataset made it impossible for the authors to reach that conclusion.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] The authors of the original PNAS study corrected their article following the criticism by the Princeton scholars.

[ 142 ] A study by Texas A&M University economists, which rectified some problems of selection bias identified in the literature above, found that white police officers were more likely to use force and guns than black police, and that white officers were five times as likely to use gun force in predominantly black neighborhoods.

[ 143 ] A 2020 American Political Science Review study estimated that 39% of uses of force by police against blacks and Hispanics in New York City were racially discriminatory.

[ 144 ] Charging decisions [ edit ] A 2018 study in the Journal of Empirical Legal Studies found that law enforcement officers in Texas who could charge shoplifters with two types of crimes (one more serious, one less so) due to a vaguely worded statute were more likely to charge blacks and Hispanics with the more serious crime.

[ 145 ] A 2017 report by the Marshall Project found that killings of black men by whites were far more likely to be deemed "justifiable" than killings by any other combination of races.

[ 146 ] Legal representation, bail decisions, trials, and convictions [ edit ] A 2019 audit study found that lawyers are less likely to take on clients with black-sounding names than white-sounding names.

[ 147 ] A 2018 study in the Quarterly Journal of Economics found that bail judges in Miami and Philadelphia were racially biased against black defendants, as white defendants had higher rates of pretrial misconduct than black defendants.

[ 113 ] A 2022 study in the American Economic Review found that New York City judges engaged in racial discrimination against black defendants in bail decisions.

[ 148 ] A 2012 study found that "(i) juries formed from all-white jury pools convict black defendants significantly (16 percentage points) more often than white defendants, and (ii) this gap in conviction rates is entirely eliminated when the jury pool includes at least one black member." [ 111 ] A 2018 National Bureau of Economic Research experiment found that law students, economics students, and practicing lawyers who watched 3D virtual reality videos of court trials (where the researchers altered the race of the defendants) showed a racial bias against minorities.

[ 149 ] DNA exonerations in rape cases strongly suggest that the wrongful conviction rate is higher for black convicts than white convicts.

[ 150 ] Sentencing [ edit ] Research has found evidence of in-group bias, where "black (white) juveniles who are randomly assigned to black (white) judges are more likely to get incarcerated (as opposed to being placed on probation), and they receive longer sentences." [ 112 ] A 2018 study in the American Economic Journal: Applied Economics found that judges gave longer sentences, in particular to black defendants, after their favorite team lost a home game.

[ 151 ] A 2014 study in the Journal of Political Economy found that 9% of the black-white gap in sentencing could not be accounted for.

[ 114 ] The elimination of unexplained sentencing disparities would reduce "the steady-state level of black men in federal prison by 8,000–11,000 men [out of the black male prison population of 95,000] and save $230–$320 million per year in direct costs." [ 114 ] The majority of the unexplained sentencing disparity appears to occur at the point when prosecutors decide to bring charges carrying "mandatory minimum" sentences.

[ 114 ] A 2018 paper by Alma Cohen and Crystal Yang of Harvard Law School found that "Republican-appointed judges give substantially longer prison sentences to black offenders versus observably similar non-black offenders compared to Democratic-appointed judges within the same district court." [ 152 ] In criminal sentencing, medium- to dark-skinned African Americans are likely to receive sentences 2.6 years longer than those of whites or light-skinned African Americans. When a white victim is involved, those with more "black" features are likely to receive a much more severe punishment.

[ 153 ] A 2016 report by the Sarasota Herald-Tribune found that Florida judges sentence black defendants to far longer prison sentences than whites with the same background.

[ 154 ] For the same drug possession crimes, blacks were sentenced to double the time of whites.

[ 154 ] Blacks were given longer sentences in 60 percent of felony cases, 68 percent of the most serious first-degree crimes, 45 percent of burglary cases, and 30 percent of battery cases.

[ 154 ] For third-degree felonies (the least serious types of felonies in Florida), white judges sentenced blacks to twenty percent more time than whites, whereas black judges gave more balanced sentences.

[ 154 ] A 2017 report by the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC) found, "after controlling for a wide variety of sentencing factors" (such as age, education, citizenship, weapon possession, and prior criminal history), that "Black male offenders received sentences on average 19.1 percent longer than similarly situated White male offenders".

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] A 2014 study on the application of the death penalty in Connecticut over the period 1973–2007 found "that minority defendants who kill white victims are capitally charged at substantially higher rates than minority defendants who kill minorities... There is also strong and statistically significant evidence that minority defendants who kill whites are more likely to end up with capital sentences than comparable cases with white defendants." [ 157 ] Prison system, parole, and pardons [ edit ] A 2016 analysis by the New York Times found that "tens of thousands of disciplinary cases against inmates in 2015, hundreds of pages of internal reports and three years of parole decisions found that racial disparities were embedded in the prison experience in New York." [ 158 ] Blacks and Latinos were sent more frequently to solitary and held there for longer durations than whites.

[ 158 ] The New York Times analysis found that the disparities were greatest for violations where the prison guards had much discretion, such as disobeying orders, but smaller for violations that required physical evidence, such as possessing contraband.

[ 158 ] According to a 2011 ProPublica analysis, "whites are nearly four times as likely as minorities to win a pardon, even when the type of crime and severity of sentence are taken into account." [ 159 ] Education [ edit ] The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education (1954) that integrated , equal schools should be accessible to all children unbiased to skin color. Currently, in the United States, not all state-funded schools are equally funded. Schools are funded by "federal, state, and local governments", while "states play a large and increasing role in education funding." [ 160 ] " Property taxes support most of the funding that the local government provides for education." [ 160 ] Schools in lower-income areas get less funding than schools in higher-income areas because all funding for education is based on property taxes. The U.S. Department of Education reports that "many high-poverty schools receive less than their fair share of state and local funding, leaving students in high-poverty schools with fewer resources than schools which are attended by their wealthier peers." [ 161 ] The U.S. Department of Education also says this fact affects "more than 40% of low-income schools".

[ 161 ] Children of color are much more likely to suffer from poverty than white children. Furthermore, an article from 2015 informs that since black students finance their education through debt, the chances of them receiving a college degree worsen.

[ 162 ] And because education does not lead to economic equality for black employees, the excessive deficit that black students are taking on to pay for their education is widening the wealth disparity between races.

[ 162 ] The statistics from the article show the average white college graduate has more than seven times as much wealth as the average black graduate.

[ 162 ] Therefore, students of color are more likely to have lower educational outcomes because of the wealth differences.

A 2015 study that used correspondence tests "found that when they are considering requests from prospective students who are seeking mentoring in the future, faculty were significantly more responsive to White males than they were to all other categories of students, collectively, particularly in higher-paying disciplines and private institutions." [ 163 ] Through affirmative action , elite colleges consider a broader range of experiences for minority applicants.

[ 164 ] A 2016 study in the journal PNAS found that blacks and Hispanics were systemically underrepresented in education programs for gifted children where teachers and parents referred students to those programs; when a universal screening program based on IQ was used to refer students, the disparity was significantly reduced.

[ 165 ] An article from 2000 mentions the inequalities students of color have when accessing advanced classes or programs for gifted students. The authors analyzed how schools that serve minorities offer less advanced courses than schools that serve large white populations of students.

[ 166 ] Thus, these statistics show how this issue is ongoing and has not been minimized.

The phrase "brown paper bag test", or paper bag party , along with the "ruler test", refers to a ritual that was once done by certain African-American sororities and fraternities that would not let anyone into the group if his or her skin was darker than a brown paper bag.

[ 167 ] Spike Lee 's film School Daze satirized this practice at historically black colleges and universities.

[ 168 ] Along with the "paper bag test", guidelines for acceptance among the lighter ranks included the "comb test" and the "pencil test", which tested the coarseness of one's hair, and the "flashlight test", which tested a person's profile in order to make sure that their features measured up or were close enough to those of the Caucasian race.

[ 167 ] A 2013 study used spectrophotometer readings to quantify the skin color of respondents. White women experience discrimination in education, with those women with darker skin graduating from college at lower rates than those with lighter skin. This precise and repeatable test of skin color revealed that white women experience skin color discrimination in education at levels that are consistent with the levels of skin color discrimination experienced by African-Americans. White men are not affected in this way.

[ 169 ] Health [ edit ] A 2019 review of the literature in the Annual Review of Public Health found that structural racism , cultural racism , and individual-level discrimination are "a fundamental cause of adverse health outcomes for racial/ethnic minorities and racial/ethnic inequities in health." [ 170 ] A 2020 study found that black healthcare workers experience racial discrimination, which increases racial harassment and firing rates while decreasing promotional opportunities.

[ 171 ] A 2020 interview study found that black technicians were treated differently compared to white technicians. When performing a simple procedure, patients were more likely to object to a black technician's work and question their credentials than to a white technician's.

[ 171 ] A 1999 study found that doctors treat black and white patients differently, even when their medical files were statistically identical.

[ 172 ] When shown patient histories and asked to make judgments about heart disease, the doctors were much less likely to recommend cardiac catheterization (a helpful procedure) to black patients.

[ 172 ] A 2015 study found that pediatricians were more likely to undertreat appendicitis pain in black children than white children.

[ 173 ] A 2017 study found that medical staff treating anterior cruciate ligament injuries perceived black collegiate athletes as having higher pain tolerance than white athletes.

[ 174 ] A study by University of Toronto and Ohio State University economists found substantial evidence of racial discrimination against black veterans in terms of medical treatment and awarding of disability pensions in the late 19th and early 20th centuries; the discrimination was substantial enough to account for nearly the entire black-white mortality gap in the period.

[ 175 ] A 2019 study in Science found that one widely used algorithm to assess health risks falsely concluded that "Black patients are healthier than equally sick White patients", thus leading health care providers to provide lower levels of care for black patients.

[ 176 ] A 2020 study found that "when Black newborns are cared for by Black physicians, the mortality penalty they suffer, as compared with White infants, is halved." [ 177 ] [ 178 ] The 2020 study was debunked in 2024.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] A 2020 study published in The New England Journal of Medicine examined racial bias in pulse oximetry measurement.

[ 181 ] Pulse oximeters are a medical device that is commonly attached to a patient's finger and uses a sensor to measure light that has traveled through the skin to determine oxygen saturation in blood.

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] Oxygen saturation is an important vital that quantifies of the amount of oxygen in the bloodstream.

[ 184 ] The purpose of the study was to identify cases of occult hypoxemia , which the study defined as cases where a subject had "an arterial oxygen saturation of <88% despite an oxygen saturation of 92 to 96% on pulse oximetry".

[ 181 ] It is important to note that there are different forms of medical intervention recommended at oxygen saturation levels at <88% and 92%, and below 90% organs such as the brain, heart, and lungs become at risk for organ damage.

[ 185 ] The study found that "Black patients had nearly three times the frequency of occult hypoxemia that was not detected by pulse oximetry as White patients".

[ 181 ] Pulse Ox devices are used frequently for medical decision making, potentially resulting in disparate outcomes for darker and lighter skin patients when choices are made based on pulse oximeters for supplemental oxygen (especially when hospitals are overwhelmed, like during the COVID-19 pandemic).

[ 181 ] A 2018 ProPublica analysis found that African Americans and Native Americans were underrepresented in clinical trials of new drugs. Fewer than 5% of patients were African-American, even though they make up 13.4% of the total US population. African-Americans were even underrepresented in trials involving drugs intended for diseases that disproportionately affect African-Americans. As a result, African-Americans who have exhausted all other treatments have weaker access to experimental treatments.

[ 186 ] Studies have argued that there are racial disparities in how the media and politicians act when they are faced with cases of drug addiction in which the victims are primarily black rather than white, citing the examples of how society responded differently to the crack epidemic than it responded to the opioid epidemic.

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] The biases that underrepresentation of dark skin tone images creates ultimately exacerbate disparities in dermatologic outcomes between patient populations with light and dark skin tones.

[ 189 ] Furthermore, racial discrimination between healthcare workers is also important due to its linkage to mental health and job satisfaction.

[ 171 ] Housing and land [ edit ] Main article: Housing discrimination in the United States A 2014 meta-analysis found extensive evidence of racial discrimination in the American housing market.

[ 8 ] Minority applicants for housing needed to make many more inquiries to view properties.

[ 8 ] Geographical steering of African-Americans in US housing remains significant.

[ 8 ] A 2003 study found "evidence that agents interpret an initial housing request as an indication of a customer's preferences but are also more likely to withhold a house from all customers when it is in an integrated suburban neighborhood ( redlining ). Moreover, agents' marketing efforts increase with asking price for white, but not for black, customers; blacks are more likely than whites to see houses in suburban, integrated areas ( steering ); and the houses agents show are more likely to deviate from the initial request when the customer is black than when the customer is white. These three findings are consistent with the possibility that agents act upon the belief that some types of transactions are relatively unlikely for black customers (statistical discrimination)." [ 190 ] Real estate appraisers discriminate against black homeowners.

[ 191 ] Historically, there was extensive and long-lasting racial discrimination against African-Americans in the housing and mortgage markets in the United States, [ 192 ] [ 193 ] as well as massive discrimination against black farmers, whose numbers massively declined in post-WWII America due to local and federal anti-black policies.

[ 194 ] Government actions in part facilitated racial discrimination in the housing market, leading to substantial and persistent racial residential segregation and contributing to the racial wealth gap .

[ 195 ] According to a 2019 analysis by University of Pittsburgh economists, blacks faced a two-fold penalty due to the racially segregated housing market: rental prices increased in blocks when they underwent racial transition, whereas home values declined in neighborhoods that blacks moved into.

[ 196 ] A 2016 study found that industrial use zoning in Chicago tended to be allocated to neighborhoods that were populated by racial minorities.

[ 197 ] A report by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development revealed that when the department sent African-Americans and whites to look at apartments, African-Americans were shown fewer apartments to rent and fewer houses for sale than whites were.

[ 198 ] A 2017 study found "that applications [for Airbnb housing] from guests with distinctively African American names are 16 percent less likely to be accepted relative to identical guests with distinctively white names." [ 199 ] A 2020 audit study of Boston found that prospective white renters were 32 percentage points more likely to be shown an apartment than similar prospective black renters.

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] A 2017 paper by Troesken and Walsh found that pre-20th century cities "created and sustained residential segregation through private norms and vigilante activity." However, "when these private arrangements began to break down during the early 1900s", whites started "lobbying municipal governments for segregation ordinances". As a result, cities passed ordinances that "prohibited members of the majority racial group on a given city block from selling or renting property to members of another racial group" between 1909 and 1917.

[ 202 ] Government policies have contributed significantly to the racial gap in homeownership because various government policies and benefits have made it easier for whites to become homeowners relative to blacks.

[ 203 ] A 2017 study by Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago economists found that the practice of redlining —the practice whereby banks discriminated against the inhabitants of certain neighborhoods—had a persistent adverse impact on the neighborhoods, with redlining affecting homeownership rates, home values, and credit scores in 2010.

[ 204 ] [ 205 ] Since many African-Americans could not access conventional home loans, they had to turn to predatory lenders, who charged high interest rates.

[ 205 ] Due to lower home ownership rates, slumlords were able to rent out apartments that would otherwise be owned.

[ 205 ] A 2019 analysis estimated that predatory housing contracts targeting African-Americans in Chicago in the 1950s and 1960s cost black families between $3 billion and $4 billion in wealth.

[ 206 ] A 2017 study in Research & Politics found that white supporters of Donald Trump became less likely to approve of federal housing assistance when they were shown an image of a black man.

[ 207 ] [ 208 ] A 2018 study in the American Sociological Review found that housing market professionals (real estate agents, housing developers, mortgage appraisers, and home value appraisers) held derogatory racial views about black and Latino individuals and neighborhoods, whereas white individuals and neighborhoods were beneficiaries of widely shared, positive racial beliefs.

[ 209 ] A 2018 experimental study by University of Illinois and Duke University economists found that real estate agents and housing providers systematically recommended homes in neighborhoods with higher poverty rates, greater pollution, higher crime rates, fewer college-educated families, and fewer skilled workers to minority individuals who had all the same characteristics as white individuals except ethnic differences.

[ 210 ] A 2018 study in the American Political Science Review found that white voters in areas that experienced massive African-American population growth between 1940 and 1960 were more likely to vote for California Proposition 14 (1964) , which sought to enshrine legal protections for landlords and property owners who discriminated against "colored" buyers and renters.

[ 211 ] A 2018 study in the Journal of Politics found extensive evidence of discrimination against blacks and Hispanics in the New York City rental market.

[ 212 ] A 2018 study in the journal Regional Science and Urban Economics found that there was discrimination against blacks and Arab males in the U.S. rental market.

[ 213 ] A 2018 study in the Journal of Regional Science found that "black households pay more for identical housing in identical neighborhoods than their white counterparts [...] In neighborhoods with the smallest fraction white, the premium is about 0.6%. In neighborhoods with the largest fraction white, it is about 2.4%." [ 214 ] A 2022 study found that ethnic minority hosts on Airbnb charge lower prices due to discrimination by consumers.

[ 215 ] Labor market [ edit ] Several meta-analyses find extensive evidence of ethnic and racial discrimination in hiring in the American labor market.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 216 ] A 2017 meta-analysis found "no change in the levels of discrimination against African Americans since 1989, although we do find some indication of declining discrimination against Latinos." [ 217 ] A 2016 meta-analysis of 738 correspondence tests – tests where identical CVs for stereotypically black and white names were sent to employers – in 43 separate studies conducted in OECD countries between 1990 and 2015 finds that there is extensive racial discrimination in hiring decisions in Europe and North America.

[ 9 ] These correspondence tests showed that equivalently, minority candidates need to send around 50% more applications to be invited for an interview than majority candidates.

[ 9 ] [ 218 ] A study that examined the job applications of actual people provided with identical résumés and similar interview training showed that African-American applicants with no criminal record were offered jobs at a rate as low as white applicants who had criminal records.

[ 219 ] A 2018 National Bureau of Economic Research paper found evidence of racial bias in how CVs were evaluated.

[ 220 ] A 2020 study found that there is not only discrimination towards minorities in callback rates in audit studies, but that the discrimination gets more severe after the callbacks in terms of job offers.

[ 221 ] A 2022 study involving 83,000 job applications sent to the 108 largest U.S. employers found that employers consistently favored applications with distinctively white names over black names.

[ 222 ] A 2021 study found discrimination among Swiss job recruiters against immigrant and minority groups.

[ 223 ] Research suggests that light-skinned African American women have higher salaries and greater job satisfaction than dark-skinned women.

[ 224 ] Being "too black" has recently been acknowledged by the U.S. Federal courts in an employment discrimination case under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . In Etienne v. Spanish Lake Truck & Casino Plaza, LLC , the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit determined that an employee who was told on several occasions that her manager thought she was "too black" to do various tasks found that the issue of the employee's skin color rather than race itself played a key role in an employer's decision to keep the employee from advancing.

[ 225 ] A 2018 study found evidence suggesting discrimination against immigrants with darker skin colors.

[ 226 ] A 2019 experimental study found that there was a bias against blacks, Latinos, and women in the hiring of postdocs in the fields of biology and physics.

[ 227 ] [ 228 ] A 2020 study, which used a natural experiment with sun exposure and tans, found that darker-skinned individuals are discriminated against in the labor market.

[ 229 ] A 2008 study found that black service providers receive lower tips than white service providers.

[ 230 ] Research shows that " ban the box " (the removal of the check box asking job applicants if they have criminal records) leads employers to discriminate against young, black, low-skilled applicants, possibly because employers simply assume these applicants have checkered pasts when they are not able to confirm it.

[ 231 ] Media [ edit ] Colorism in movies, print, and music can take several forms. It can be the representation of people of color in an ill light, the hiring of actors based on their skin color, the use of colors in costumes with the intention to differentiate between good and evil characters, or simply failing to represent people of color at all.

[ 232 ] African Americans with lighter skin tone and "European features", such as lighter eyes and smaller noses and lips, have more opportunities in the media industry. For example, film producers hire lighter-skinned African Americans more often, television producers choose lighter-skinned cast members, and magazine editors choose African American models that resemble European features.

[ 233 ] A content analysis conducted by Scott and Neptune (1997) shows that less than one percent of advertisements in major magazines featured African American models. When African Americans did appear in advertisements, they were mainly portrayed as athletes, entertainers, or unskilled laborers. In addition, seventy percent of the advertisements that featured animal print included African American women. Animal print reinforces the stereotypes that African Americans are animalistic in nature, sexually active, less educated, have lower income, and are extremely concerned with their personal appearances.

[ 234 ] Concerning African American males in the media, darker-skinned men are more likely to be portrayed as violent or more threatening, influencing the public perception of African American men. Since dark-skinned males are more likely to be linked to crime and misconduct, many people develop preconceived notions about the characteristics of black men.

[ 235 ] Colorism was, and still is, very evident in the media. An example of this is the minstrel shows that were popular during and after slavery. Minstrel shows were a very popular form of theater that involved white and black people in blackface, portraying black people while doing demeaning things. The actors painted their faces with black paint and overlined their lips with bright red lipstick to exaggerate and make fun of black people.

[ 236 ] When minstrel shows died out and television became popular, black actors were rarely hired, and when they were, they had very specific roles. These roles included being servants, slaves, idiots, and criminals.

[ 237 ] The absence of people of color in media, in settings where they normally should be present, is also called erasure.

[ 238 ] Politics [ edit ] A 2011 study found that white state legislators of both political parties were less likely to respond to constituents with African-American names.

[ 239 ] A 2013 study found that in response to e-mail correspondence from a putatively black alias, "nonblack legislators were markedly less likely to respond when their political incentives to do so were diminished, black legislators typically continued to respond even when doing so promised little political reward. Black legislators thus appear substantially more intrinsically motivated to advance blacks' interests." [ 240 ] Some research suggests that white voters' voting behavior is motivated by racial threat. A 2016 study, for instance, found that white Chicago voters' turnout decreased when public housing was reconstructed and 25,000 African Americans were displaced. This suggests that white voters' turnout decreased due to not living in proximity to African-Americans.

[ 241 ] Voter ID laws have brought on accusations of racial discrimination. In a 2014 review by the Government Accountability Office of the academic literature, three studies out of five found that voter ID laws reduced minority turnout, whereas two studies found no significant impact.

[ 242 ] Disparate impact may also be reflected in access to information about voter ID laws. A 2015 experimental study found that election officials queried about voter ID laws are more likely to respond to emails from a non-Latino white name (70.5% response rate) than a Latino name (64.8% response rate), though response accuracy was similar across groups.

[ 243 ] Studies have also analyzed racial differences in ID request rates. A 2012 study in the city of Boston found that black and Hispanic voters were more likely to be asked for ID during the 2008 election. According to exit polls, 23% of whites, 33% of blacks, and 38% of Hispanics were asked for ID, though this effect is partially attributed to blacks and Hispanics preferring non-peak voting hours when election officials inspected a greater portion of IDs. Precinct differences also confound the data, as black and Hispanic voters tended to vote in black and Hispanic-majority precincts.

[ 244 ] A 2010 study of the 2006 midterm election in New Mexico found that Hispanics were more likely to incur ID requests, while early voters, women, and non-Hispanics were less likely to incur requests.

[ 245 ] A 2009 study of the 2006 midterm election nationwide found that 47% of white voters reported being asked to show photo identification at the polls, compared with 54% of Hispanics and 55% of African Americans.

[ 246 ] Very few were, however, denied the vote as a result of voter identification requests.

[ 246 ] A 2015 study found that turnout among blacks in Georgia was generally higher since the state began enforcing its strict voter ID law.

[ 247 ] A 2016 study by University of California, San Diego researchers found that voter ID laws "have a differentially negative impact on the turnout of Hispanics, Blacks, and mixed-race Americans in primaries and general elections." [ 248 ] Research by University of Oxford economist Evan Soltas and Stanford political scientist David Broockman suggests that voters act upon racially discriminatory tastes.

[ 249 ] A 2018 study in Public Opinion Quarterly found that whites, in particular those who had racial resentment, largely attributed Obama's success among African-Americans to his race and not his characteristics as a candidate or the political preferences of African-Americans.

[ 250 ] A 2018 study in the journal American Politics Research found that white voters tended to misperceive political candidates from racial minorities as being more ideologically extreme than objective indicators would suggest; this adversely affected the electoral chances for those candidates.

[ 251 ] A 2018 study in the Journal of Politics found that "when a white candidate makes vague statements, many [nonblack] voters project their own policy positions onto the candidate, increasing support for the candidate. But they are less likely to extend black candidates the same courtesy. [...] In fact, black male candidates who make ambiguous statements are actually punished for doing so by racially prejudiced voters." [ 252 ] A 2018 study found evidence of racial-motivated reasoning as voters assessed President Barack Obama 's economic performance. The study found that "Whites attributed more responsibility to Obama under negative economic conditions (i.e., blame) than positive economic conditions (i.e., credit). [...] Whites attributed equal responsibility to the President and governors for negative economic conditions, but gave more responsibility to governors than Obama for positive conditions. Whites also gave governors more responsibility for state improvements than they gave Obama for national ones." [ 253 ] It is also alleged that during his senatorial run in 2008 against former senator and later presidential candidate Hillary Clinton , Clinton's campaign team intentionally darkened Obama's face while running campaign ads. Although her camp denied the accusations, the intention, whether apparent or not, stems from the system of colorism and viewing or equating darker skin tones as bad and in a negative light.

[ 254 ] A 2018 study examining "all 24 African American challengers (non-incumbents) from 2000 to 2014 to white challengers from the same party running in the same state for the same office around the same time" found "that white challengers are about three times more likely to win and receive about 13 percentage points more support among white voters. These estimates hold when controlling for a number of potential confounding factors and when employing several statistical matching estimators." [ 255 ] A 2019 study found that whites are less supportive of welfare when they are told that blacks are the majority of recipients (as opposed to whites).

[ 256 ] However, when informed that most welfare recipients eventually gain jobs and leave the welfare program, this racial bias disappears.

[ 256 ] An analysis by MIT political scientist Regina Bateson found that Americans engage in strategic discrimination against racial minority candidates out of a belief that they are less electable than white male candidates. "In the abstract, Americans consider white men more "electable" than equally qualified black and female candidates. Additionally, concerns about winning the votes of white men can cause voters to rate black and female Democratic candidates as less capable of beating Donald Trump in 2020." [ 257 ] A 2019 paper found, using smartphone data, that voters in predominantly black neighborhoods waited far longer at polling places than voters in white neighborhoods.

[ 258 ] A 2021 study in the American Political Science Review found that black protestors were perceived to be more violent in protests than white protestors when they were protesting for the same goals.

[ 259 ] Beauty [ edit ] See also: Sexual racism and Skin whitening Susan L. Bryant has written that the European beauty standard is "the notion that the more closely associated a person is with European features, the more attractive he or she is considered".

[ 260 ] However, an actual study that sought to test this hypothesis found no evidence of a "Eurocentric beauty standard" for women. Using Chinese immigrants and White American citizens , this study found that their ideals of female beauty were not significantly different.

[ 261 ] Participants in the study rated Asian and Latina women as more attractive than White and Black women , and it was found that Asian and Latina women had more of the attributes that were considered attractive for women.

[ 262 ] Exposure to Western media did not influence or improve the Asian men's ratings of White women, which is inconsistent with the idea of a "Eurocentric beauty ideal".

[ 263 ] Shirley Hune notes that the success of Asian and mixed-Asian women in beauty pageants casts doubt on the idea of a Eurocentric beauty ideal.

[ 264 ] Sports [ edit ] A 2018 study found evidence that non-black voters in Heisman Trophy voting were biased against non-black players.

[ 265 ] A 2021 study found that black NBA players were 30% more likely to exit the league in any given season than white players with similar player statistics.

[ 266 ] A 2019 study found that after controlling for objective measures of performance, broadcast commentators were "more likely to discuss the performance and mental abilities of lighter-skinned players and the physical characteristics of darker-skinned players" in the Men's Division I Basketball Tournament.

[ 267 ] A 2020 report found that football commentators were more likely to praise white players for their intelligence and leadership qualities while criticizing black players for lacking those attributes. Black players were four times more likely to be praised for their strength and seven times more likely to be praised for their speed.

[ 268 ] A 2017 study found that racially resentful whites become less likely to favor salaries for college athletes when they are primed to think about African Americans.

[ 269 ] See also [ edit ] Apartheid Black nationalism Black Power Black Power movement Black supremacy Colonial mentality Dusky Peril Fitzpatrick scale for skin color Hoteps Internalized racism Mormon teachings on skin color One-drop rule Persecution of people with albinism Racial nationalism Tanorexia White Australia policy White genocide conspiracy theory White nationalism White supremacy Yellow Peril References [ edit ] ^ Norwood, Kimberly (2015).

"If You Is White, You's Alright..." Stories About Colorism in America .

14 (4).

Archived from the original on 11 July 2025 . Retrieved 5 June 2025 .

^ Hunter, Margaret (2007).

"The Persistent Problem of Colorism: Skin Tone, Status, and Inequality" (PDF) .

Sociology Compass .

1 (1): 237– 254.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 May 2025 . Retrieved 5 June 2025 .

^ Hunter, Margaret (2007).

"The Persistent Problem of Colorism: Skin Tone, Status, and Inequality" (PDF) .

Sociology Compass .

1 (1): 237– 254.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 May 2025 . Retrieved 5 June 2025 .

^ Sanz Espinar, Gemma (2022). "Hacia un nuevo MCER. Objetivo: mediación".

Çédille (22): 513– 519.

doi : 10.25145/j.cedille.2022.22.29 .

ISSN 1699-4949 .

S2CID 254768115 .

^ Jablonski, Nina G. (2021).

"Skin color and race" .

American Journal of Physical Anthropology .

175 (2): 437– 447.

doi : 10.1002/ajpa.24200 .

ISSN 0002-9483 .

PMC 8247429 .

PMID 33372701 .

^ Hall, Ronald (8 November 2022).

"Being light-skinned can lead to 'reverse colorism' in many parts of the world" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2024 . Retrieved 30 April 2023 .

^ a b c d West, Keon; Greenland, Katy; Laar, Colette (12 May 2021).

"Implicit racism, colour blindness, and narrow definitions of discrimination: Why some White people prefer 'All Lives Matter' to 'Black Lives Matter' " .

British Journal of Social Psychology .

60 (4): 1136– 1153.

doi : 10.1111/bjso.12458 .

ISSN 0144-6665 .

PMID 33977556 .

S2CID 234474038 .

^ a b c d e f Rich, Judith (November 2014). "What Do Field Experiments of Discrimination in Markets Tell Us? A Meta Analysis of Studies Conducted Since 2000".

IZA Discussion Paper No. 8584 .

SSRN 2517887 .

^ a b c d e f Zschirnt, Eva; Ruedin, Didier (27 May 2016).

"Ethnic discrimination in hiring decisions: a meta-analysis of correspondence tests 1990–2015" (PDF) .

Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies .

42 (7): 1115– 1134.

doi : 10.1080/1369183X.2015.1133279 .

hdl : 10419/142176 .

S2CID 10261744 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 November 2018 . Retrieved 16 May 2018 .

^ a b P. A. Riach; J. Rich (November 2002).

"Field Experiments of Discrimination in the Market Place" (PDF) .

The Economic Journal .

112 (483): F480 – F518 .

doi : 10.1111/1468-0297.00080 .

S2CID 19024888 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 July 2024 . Retrieved 28 July 2019 .

^ Monk, Ellis P. (1 September 2015). "The Cost of Color: Skin Color, Discrimination, and Health among African-Americans".

American Journal of Sociology .

121 (2): 396– 444.

doi : 10.1086/682162 .

PMID 26594713 .

S2CID 10357627 .

^ Monk, Ellis P. (1 June 2014). "Skin Tone Stratification among Black Americans, 2001–2003".

Social Forces .

92 (4): 1313– 1337.

doi : 10.1093/sf/sou007 .

S2CID 145107271 .

^ Egbi, O. G.; Kasia, B. (20 May 2021).

"Prevalence, determinants and perception of use of skin lightening products among female medical undergraduates in Nigeria" .

Skin Health and Disease .

1 (3): e46.

doi : 10.1002/ski2.46 .

ISSN 2690-442X .

PMC 9060047 .

PMID 35663132 .

^ Agyei-Boateng, Akua (6 July 2020).

"Colorism in Africa" .

The Voice of Africa .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2024 . Retrieved 21 September 2024 .

^ a b Fihlani, Pumza (January 2013).

"Africa: Where black is not really beautiful" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 .

^ a b c Backhaus, Anne; Okunmwendia, Ella (16 June 2020).

"Skin Bleaching in Ghana: "When You Are Light-Skinned, You Earn More" " . Global Societies.

Spiegel International .

Der Spiegel .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2020.

^ a b c Jacobs, Meagan; Levine, Susan; Abney, Kate; Davids, Lester (2016).

"Fifty shades of African lightness: A bio-psychosocial review of the global phenomenon of skin lightening practices" .

Journal of Public Health in Africa .

7 (2): 552.

doi : 10.4081/jphia.2016.552 .

PMC 5345401 .

PMID 28299156 .

^ Weisband, Edward; Thomas, Courtney I. P. (17 November 2015).

Political Culture and the Making of Modern Nation-States . Routledge. p. 243.

ISBN 978-1-317-25409-6 .

^ Rossatto, Cesar Augusto; Allen, Ricky Lee; Pruyn, Marc (24 October 2006).

Reinventing Critical Pedagogy: Widening the Circle of Anti-Oppression Education . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 15.

ISBN 978-1-4616-4300-5 .

^ a b "Skin Deep: Dying to be White" . CNN. 15 May 2002.

Archived from the original on 8 April 2010 . Retrieved 8 September 2010 .

^ a b P.H., Li, Eric; Jeong, Min, Hyun; W., Belk, Russell (1 January 2008).

"Skin Lightening and Beauty in Four Asian Cultures" .

NA – Advances in Consumer Research .

35 . Archived from the original on 18 June 2019 . Retrieved 26 October 2016 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "In the dark: what is behind India's obsession with skin whitening?" . Archived from the original on 18 June 2019 . Retrieved 12 March 2017 .

^ Purnell, Newley (31 October 2013).

"Images Spark Racism Debate in Thailand" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2014 . Retrieved 26 March 2021 .

^ Adrian, B. (2003).

Framing the Bride: Globalizing Beauty and Romance in Taiwan's Bridal Industry . University of California Press. p. 165.

ISBN 978-0-520-23834-3 . Retrieved 4 August 2023 .

^ Lim, Tai Wei (22 February 2021).

Women Hold Up Half The Sky: The Political-economic And Socioeconomic Narratives Of Women In China . World Scientific. pp.

47– 48.

ISBN 978-981-12-2620-5 .

^ Wagatsuma, Hiroshi (1967). "The Social Perception of Skin Color in Japan".

Daedalus .

96 (2): 407– 443.

^ a b Mire, Amina (4 September 2019).

Wellness in Whiteness: Biomedicalization and the Promotion of Whiteness and Youth among Women . Routledge. p. 114.

ISBN 978-1-351-23412-2 .

My informants, mainly women insisted that Japanese skin was superior to Caucasian skin. Although many of my informants had little personal contact with Westerners, they all made more or less identical negative comments about Caucasian women's skin, saying, for example, that it was rough, aged quickly and had too many spots [...] with color resembling 'shabu-shabu'....

^ Hall, Ronald E. (20 February 2021).

"Women of color spend more than $8 billion on bleaching creams worldwide every year" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2024 . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

^ Alrayyes, Sarah Fahad; Alrayyes, Saad Fahad; Farooq Dar, Umar (2020). "Skin-lightening practices behind the veil: An epidemiological study among Saudi women".

Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology .

19 (1): 147– 153.

doi : 10.1111/jocd.12972 .

ISSN 1473-2165 .

PMID 31058398 .

^ Hamed, Saja H.; Tayyem, Reema; Nimer, Nisreen; Alkhatib, Hatim S. (2010). "Skin-lightening practice among women living in Jordan: prevalence, determinants, and user's awareness".

International Journal of Dermatology .

49 (4): 414– 420.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2010.04463.x .

ISSN 1365-4632 .

PMID 20465697 .

^ Prusher, Ilene R. (28 December 2009).

"Skin whitening cream finds new popularity among Palestinian women" .

The Christian Science Monitor .

Archived from the original on 26 May 2024 . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

^ Shankar, Ravi (2007).

"Fair Skin in South Asia: an obsession?" .

Journal of Pakistan Association of Dermatologists .

17 : 100– 104.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ Mishra, Neha.

"India and Colorism: The Finer Nuances" .

Washington University Global Studies Law Review .

14 .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2023 . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ a b c d Jesús, Aisha M. Beliso-De; Pierre, Jemima; Rana, Junaid (28 January 2025).

The Anthropology of White Supremacy: A Reader . Princeton University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 978-0-691-25819-5 .

^ Thappa (2014).

"Skin color matters in India" .

Pigment International .

1 : 2.

doi : 10.4103/2349-5847.135419 .

S2CID 178991050 .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2021 .

^ Singh, Indervir (2012).

"Social Norms and Occupational Choice: The Case of Caste Systems in India" .

Indian Journal of Economics and Business .

11 (2): 431– 454.

^ Jayawardene, Sureshi (December 2016).

"Racialized Casteism: Exposing the Relationship Between Race, Caste, and Colorism Through the Experiences of Africana People in India and Sri Lanka" .

Journal of African American Studies .

20 (3/4): 323– 345.

doi : 10.1007/s12111-016-9333-5 .

JSTOR 44508183 .

S2CID 152002116 .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2021 . Retrieved 15 October 2021 .

^ Iliescu, Florin Mircea; Chaplin, George; Rai, Niraj; Jacobs, Guy S.; Mallick, Chandana Basu; Mishra, Anshuman; Thangaraj, Kumarasamy; Jablonski, Nina G. (2018).

"The influences of genes, the environment, and social factors on the evolution of skin color diversity in India" .

American Journal of Human Biology .

30 (5): e23170.

doi : 10.1002/ajhb.23170 .

hdl : 20.500.11820/435c03a5-a3ca-4046-aa50-c81c38d08645 .

ISSN 1520-6300 .

PMID 30099804 .

S2CID 51966049 .

Archived from the original on 30 April 2020 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

^ Jensen, Kari B. (2020).

"Colorism in Bangladeshi Society" .

Focus on Geography .

63 .

doi : 10.21690/foge/2020.63.2f .

S2CID 216266145 .

^ Verma, Harsh (2011).

"Skin 'fairness'-Culturally Embedded Meaning and Branding Implications" .

Global Business Review .

12 (2): 207, 208.

doi : 10.1177/097215091101200202 .

S2CID 145725139 .

^ Mukherjee, Sayantan (1 January 2020).

"Darker shades of "fairness" in India: Male attractiveness and colorism in commercials" .

Open Linguistics .

6 (1): 225– 248.

doi : 10.1515/opli-2020-0007 .

ISSN 2300-9969 .

S2CID 219983420 .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2023 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

^ Sims, Cynthia; Hirudayaraj, Malar (2015). "The Impact of Colorism on the Career Aspirations and Career Opportunities of Women in India".

Advances in Developing Human Resources .

18 (I): 38– 53.

doi : 10.1177/1523422315616339 .

S2CID 147087265 .

^ Wardhani, Baiq; Largis, Era; Dugis, Vinsensio (1 March 2018).

"Colorism, Mimicry, and Beauty Construction in Modern India" .

Jurnal Hubungan Internasional .

6 (2): 242– 244.

doi : 10.18196/hi.62118 .

ISSN 2503-3883 .

S2CID 194938008 .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2022 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

It can be analyzed through Orientalist thesis where the world becomes Western and Orientals, where in the feminist perspective, Oriental women are passive, unable to express their voice (Hasan, 2009, p. 30). Western women are the opposite of non-western women or orientals women who are considered ignorant, submissive to patriarchal dominance, poor, uneducated, tradition-bound, domestic, family-oriented, and victimized"..."This is related to the existence of white supremacy , in which the white male colonial is the most masculine and superior compared with the men of the colonized country." Anne McClintock (1995, p. 120) adds that colonized and territorial communities are feminized through conquest by masculine colonial powers. "Territory is one of the symbols of property in colonial patriarchy that must be mastered and owned, so that the occupied men will lose the symbol of its masculinity.

^ "header test" .

fairandlovely-in . Archived from the original on 9 December 2018 . Retrieved 28 November 2019 .

^ Rajesh, Monisha (14 August 2013).

"India's unfair obsession with lighter skin" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2016 . Retrieved 5 June 2017 .

^ Sheth, Sudev; Jones, Geoffrey; Spencer, Morgan (2021).

"Emboldening and Contesting Gender and Skin Color Stereotypes in the Film Industry in India, 1947–1991" .

Business History Review .

95 (3): 483– 515.

doi : 10.1017/S0007680521000118 .

ISSN 0007-6805 .

S2CID 236544369 .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2021 .

^ Shroff, Hemal; Diedrichs, Phillippa C.; Craddock, Nadia (2018).

"Skin Color, Cultural Capital, and Beauty Products: An Investigation of the Use of Skin Fairness Products in Mumbai, India" .

Frontiers in Public Health .

5 : 365.

Bibcode : 2018FrPH....5..365S .

doi : 10.3389/fpubh.2017.00365 .

ISSN 2296-2565 .

PMC 5787082 .

PMID 29410952 .

^ Kukreja, Reena (1 February 2021).

"Colorism as Marriage Capital: Cross-Region Marriage Migration in India and Dark-Skinned Migrant Brides" .

Gender & Society .

35 (1): 85– 109.

doi : 10.1177/0891243220979633 .

ISSN 0891-2432 .

S2CID 231840988 .

^ "Elsevier: Article Locator Error - Article Not Available" .

linkinghub.elsevier.com .

doi : 10.1016/s0037-6337(10)70175-3 .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2021 .

^ " 'Fairness mania' is fueling a dangerous drug dependence in India" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2025 . Retrieved 19 April 2025 .

^ Yasir, Sameer; Gettleman, Jeffrey (28 June 2020).

"India Debates Skin-Tone Bias as Beauty Companies Alter Ads" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ "Black Lives Matter Gets Indians Talking About Skin Lightening And Colorism" .

NPR.org .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ Melissa Mahtani.

"An Asian dating website has removed an option that asked users to specify their skin tone" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ Mazumdar, Sucheta (1 May 1989).

"Racist Responses to Racism: The Aryan Myth and South Asians in the United States" .

Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East .

9 (1): 47– 55.

doi : 10.1215/07323867-9-1-47 .

ISSN 1089-201X .

^ Hersch, Joni (20 October 2010). "The Persistence of Skin Color Discrimination for Immigrants".

SSRN 1695209 .

^ "Fair skin obsession: An inferiority complex that needs treatment – News Features | Daily Mirror" .

www.dailymirror.lk .

^ "When Fair isn't fair and Lovely isn't lovely in Sri Lanka – Djed" . 31 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2019 . Retrieved 31 August 2018 .

^ "Miss Universe Malaysia pageant contestants 'look too western' " . 4 October 2012.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2016 . Retrieved 11 July 2016 .

^ "Malaysian ads move triggers industry row – Chinadaily.com.cn" .

www.chinadaily.com.cn .

Archived from the original on 31 August 2018 . Retrieved 11 July 2016 .

^ Gouda, Frances (2008).

Dutch Culture Overseas: Colonial Practice in the Netherlands Indies, 1900-1942 . Equinox Publishing. p. 167.

ISBN 978-979-3780-62-7 .

"Du Bois seemed unaware of the prurience implicit in his report to the
State Department in Washington D.C. Women whose complexion possessed a soft sienna incandescence and whose hair was shiny black comprised a particularly handsome "specimen" of womanhood, he insinuated,  which male-defined aesthetic norms ranked higher than pallid, anemic "samples" of European femininity." ^ Gouda 2008 , p. 167: "Half-caste women in the Dutch East Indies are fine physical specimens, varying in skin color from golden brown to nearly white, the constant characteristics being lustrous black eyes and wavy hair. To the average man, the young half-caste is physically more attractive than the pure-blooded Dutch woman. This is born out by the fact that young Dutch bachelors marry half-caste girls with a frequency embarrassing to the conservative Dutch element." ^ Gouda 2008 , p. 167: "In her heart-rending novel, The Moon on the Water, Elvire Spier recently described the sorrow experienced by a little blond-haired girl, born in to an old Indies family in the Praenger, whose lily-white skin no longer exuded the bronzed radiance of her mother's or grandmother's complexion. Her Sundanese great-grandmother commiserated with her anguish about her rosy-colored cheeks, because a koelit langsep, "a golden colored skin is the greatest gift Allah can bestow upon a woman"." ^ Kemper, Steven (1 May 2001).

Buying and Believing: Sri Lankan Advertising and Consumers in a Transnational World . University of Chicago Press. p. 153.

ISBN 9780226430409 .

^ Wilder, JeffriAnne (2015).

Color Stories: Black Women and Colorism in the 21st Century . ABC-CLIO Greenwood. p. 155.

ISBN 9781440831102 .

^ Quinn, Rachael Afi (2015). " "No tienes que entenderlo": Xiomara Fortuna, Racism, Feminism, and Other Forces in the Dominican Republic".

Black Scholar .

45 (3): 54– 66.

doi : 10.1080/00064246.2015.1060690 .

S2CID 143035833 .

^ European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights. (2023).

Being black in the EU: experiences of people of African descent (PDF) . Publications Office. p. 33.

doi : 10.2811/3319 .

ISBN 9789294892164 . Retrieved 29 October 2023 .

^ "The degree awarding gap – RGS" .

www.rgs.org .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 .

^ "Black, Asian and Ethnic Student Attainment at UK Universities: Close the Gap (May 2019)" (PDF) .

^ "Black British Voices: the findings" .

University of Cambridge . 28 September 2023.

Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 .

^ Hernandez, Tanya K. (2006). "Bringing Clarity to Race Relations in Brazil".

Diverse: Issues in Higher Education .

23 (18): 85.

^ Santana, Vilma; Almeida-Filho, Naomar; Roberts, Robert; Cooper, Sharon P. (2007).

"Skin Color, Perception of Racism and Depression among Adolescents in Urban Brazil" .

Child and Adolescent Mental Health .

12 (3): 125– 131.

doi : 10.1111/j.1475-3588.2007.00447.x .

PMID 32811081 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 31 January 2023 .

^ Monk, Ellis P. (1 August 2016). "The Consequences of "Race and Color" in Brazil".

Social Problems .

63 (3): 413– 430.

doi : 10.1093/socpro/spw014 .

^ Bueno, Natália S.; Dunning, Thad (1 January 2017). "Race, Resources, and Representation: Evidence from Brazilian Politicians".

World Politics .

69 (2): 327– 365.

doi : 10.1017/S0043887116000290 .

ISSN 0043-8871 .

^ Marteleto, Letícia J.; Dondero, Molly (21 July 2016).

"Racial Inequality in Education in Brazil: A Twins Fixed-Effects Approach" .

Demography .

53 (4): 1185– 1205.

doi : 10.1007/s13524-016-0484-8 .

PMC 5026925 .

PMID 27443551 .

^ Botelho, Fernando; Madeira, Ricardo A.; Rangel, Marcos A. (2015).

"AEJ: Applied (7,4) p. 37 – Racial Discrimination in Grading: Evidence from Brazil" (PDF) .

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics .

7 (4): 37– 52.

doi : 10.1257/app.20140352 .

^ François, Gerard; Lorenzo, Lagos; Edson, Severnini; David, Card (18 October 2018).

"Assortative Matching or Exclusionary Hiring? The Impact of Firm Policies on Racial Wage Differences in Brazil" .

National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper Series.

doi : 10.3386/w25176 .

S2CID 240144832 .

Archived from the original on 23 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 October 2018 .

^ "Estudio revela que alumnos de piel morena son considerados como 'menos competentes' en los colegios chilenos" .

Centro de Estudios de Políticas y Prácticas en Educación CEPPE de la U. Católica y Ediciones UC (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 28 March 2023 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 .

^ "Study reveals racial inequality in Mexico, disproving its 'race-blind' rhetoric" .

The Conversation . 13 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2018 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g Zizumbo-Colunga, Daniel (13 December 2017).

"Study reveals racial inequality in Mexico, disproving its 'race-blind' rhetoric" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 20 April 2024 .

^ a b c Zizumbo-Colunga, Daniel, and Ivan Flores Martinez. “Is Mexico a Post-Racial Country? Inequality and Skin Tone across The ...” Is Mexico a Post-Racial Country? Inequality and Skin Tone across the Americas , 6 November 2017, www.vanderbilt.edu/lapop/insights/ITB031en.pdf.

^ "In Mexico, economic opportunity increases the closer your skin gets to white" .

Quartz . 25 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 20 May 2023 . Retrieved 19 May 2023 .

^ Hill, Mark E (2002). "Skin Color and the Perception of Attractiveness Among African Americans: Does Gender Make a Difference?".

Social Psychology Quarterly .

65 (1): 77– 91.

doi : 10.2307/3090169 .

JSTOR 3090169 .

^ Russell, K., Wilson, M., & Hall, R. (1993). The color complex: The politics of skin color among African Americans. New York: Anchor Books.

^ Fultz, Lauren (Summer 2017).

"The Psycho-Social Impact of Colorism Among African American Women: Crossing the Divide" .

Psychology Commons .

Archived from the original on 2 October 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2017 .

^ "Brown Paper Bag Test – 2014 – Question of the Month – Jim Crow Museum – Ferris State University" .

ferris.edu .

Archived from the original on 13 December 2017 . Retrieved 14 November 2017 .

^ Ware, Leland.

" 'Color Struck': Intragroup and Cross-racial Color Discrimination" .

Race, Racism and the Law . Archived from the original on 24 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 October 2019 .

^ Hunter, Margaret (2007). "The Persistent Problem of Colorism: Skin Tone, Status, and Inequality".

Sociology Compass .

1 (1): 237– 254.

doi : 10.1111/j.1751-9020.2007.00006.x .

ISSN 1751-9020 .

S2CID 11960841 .

^ Lindsey, Treva B (2011). "Black no more: Skin bleaching and the emergence of new negro womanhood beauty culture".

Journal of Pan African Studies .

4 : 97– 116.

^ "Testing Blackness – Ask Me About My Hair (.com)" .

Ask Me About My Hair (.com) . 10 February 2014. Archived from the original on 24 May 2015 . Retrieved 14 November 2017 .

^ Keith, Verna M.; Herring, Cedric (1991). "Skin Tone and Stratification in the Black Community".

American Journal of Sociology .

97 (3): 760– 764.

doi : 10.1086/229819 .

JSTOR 2781783 .

S2CID 145588099 .

^ a b Harris, Angela (January 2008).

"From Color Line to Color Chart: Racism and Colorism in the New Century" .

Berkeley Journal of African-American Law & Policy .

10 (1): 53.

doi : 10.15779/Z380C9X .

^ Sundstrom, Ronald Robles (2008). "Introduction". In Bernasconi, Robert ; Sharpley-Whiting, Tracy Denean (eds.).

The Browning of America and the Evasion of Social Justice . Philosophy and Race. State University of New York Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9780791475850 .

OCLC 187300169 .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 31 October 2020 .

^ Carter, Greg (22 April 2013).

The United States of the United Races: A Utopian History of Racial Mixing . NYU Press. p. 133.

ISBN 978-0-8147-7251-5 .

Du Bois, Garvey and their peers had not invented this rhetoric, but they did rearticulate minority antipathy toward racial mixing during the twentieth century into a sort of reverse colorism that held light-skinned kin as privileged, suspect, and poisoned by whiteness.

^ Klotz, Kelsey (7 February 2023).

Dave Brubeck and the Performance of Whiteness . Oxford University Press. p. 194.

ISBN 978-0-19-752507-4 .

This may have been an implicit form of reverse colorism. While colorism typically would privilege light-skinned Black people (and therefore is, as Ibram X. Kendi writes, "A collection of racist policies that cause inequities between Light people and Dark people, and these inequities are substantiated by racist ideas about Light and Dark people"), this statement suggests that Wright was acting too "light," or had assimilated too much to white ideals and behaviors. Ibram X. Kendi, How to Be an Antiracist *New York, One World, (2019), 110.

^ Hall, Ronald E. (11 September 2012).

The Melanin Millennium: Skin Color as 21st Century International Discourse . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 103.

ISBN 978-94-007-4607-7 .

While the process of Americanization of Guahan has resulted in the valuation of color consistent with colorism, the more recent historical experiences of Chamorus and others on Guahan have resulted in a shift from the desirability of a lighter skin color the varying shades of brown skin...This decolonizing experience has interrupted the process of colorism on Guahan and, in some cases, led to a reverse colorism.

^ Gouda 2008 , p. 167.

^ a b c d e f g Greenwood, Shannon (4 November 2021).

"Majority of Latinos Say Skin Color Impacts Opportunity in America and Shapes Daily Life" .

Pew Research Center's Hispanic Trends Project .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2023 . Retrieved 19 May 2023 .

^ Ayres, Ian; Siegelman, Peter (1 January 1995). "Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for a New Car".

American Economic Review .

85 (3): 304– 21.

JSTOR 2118176 .

^ Doleac, Jennifer L.; Stein, Luke C.D. (1 November 2013). "The Visible Hand: Race and Online Market Outcomes".

The Economic Journal .

123 (572): F469 – F492 .

doi : 10.1111/ecoj.12082 .

S2CID 154984687 .

^ Cook, Lisa D. (2014). "Violence and economic activity: evidence from African American patents, 1870–1940".

Journal of Economic Growth .

19 (2): 221– 257.

doi : 10.1007/s10887-014-9102-z .

ISSN 1381-4338 .

S2CID 153971489 .

^ Gentles-Peart, Kamille (2018).

"Controlling Beauty Ideals: Caribbean Women, Thick Bodies, and White Supremacist Discourse" .

WSQ: Women's Studies Quarterly .

46 ( 1– 2): 199– 214.

doi : 10.1353/wsq.2018.0009 .

ISSN 1934-1520 .

S2CID 91021491 .

^ Hyman, Louis (2011). "Ending Discrimination, Legitimating Debt: The Political Economy of Race, Gender, and Credit Access in the 1960s and 1970s".

Enterprise & Society .

12 (1): 200– 232.

doi : 10.1017/S1467222700009770 .

ISSN 1467-2227 .

S2CID 154351557 .

^ Flitter, Emily (15 July 2020).

"Black Business Owners Had a Harder Time Getting Federal Aid, a Study Finds" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 16 July 2020 . Retrieved 17 July 2020 .

^ Mujcic, Redzo; Frijters, Paul (2020).

"The Colour of a Free Ride" .

The Economic Journal .

131 (634): 970– 999.

doi : 10.1093/ej/ueaa090 .

^ a b c d Buolamwini, Joy; Gebru, Timnit (21 January 2018).

"Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification" .

Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency . PMLR: 77– 91.

Archived from the original on 13 March 2025 . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Warren, Patricia Y.; Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald (1 May 2009). "Racial profiling and searches: Did the politics of racial profiling change police behavior?".

Criminology & Public Policy .

8 (2): 343– 369.

doi : 10.1111/j.1745-9133.2009.00556.x .

^ Donohue III, John J.; Levitt, Steven D. (1 January 2001). "The Impact of Race on Policing and Arrests".

The Journal of Law & Economics .

44 (2): 367– 394.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.381.8047 .

doi : 10.1086/322810 .

JSTOR 10.1086/322810 .

S2CID 1547854 .

^ Hinton, Elizabeth; Cook, DeAnza (29 June 2020).

"The Mass Criminalization of Black Americans: A Historical Overview" .

Annual Review of Criminology .

4 : 261– 286.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-criminol-060520-033306 .

ISSN 2572-4568 .

^ Abrams, David S.; Bertrand, Marianne; Mullainathan, Sendhil (1 June 2012).

"Do Judges Vary in Their Treatment of Race?" .

The Journal of Legal Studies .

41 (2): 347– 383.

doi : 10.1086/666006 .

S2CID 2338687 .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2019 . Retrieved 28 July 2019 .

^ Mustard, David B. (2001). "Racial, Ethnic, and Gender Disparities in Sentencing: Evidence from the U.S. Federal Courts".

The Journal of Law and Economics .

44 (1): 285– 314.

doi : 10.1086/320276 .

S2CID 154533225 .

^ a b Anwar, Shamena; Bayer, Patrick; Hjalmarsson, Randi (1 May 2012).

"The Impact of Jury Race in Criminal Trials" .

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

127 (2): 1017– 1055.

doi : 10.1093/qje/qjs014 .

^ a b Depew, Briggs; Eren, Ozkan; Mocan, Naci (2017).

"Judges, Juveniles, and In-Group Bias" (PDF) .

Journal of Law and Economics .

60 (2): 209– 239.

doi : 10.1086/693822 .

S2CID 147631237 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 28 July 2019 .

^ a b Arnold, David; Dobbie, Will; Yang, Crystal S. (2018).

"Racial Bias in Bail Decisions" (PDF) .

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

133 (4): 1885– 1932.

doi : 10.1093/qje/qjy012 .

S2CID 13703268 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ a b c d Rehavi, M. Marit; Starr, Sonja B. (2014).

"Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences" .

Journal of Political Economy .

122 (6): 1320– 1354.

doi : 10.1086/677255 .

ISSN 0022-3808 .

S2CID 3348344 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 28 July 2019 .

^ Yang, Crystal S.; Cohen, Alma (2019).

"Judicial Politics and Sentencing Decisions" .

American Economic Journal: Economic Policy .

11 (1): 160– 91.

doi : 10.1257/pol.20170329 .

ISSN 1945-7731 .

^ Hymowitz, Kay (3 December 2012).

"The Real, Complex Connection Between Single-Parent Families and Crime" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 20 August 2022 .

^ "Children in single-parent families by race | KIDS COUNT Data Center" .

datacenter.kidscount.org . Retrieved 20 August 2022 .

^ Bulman, George (2019). "Law Enforcement Leaders and the Racial Composition of Arrests".

Economic Inquiry .

57 (4): 1842– 1858.

doi : 10.1111/ecin.12800 .

ISSN 1465-7295 .

S2CID 3616622 .

^ West, Jeremy (February 2018).

"Racial Bias in Police Investigations" (PDF) .

Working Paper .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 March 2019 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ a b "Federal study confirms racial bias of many facial-recognition systems, casts doubt on their expanding use" .

The Washington Post . 2019.

^ a b Hester, Neil; Gray, Kurt (21 February 2018).

"For Black men, being tall increases threat stereotyping and police stops" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

115 (11): 2711– 2715.

Bibcode : 2018PNAS..115.2711H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1714454115 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 5856523 .

PMID 29483263 .

^ "Analysis | What data on 20 million traffic stops can tell us about 'driving while black' " .

Washington Post . Retrieved 17 July 2018 .

^ Baumgartner, Frank R.; Epp, Derek A.; Shoub, Kelsey (10 July 2018).

Suspect Citizens . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781108553599 .

ISBN 9781108553599 .

S2CID 158379135 .

^ Pierson, Emma; Simoiu, Camelia; Overgoor, Jan; Corbett-Davies, Sam; Jenson, Daniel; Shoemaker, Amy; Ramachandran, Vignesh; Barghouty, Phoebe; Phillips, Cheryl; Shroff, Ravi; Goel, Sharad (4 May 2020).

"A large-scale analysis of racial disparities in police stops across the United States" .

Nature Human Behaviour .

4 (7): 736– 745.

doi : 10.1038/s41562-020-0858-1 .

ISSN 2397-3374 .

PMID 32367028 .

^ Feigenberg, Benjamin; Miller, Conrad (2021).

"Would Eliminating Racial Disparities in Motor Vehicle Searches Have Efficiency Costs?*" .

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

137 : 49– 113.

doi : 10.1093/qje/qjab018 .

ISSN 0033-5533 .

^ Goncalves, Felipe; Mello, Steven (2021).

"A Few Bad Apples? Racial Bias in Policing" .

American Economic Review .

111 (5): 1406– 1441.

doi : 10.1257/aer.20181607 .

ISSN 0002-8282 .

S2CID 235575809 .

^ "Gary Johnson's bungled claims about racial disparities in crime" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 21 January 2017 .

^ Fryer, Roland Gerhard (June 2019).

"An Empirical Analysis of Racial Differences in Police Use of Force" .

Journal of Political Economy .

127 (3).

University of Chicago : 1210– 1261.

doi : 10.1086/701423 .

ISSN 0022-3808 .

OCLC 8118094562 .

S2CID 158634577 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 8 November 2020 .

^ a b Fryer, Roland Gerhard (July 2016).

"An Empirical Analysis of Racial Differences in Police Use of Force" (PDF) .

National Bureau of Economic Research . NBER Working Papers (Revised January 2018 ed.).

doi : 10.3386/w22399 .

OCLC 956328193 .

S2CID 158634577 . W22399.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2020.

[ 128 ] ^ Durlauf, Steven Neil ; Heckman, James Joseph (21 July 2020).

"An Empirical Analysis of Racial Differences in Police Use of Force: A Comment" .

Journal of Political Economy .

128 (10).

University of Chicago : 3998– 4002.

doi : 10.1086/710976 .

ISSN 0022-3808 .

OCLC 8672021465 .

^ Fryer, Roland Gerhard (21 July 2020).

"An Empirical Analysis of Racial Differences in Police Use of Force: A Response" .

Journal of Political Economy .

128 (10).

University of Chicago : 4003– 4008.

doi : 10.1086/710977 .

ISSN 0022-3808 .

OCLC 8672034484 .

S2CID 222813143 . Archived from the original on 8 November 2020.

^ Edwards, Frank; Esposito, Michael H.; Lee, Hedwig (19 July 2018).

"Risk of Police-Involved Death by Race/Ethnicity and Place, United States, 2012–2018" .

American Journal of Public Health .

108 (9): e1 – e8 .

doi : 10.2105/ajph.2018.304559 .

ISSN 0090-0036 .

PMC 6085013 .

PMID 30024797 .

^ Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (10 August 2016).

"Findings of Police Bias in Baltimore Validate What Many Have Long Felt" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 10 August 2016 . Retrieved 11 August 2016 .

^ "The 12 key highlights from the DOJ's scathing Ferguson report" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 11 August 2016 .

^ Hanna, Jason; Park, Madison (13 January 2017).

"Chicago police use excessive force, DOJ finds" .

CNN . Retrieved 13 January 2017 .

^ Menifield, Charles E.; Shin, Geiguen; Strother, Logan (2019). "Do White Law Enforcement Officers Target Minority Suspects?".

Public Administration Review .

79 : 56– 68.

doi : 10.1111/puar.12956 .

ISSN 0033-3352 .

S2CID 229296886 .

^ Streeter, Shea (7 June 2019). "Lethal Force in Black and White: Assessing Racial Disparities in the Circumstances of Police Killings".

The Journal of Politics .

81 (3): 1124– 1132.

doi : 10.1086/703541 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

S2CID 197815467 .

^ a b Esposito, Michael; Lee, Hedwig; Edwards, Frank (31 July 2019).

"Risk of being killed by police use of force in the United States by age, race–ethnicity, and sex" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

116 (34): 16793– 16798.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..11616793E .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1821204116 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 6708348 .

PMID 31383756 .

^ Cesario, Joseph; Taylor, Carley; Burkel, Nicole; Tress, Trevor; Johnson, David J. (17 July 2019).

"Officer characteristics and racial disparities in fatal officer-involved shootings" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

116 (32): 15877– 15882.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..11615877J .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1903856116 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 6689929 .

PMID 31332014 .

(Retracted, see doi : 10.1073/pnas.2014148117 , PMID 32651282 , Retraction Watch ) ^ Knox, Dean; Mummolo, Jonathan (2 August 2019). "Making inferences about racial disparities in police violence".

SSRN 3431132 .

^ Knox, Dean; Mummolo, Jonathan (21 January 2020).

"Making inferences about racial disparities in police violence" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

117 (3): 1261– 1262.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..117.1261K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1919418117 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 6983428 .

PMID 31964781 .

^ Sciences, National Academy of (2020).

"Correction for Johnson et al., Officer characteristics and racial disparities in fatal officer-involved shootings" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

117 (16): 9127.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..117.9127.

.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2004734117 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 7183161 .

PMID 32284413 .

^ Hoekstra, Mark; Sloan, CarlyWill (2020).

"Does Race Matter for Police Use of Force? Evidence from 911 Calls" .

National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper Series.

doi : 10.3386/w26774 .

S2CID 213236709 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2020 . Retrieved 24 February 2020 .

^ Knox, Dean; Lowe, Will; Mummolo, Jonathan (2020).

"Administrative Records Mask Racially Biased Policing" .

American Political Science Review .

114 (3): 619– 637.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055420000039 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

^ Braun, Michael; Rosenthal, Jeremy; Therrian, Kyle (2018). "Police Discretion and Racial Disparity in Organized Retail Theft Arrests: Evidence from Texas".

Journal of Empirical Legal Studies .

15 (4): 916– 950.

doi : 10.1111/jels.12201 .

ISSN 1740-1461 .

S2CID 158361514 .

^ "Killings of Black Men by Whites are Far More Likely to be Ruled "Justifiable" " .

The Marshall Project . 14 August 2017.

Archived from the original on 21 August 2017 . Retrieved 21 August 2017 .

^ Libgober, Brian (16 May 2019). "Getting a Lawyer While Black: A Field Experiment".

SSRN 3389279 .

^ Arnold, David; Dobbie, Will; Hull, Peter (2022).

"Measuring Racial Discrimination in Bail Decisions" .

American Economic Review .

112 (9): 2992– 3038.

doi : 10.1257/aer.20201653 .

ISSN 0002-8282 .

PMC 10289801 .

PMID 37360006 .

^ Bielen, Samantha; Marneffe, Wim; Mocan, Naci H (2018).

"Racial Bias and In-group Bias in Judicial Decisions: Evidence from Virtual Reality Courtrooms" .

National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper Series.

doi : 10.3386/w25355 .

S2CID 53629979 .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2018 . Retrieved 17 December 2018 .

^ Bjerk, David; Helland, Eric (1 May 2020).

"What Can DNA Exonerations Tell Us about Racial Differences in Wrongful-Conviction Rates?" .

The Journal of Law and Economics .

63 (2): 341– 366.

doi : 10.1086/707080 .

hdl : 10419/185297 .

ISSN 0022-2186 .

S2CID 51997973 .

^ Eren, Ozkan; Mocan, Naci (2018).

"Emotional Judges and Unlucky Juveniles" .

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics .

10 (3): 171– 205.

doi : 10.1257/app.20160390 .

ISSN 1945-7782 .

^ Cohen, Alma; Yang, Crystal (2018).

"Judicial Politics and Sentencing Decisions" .

National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper Series.

doi : 10.3386/w24615 .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2018 . Retrieved 21 May 2018 .

^ Hochschild, Jennifer L (2007). "The Skin Color Paradox and the American Racial Order".

Social Forces .

86 (2): 643– 670.

doi : 10.1093/sf/86.2.643 .

S2CID 145637304 .

^ a b c d "Same background. Same crime. Different race. Different sentence" . Archived from the original on 17 December 2016 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "Black men sentenced to more time for committing the exact same crime as a white person, study finds" .

washingtonpost.com . Archived from the original on 16 November 2017 . Retrieved 23 November 2017 .

^ "Demographic Differences in Sentencing" .

United States Sentencing Commission . 13 November 2017.

Archived from the original on 7 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 November 2017 .

^ Donohue, John J. (28 October 2014). "An Empirical Evaluation of the Connecticut Death Penalty System Since 1973: Are There Unlawful Racial, Gender, and Geographic Disparities?".

Journal of Empirical Legal Studies .

11 (4): 637– 696.

doi : 10.1111/jels.12052 .

ISSN 1740-1453 .

S2CID 39548863 .

^ a b c Winerip, Michael Schwirtz, Michael; Gebeloff, Robert (3 December 2016).

"The Scourge of Racial Bias in New York State's Prisons" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 December 2016 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Linzer, Dafna; LaFleur, Jennifer (3 December 2011).

"Presidential Pardons Heavily Favor Whites" .

ProPublica .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2017 . Retrieved 21 December 2017 .

^ a b "School Finance – EdCentral" .

EdCentral . Retrieved 2 December 2016 .

^ a b "More Than 40% of Low-Income Schools Don't Get a Fair Share of State and Local Funds, Department of Education Research Finds | U.S. Department of Education" .

ed.gov .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2012 . Retrieved 2 December 2016 .

^ a b c Valliani, Nadia (May 2015).

The State of Higher Education in California: Blacks (Report). Campaign for College Opportunity.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 .

^ Milkman, Katherine L.

; Akinola, Modupe ; Chugh, Dolly (1 November 2015).

"What happens before? A field experiment exploring how pay and representation differentially shape bias on the pathway into organizations" .

The Journal of Applied Psychology .

100 (6): 1678– 1712.

doi : 10.1037/apl0000022 .

PMID 25867167 .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2020 . Retrieved 28 July 2019 .

^ Espenshade, Thomas J.; Radford, Alexandria Walton (November 2009).

Espenshade, T.J. and Radford, A.W.: No Longer Separate, Not Yet Equal: Race and Class in Elite College Admission and Campus Life. (eBook, Paperback and Hardcover) . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691141602 .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2016 . Retrieved 24 April 2016 .

^ Card, David; Giuliano, Laura (29 November 2016).

"Universal screening increases the representation of low-income and minority students in gifted education" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

113 (48): 13678– 13683.

Bibcode : 2016PNAS..11313678C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1605043113 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 5137751 .

PMID 27856741 .

^ Gordon, Rebecca; Piana, Libero Della; Keleher, Terry (2000).

"Facing the consequences: An examination of racial discrimination in US public schools" .

ERIC .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 .

^ a b Kerr, A. E. (2006). The paper bag principle: Class, colorism, and rumor in the case of black Washington, DC. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.

^ Spike Lee, "School Daze," 40 Acres & A Mule Filmworks, Columbia Pictures Corporation ^ Branigan, Amelia; Freese, Jeremy; Patir, Assaf; McDade, Thomas; Liu, Kiang; Kiefe, Catarina (November 2013). "Skin color, sex, and educational attainment in the post-civil rights era".

Social Science Research .

42 (6): 1659– 1674.

doi : 10.1016/j.ssresearch.2013.07.010 .

PMID 24090859 .

^ Williams, David R.; Lawrence, Jourdyn A.; Davis, Brigette A. (2019).

"Racism and Health: Evidence and Needed Research" .

Annual Review of Public Health .

40 (1): 105– 125.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-publhealth-040218-043750 .

PMC 6532402 .

PMID 30601726 .

^ a b c Wingfield, Adia Harvey; Chavez, Koji (February 2020).

"Getting In, Getting Hired, Getting Sideways Looks: Organizational Hierarchy and Perceptions of Racial Discrimination" .

American Sociological Review .

85 (1): 31– 57.

doi : 10.1177/0003122419894335 .

ISSN 0003-1224 .

S2CID 214050882 .

^ a b Schulman, Kevin A.; Berlin, Jesse A.; Harless, William; Kerner, Jon F.; Sistrunk, Shyrl; Gersh, Bernard J.; Dubé, Ross; Taleghani, Christopher K.; Burke, Jennifer E. (25 February 1999). "The Effect of Race and Sex on Physicians' Recommendations for Cardiac Catheterization".

New England Journal of Medicine .

340 (8): 618– 626.

doi : 10.1056/NEJM199902253400806 .

PMID 10029647 .

^ Goyal, Monika K.; Kuppermann, Nathan ; Cleary, Sean D.; Teach, Stephen J.; Chamberlain, James M. (1 November 2015).

"Racial Disparities in Pain Management of Children With Appendicitis in Emergency Departments" .

JAMA Pediatrics .

169 (11): 996– 1002.

doi : 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2015.1915 .

ISSN 2168-6203 .

PMC 4829078 .

PMID 26366984 .

^ Druckman, James N ; Trawalter, Sophie; Montes, Ivonne; Fredendall, Alexandria; Kanter, Noah; Rubenstein, Allison Paige (2017). "Racial bias in sport medical staff's perceptions of others' pain".

The Journal of Social Psychology .

158 (6): 721– 729.

doi : 10.1080/00224545.2017.1409188 .

PMID 29173126 .

S2CID 12371799 .

^ Eli, Shari; Logan, Trevon D; Miloucheva, Boriana (2019).

"Physician Bias and Racial Disparities in Health: Evidence from Veterans' Pensions" .

National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper Series.

doi : 10.3386/w25846 .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2019 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ Obermeyer, Ziad; Powers, Brian; Vogeli, Christine; Mullainathan, Sendhil (25 October 2019).

"Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations" .

Science .

366 (6464): 447– 453.

Bibcode : 2019Sci...366..447O .

doi : 10.1126/science.aax2342 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 31649194 .

S2CID 204881868 .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Greenwood, Brad N.; Hardeman, Rachel R.; Huang, Laura; Sojourner, Aaron (13 August 2020).

"Physician–patient racial concordance and disparities in birthing mortality for newborns" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

117 (35): 21194– 21200.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..11721194G .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1913405117 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 7474610 .

PMID 32817561 .

^ Rob Picheta (18 August 2020).

"Black newborns 3 times more likely to die when looked after by White doctors" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2020 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ Physician–patient racial concordance and newborn mortality. George J. Borjas & Robert VerBruggen, 16 September 2024, https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2409264121 Archived 23 May 2025 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The data hinted at racism among white doctors. Then scholars looked again" .

The Economist . 27 October 2024.

Archived from the original on 22 May 2025 . Retrieved 20 May 2025 .

Although the authors of the original 2020 study had controlled for various factors, they had not included very low birth weight (ie, babies born weighing less than 1,500 grams, who account for about half of infant mortality). Once this was also taken into consideration, there was no measurable difference in outcomes ^ a b c d Sjoding, Michael W.; Dickson, Robert P.; Iwashyna, Theodore J.; Gay, Steven E.; Valley, Thomas S. (17 December 2020).

"Racial Bias in Pulse Oximetry Measurement" .

New England Journal of Medicine .

383 (25): 2477– 2478.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMc2029240 .

ISSN 0028-4793 .

PMC 7808260 .

PMID 33326721 .

^ "Pulse Oximetry" .

Yale Medicine . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ "Pulse Oximetry" .

www.lung.org .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2024 . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Nunn, John F.; Lumb, Andrew B.; Pearl, Ronald G.; Lumb, Andrew (2017).

Nunn's applied respiratory physiology (8th ed.). Edinburgh London New York: Elsevier. pp.

335– 340.

ISBN 978-0-7020-6294-0 .

^ Moran-Thomas, Amy (5 August 2020).

"How a Popular Medical Device Encodes Racial Bias" .

Boston Review .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2024 . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Chen, Caroline; Wong, Riley (19 September 2018).

"Black Patients Miss Out On Promising Cancer Drugs" .

ProPublica .

Archived from the original on 20 September 2018 . Retrieved 21 September 2018 .

^ Shachar, Carmel; Wise, Tess; Katznelson, Gali; Campbell, Andrea Louise (2019).

"Criminal Justice or Public Health: A Comparison of the Representation of the Crack Cocaine and Opioid Epidemics in the Media" .

Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law .

45 (2): 211– 239.

doi : 10.1215/03616878-8004862 .

PMID 31808806 .

^ Kim, Jin Woo; Morgan, Evan; Nyhan, Brendan (2019). "Treatment versus Punishment: Understanding Racial Inequalities in Drug Policy".

Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law .

45 (2): 177– 209.

doi : 10.1215/03616878-8004850 .

PMID 31808796 .

S2CID 208742790 .

^ Kaundinya, T.; Kundu, R. V. (2021).

"Diversity of Skin Images in Medical Texts: Recommendations for Student Advocacy in Medical Education" .

Journal of Medical Education and Curricular Development .

8 .

doi : 10.1177/23821205211025855 .

PMC 8202324 .

PMID 34179498 .

^ Ondrich, Jan; Ross, Stephen; Yinger, John (1 November 2003).

"Now You See It, Now You Don't: Why Do Real Estate Agents Withhold Available Houses from Black Customers?" (PDF) .

Review of Economics and Statistics .

85 (4): 854– 873.

doi : 10.1162/003465303772815772 .

S2CID 8524510 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 April 2019 . Retrieved 28 July 2019 .

^ Kamin, Debra (25 August 2020).

"Black Homeowners Face Discrimination in Appraisals" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Sander, Richard H.; Kucheva, Yana A.; Zasloff, Jonathan M. (2018).

"Moving toward Integration" . Harvard University Press.

Archived from the original on 22 January 2019 . Retrieved 21 January 2019 .

^ Taylor, Keeanga-Yamahtta.

"Race for Profit" .

University of North Carolina Press .

Archived from the original on 27 October 2019 . Retrieved 3 November 2019 .

^ Newkirk II, Vann R. (2019).

"The Great Land Robbery" .

The Atlantic .

ISSN 1072-7825 .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2022 . Retrieved 12 August 2019 .

^ Faber, Jacob W. (21 August 2020).

"We Built This: Consequences of New Deal Era Intervention in America's Racial Geography" .

American Sociological Review .

85 (5): 739– 775.

doi : 10.1177/0003122420948464 .

ISSN 0003-1224 .

S2CID 222003246 .

^ Akbar, Prottoy A; Li, Sijie; Shertzer, Allison; Walsh, Randall P (2019).

"Racial Segregation in Housing Markets and the Erosion of Black Wealth" .

National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper Series.

doi : 10.3386/w25805 .

S2CID 159270884 .

^ Shertzer, Allison; Twinam, Tate; Walsh, Randall P. (1 July 2016).

"Race, Ethnicity, and Discriminatory Zoning" .

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics .

8 (3): 217– 246.

doi : 10.1257/app.20140430 .

ISSN 1945-7782 .

^ "Housing Discrimination against Racial and Ethnic Minorities 2012: Full Report" .

urban.org . 11 June 2013.

Archived from the original on 6 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 April 2016 .

^ Benjamin, Edelman; Michael, Luca; Dan, Svirsky (1 April 2017).

"Racial Discrimination in the Sharing Economy: Evidence from a Field Experiment" .

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics .

9 (2): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1257/app.20160213 .

ISSN 1945-7782 .

^ "Black renters face egregious housing discrimination, study shows – The Boston Globe" .

BostonGlobe.com . 2020.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2020 . Retrieved 1 July 2020 .

^ "Qualified Renters Need Not Apply: Race and Voucher Discrimination in the Metro Boston Rental Housing Market" (PDF) . 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 July 2020 . Retrieved 1 July 2020 .

^ Walsh, Randall; Troesken, Werner (2019). "Collective Action, White Flight, and the Origins of Racial Zoning Laws".

The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization .

35 (2): 289– 318.

doi : 10.1093/jleo/ewz006 .

hdl : 10.1093/jleo/ewz006 .

^ Thurston, Chloe N. (2018).

At the Boundaries of Homeownership: Credit, Discrimination, and the American State .

doi : 10.1017/9781108380058 .

ISBN 9781108422055 .

Archived from the original on 13 June 2020 . Retrieved 13 June 2020 .

^ Aaronson, Daniel; Hartley, Daniel A.; Mazumder, Bhashkar (September 2017). "The Effects of the 1930s HOLC 'Redlining' Maps".

FRB of Chicago Working Paper No. WP-2017-12 .

SSRN 3038733 .

^ a b c Badger, Emily (24 August 2017).

"How Redlining's Racist Effects Lasted for Decades" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2017 . Retrieved 26 August 2017 .

^ Moore, Natalie (30 May 2019).

"Contract Buying Robbed Black Families In Chicago Of Billions" .

WBEZ . Archived from the original on 5 June 2019 . Retrieved 5 June 2019 .

^ "Study: Trump fans are much angrier about housing assistance when they see an image of a black man" .

Vox . Retrieved 9 September 2017 .

^ Luttig, Matthew D.; Federico, Christopher M.; Lavine, Howard (1 October 2017).

"Supporters and opponents of Donald Trump respond differently to racial cues: An experimental analysis" .

Research & Politics .

4 (4): 2053168017737411.

doi : 10.1177/2053168017737411 .

ISSN 2053-1680 .

^ Korver-Glenn, Elizabeth (21 June 2018). "Compounding Inequalities: How Racial Stereotypes and Discrimination Accumulate across the Stages of Housing Exchange".

American Sociological Review .

83 (4): 627– 656.

doi : 10.1177/0003122418781774 .

ISSN 0003-1224 .

S2CID 149810113 .

^ Christensen, Peter; Timmins, Christopher (2018).

"Sorting or Steering: Experimental Evidence on the Economic Effects of Housing Discrimination" .

National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper Series.

doi : 10.3386/w24826 .

S2CID 235323585 .

Archived from the original on 16 July 2018 . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

^ Reny, Tyler T.; Newman, Benjamin J. (2018). "Protecting the Right to Discriminate: The Second Great Migration and Racial Threat in the American West".

American Political Science Review .

112 (4): 1104– 1110.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055418000448 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

S2CID 149560682 .

^ Fang, Albert H.; Guess, Andrew M.; Humphreys, Macartan (2019). "Can the Government Deter Discrimination? Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in New York City".

The Journal of Politics .

81 : 127– 141.

doi : 10.1086/700107 .

hdl : 10419/209709 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

S2CID 44470452 .

^ Murchie, Judson; Pang, Jindong (2018). "Rental Housing Discrimination Across Protected Classes: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment".

Regional Science and Urban Economics .

73 : 170– 179.

Bibcode : 2018RSUE...73..170M .

doi : 10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2018.10.003 .

ISSN 0166-0462 .

S2CID 158845046 .

^ Early, Dirk W.; Carrillo, Paul E.; Olsen, Edgar O. (2019). "Racial rent differences in U.S. housing markets: Evidence from the housing voucher program".

Journal of Regional Science .

59 (4): 669– 700.

Bibcode : 2019JRegS..59..669E .

doi : 10.1111/jors.12422 .

ISSN 1467-9787 .

S2CID 158658460 .

^ Laouénan, Morgane; Rathelot, Roland (2022).

"Can Information Reduce Ethnic Discrimination? Evidence from Airbnb" .

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics .

14 (1): 107– 132.

doi : 10.1257/app.20190188 .

ISSN 1945-7782 .

S2CID 222184953 .

^ Hexel, Ole; Fleischmann, Fenella; Midtbøen, Arnfinn H.; Pager, Devah; Heath, Anthony; Quillian, Lincoln (17 June 2019).

"Do Some Countries Discriminate More than Others? Evidence from 97 Field Experiments of Racial Discrimination in Hiring" .

Sociological Science .

6 : 467– 496.

doi : 10.15195/v6.a18 .

ISSN 2330-6696 .

^ Quillian, Lincoln; Pager, Devah; Hexel, Ole; Midtbøen, Arnfinn H. (12 September 2017).

"Meta-analysis of field experiments shows no change in racial discrimination in hiring over time" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

114 (41): 10870– 10875.

Bibcode : 2017PNAS..11410870Q .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1706255114 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 5642692 .

PMID 28900012 .

^ Bertrand, Marianne; Mullainathan, Sendhil (2004).

"Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination" (PDF) .

American Economic Review .

94 (4): 991– 1013.

doi : 10.1257/0002828042002561 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 January 2020 . Retrieved 28 July 2019 .

^ Pager, Devah; Western, Bruce; Bonikowski, Bart (1 October 2009).

"Discrimination in a Low-Wage Labor Market A Field Experiment" .

American Sociological Review .

74 (5): 777– 799.

doi : 10.1177/000312240907400505 .

PMC 2915472 .

PMID 20689685 .

^ Lahey, Joanna N; Oxley, Douglas R (2018).

"Discrimination at the Intersection of Age, Race, and Gender: Evidence from a Lab-in-the-field Experiment" .

National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper Series.

doi : 10.3386/w25357 .

S2CID 38242869 .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2018 . Retrieved 17 December 2018 .

^ Quillian, Lincoln; Lee, John J.; Oliver, Mariana (2020).

"Evidence from Field Experiments in Hiring Shows Substantial Additional Racial Discrimination after the Callback" .

Social Forces .

99 (2): 732– 759.

doi : 10.1093/sf/soaa026 .

^ Kline, Patrick; Rose, Evan K; Walters, Christopher R (2022).

"Systemic Discrimination Among Large U.S. Employers*" .

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

137 (4): 1963– 2036.

doi : 10.1093/qje/qjac024 .

ISSN 0033-5533 .

^ Hangartner, Dominik; Kopp, Daniel; Siegenthaler, Michael (20 January 2021).

"Monitoring hiring discrimination through online recruitment platforms" .

Nature .

589 (7843): 572– 576.

Bibcode : 2021Natur.589..572H .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-020-03136-0 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 33473211 .

S2CID 213021251 .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2021 . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

^ Hunter, Margaret (2002). " 'If You're Light You're Alright': Light Skin Color as Social Capital for Women of Color".

Gender and Society .

16 (2): 175– 93.

doi : 10.1177/08912430222104895 .

S2CID 145727411 .

^ Riddle, Benjamin L. (25 February 2015).

" "Too Black": Waitress's Claim of Color Bias Raises Novel Title VII Claim" .

The National Law Review .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2015 . Retrieved 28 February 2015 .

^ Hersch, Joni (2018). "Colorism Against Legal Immigrants to the United States".

American Behavioral Scientist .

62 (14): 2117– 2132.

doi : 10.1177/0002764218810758 .

S2CID 150280312 .

^ Langin, Katie (3 June 2019).

"Racial and gender biases plague postdoc hiring" .

Science .

doi : 10.1126/science.caredit.aay2605 .

S2CID 195456423 .

Archived from the original on 5 June 2019 . Retrieved 5 June 2019 .

^ Eaton, Asia A.; Saunders, Jessica F.; Jacobson, Ryan K.; West, Keon (3 June 2019).

"How Gender and Race Stereotypes Impact the Advancement of Scholars in STEM: Professors' Biased Evaluations of Physics and Biology Post-Doctoral Candidates" (PDF) .

Sex Roles .

82 ( 3– 4): 127– 141.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-019-01052-w .

ISSN 1573-2762 .

S2CID 189874898 .

^ Katz, Tamar Kricheli; Regev, Tali; Lavie, Shay; Porat, Haggai; Avraham, Ronen (24 July 2020).

"Those who tan and those who don't: A natural experiment on colorism" .

PLOS ONE .

15 (7): e0235438.

Bibcode : 2020PLoSO..1535438K .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0235438 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 7380621 .

PMID 32706822 .

^ Lynn, Michael; Sturman, Michael; Ganley, Christie; Adams, Elizabeth; Douglas, Mathew; McNeil, Jessica (2008).

"Consumer Racial Discrimination in Tipping: A Replication and Extension" .

Journal of Applied Social Psychology .

38 (4): 1045– 1060.

doi : 10.1111/j.1559-1816.2008.00338.x .

hdl : 1813/71558 .

ISSN 0021-9029 .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2019 . Retrieved 28 July 2019 .

^ "The Effects of 'Ban the Box' on the Employment of Black Men" .

Econofact . 9 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2019 . Retrieved 20 January 2019 .

^ "Colorism In Media – The West Georgian" . 14 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 March 2021 .

^ Woodard, K (2000). "Traumatic Shame: Toni Morrison, Televisual Culture, and the Cultural Politics of the Emotions".

Cultural Critique .

46 (1): 210– 240.

doi : 10.2307/1354414 .

JSTOR 1354414 .

^ Pious, Scott; Neptune, Dominique (1997). "Racial and Gender Biases in Magazine Advertising: A Content-Analytic Study".

Psychology of Women Quarterly .

21 (4): 627– 644.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-6402.1997.tb00135.x .

S2CID 12155745 .

^ Hall, R (1995). "The bleaching syndrome: African American's response to cultural domination vis-A-vis skin color".

Journal of Black Studies .

26 (2): 172– 184.

doi : 10.1177/002193479502600205 .

S2CID 143934823 .

^ "The Minstrel Show" .

chnm.gmu.edu . Archived from the original on 28 November 2017 . Retrieved 14 November 2017 .

^ Punyanunt, Narissa. "The Perceived Realism of African American Portrayals on Television".

The Howard Journal of Communications .

^ Garcia, Sandra E. (17 June 2020).

"Where Did BIPOC Come From?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 21 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 September 2020 .

^ Butler, Daniel M.

; Broockman, David E. (1 July 2011). "Do Politicians Racially Discriminate Against Constituents? A Field Experiment on State Legislators".

American Journal of Political Science .

55 (3): 463– 477.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.688.2175 .

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2011.00515.x .

S2CID 55763211 .

^ Broockman, David E. (1 July 2013).

"Black Politicians Are More Intrinsically Motivated to Advance Blacks' Interests: A Field Experiment Manipulating Political Incentives" .

American Journal of Political Science .

57 (3): 521– 536.

doi : 10.1111/ajps.12018 .

S2CID 152518282 .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Enos, Ryan D. (1 January 2016). "What the Demolition of Public Housing Teaches Us about the Impact of Racial Threat on Political Behavior".

American Journal of Political Science .

60 (1): 123– 142.

doi : 10.1111/ajps.12156 .

S2CID 51895998 .

^ "Elections: Issues Related to State Voter Identification Laws [Reissued on February 27, 2015]" .

gao.gov .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2016 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ White, Ariel R.; Nathan, Noah L.; Faller, Julie K. (1 February 2015). "What Do I Need to Vote? Bureaucratic Discretion and Discrimination by Local Election Officials".

American Political Science Review .

109 (1): 129– 142.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055414000562 .

S2CID 145471717 .

^ Cobb, Rachael V.; Greiner; James, D.; Quinn, Kevin M. (14 June 2010). "Can Voter ID Laws Be Administered in a Race-Neutral Manner? Evidence from the City of Boston in 2008".

SSRN 1625041 .

^ Atkeson, Lonna Rae; Bryant, Lisa Ann; Hall, Thad E.; Saunders, Kyle; Alvarez, Michael (1 March 2010). "A new barrier to participation: Heterogeneous application of voter identification policies".

Electoral Studies .

29 (1): 66– 73.

doi : 10.1016/j.electstud.2009.08.001 .

^ a b Ansolabehere, Stephen (1 January 2009). "Effects of Identification Requirements on Voting: Evidence from the Experiences of Voters on Election Day".

PS: Political Science & Politics .

42 (1): 127– 130.

doi : 10.1017/S1049096509090313 .

S2CID 15315808 .

^ Gillespie, June Andra (2015). "Voter Identification and Black Voter Turnout An Examination of Black Voter Turnout Patterns in Georgia, 2000–2014".

Phylon .

52 (2): 43– 67.

JSTOR 43681953 .

^ Hajnal, Zoltan; et al. (2016).

"Voter Identification Laws and the Suppression of Minority Votes" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 March 2016 .

^ Soltas, Evan; Broockman, David E. (23 February 2017). "Taste-Based Discrimination Against Nonwhite Political Candidates: Evidence from a Natural Experiment".

SSRN 2920729 .

^ Wilson, David C.; Davis, Darren W. (2018). "The Racial Double Standardattributing Racial Motivations in Voting Behavior".

Public Opinion Quarterly .

82 : 63– 86.

doi : 10.1093/poq/nfx050 .

^ Fulton, Sarah A; Gershon, Sarah Allen (2018). "Too Liberal to Win? Race and Voter Perceptions of Candidate Ideology".

American Politics Research .

46 (5): 909– 939.

doi : 10.1177/1532673X18759642 .

S2CID 158113285 .

^ Piston, Spencer; Krupnikov, Yanna; Milita, Kerri; Ryan, John Barry (1 March 2018). "Clear as Black and White: The Effects of Ambiguous Rhetoric Depend on Candidate Race".

The Journal of Politics .

80 (2): 000.

doi : 10.1086/696619 .

hdl : 2144/31470 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

S2CID 148940141 .

^ Wilson, David C.; Davis, Darren W. (2018). "Appraisals of President Obama's economic performance: Racial resentment and attributional responsibility".

Electoral Studies .

55 : 62– 72.

doi : 10.1016/j.electstud.2018.08.002 .

ISSN 0261-3794 .

S2CID 158732166 .

^ "How light or dark is Barack Obama's skin? Depends on your political stance…" .

Science . 23 November 2009. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 6 March 2023 .

^ Tokeshi, Matthew (28 August 2018). "Why are African American Governors and U.S. Senators so Rare? Exploring White Voters' Responses to African American Statewide Candidates".

Political Behavior .

42 : 285– 304.

doi : 10.1007/s11109-018-9496-y .

ISSN 0190-9320 .

S2CID 158354009 .

^ a b Cooley, Erin; Brown-Iannuzzi, Jazmin L.; Boudreau, Caroline (2019). "Shifting Stereotypes of Welfare Recipients Can Reverse Racial Biases in Support for Wealth Redistribution".

Social Psychological and Personality Science .

10 (8): 1065– 1074.

doi : 10.1177/1948550619829062 .

S2CID 150926190 .

^ Bateson, Regina (30 June 2019). "Strategic Discrimination".

SSRN 3412626 .

^ Garisto, Daniel.

"Smartphone Data Show Voters in Black Neighborhoods Wait Longer" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 13 October 2019 .

^ Manekin, Devorah; Mitts, Tamar (2021).

"Effective for Whom? Ethnic Identity and Nonviolent Resistance" .

American Political Science Review .

116 : 161– 180.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055421000940 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

S2CID 212409424 .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2021 . Retrieved 14 September 2021 .

^ Bryant, Susan L. (2013). "The Beauty Ideal: The Effects Of European Standards Of Beauty On Black Women".

Columbia Academic Commons . Vol. 4, no. 1. pp.

80– 91.

doi : 10.7916/D8DF6PQ6 .

^ Cunningham, Michael (1995). " "Their ideas of beauty are, on the whole, the same as ours": Consistency and variability in the cross-cultural perception of female physical attractiveness".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

68 (2): 261– 279.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.68.2.261 .

ISSN 1939-1315 .

^ Cunningham 1995 , p. 1995: "All groups of judges made more positive ratings of the Asian and Hispanic targets compared with the Black and White targets. Further analyses indicated that the Asian and Hispanic targets happened to possess significantly larger eye height, eye width, nose width, eyebrow height, smile width, and upper lip width than the White and Black women".

^ Cunningham 1995 , p. 271: "The four-item measure of exposure to Western culture was not reliably associated with giving higher ratings to Whites (r = . 19, n s). The relation of rating Whites to frequency of viewing Western television, for example, was quite low (r=.01)." ^ Hune, Shirley; Nomura, Gail M. (August 2003).

Asian/Pacific Islander American Women: A Historical Anthology . NYU Press. p. 201.

ISBN 978-0-8147-3633-3 .

"The dawning of the new millennium may signal a shift in the cultural importance of racialized gendered bodies. On October 14, 2000, a  Filipina American, Miss Hawaii Angela Perez Baraquio, was crowned Miss America for 2001. A few years earlier another Miss Hawaii, a mixed-race part-Asian American woman named Brook Antoinette Mahealani Lee, won not only the Miss USA competition but the title of 1997 Miss Universe. Such victories do not necessarily mean full acceptance for Asian Americans into the American body politic. However they do signal a breakdown in the hegemony of European-American cultural standards of beauty." ^ Kopkin, Nolan (2019). "Evidence of Own-Race Bias in Heisman Trophy Voting*".

Social Science Quarterly .

100 : 176– 197.

doi : 10.1111/ssqu.12567 .

ISSN 0038-4941 .

S2CID 149976487 .

^ Norris, Davon; Moss-Pech, Corey (2021).

"White Men Can't Jump, but Does It Even Matter? Exit Discrimination in the NBA" .

Social Forces .

100 (3): 961– 989.

doi : 10.1093/sf/soab009 .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2021 . Retrieved 11 March 2021 .

^ Foy, Steven L.; Ray, Rashawn (1 November 2019).

"Skin in the Game: Colorism and the Subtle Operation of Stereotypes in Men's College Basketball" .

American Journal of Sociology .

125 (3): 730– 785.

doi : 10.1086/707243 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

S2CID 213499976 .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Smith, Rory (30 June 2020).

" 'Intelligent' or 'Strong': Study Finds Bias in Soccer Broadcasts" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2020 . Retrieved 30 June 2020 .

^ Wallsten, Kevin; Nteta, Tatishe M.; McCarthy, Lauren A.; Tarsi, Melinda R. (1 March 2017). "Prejudice or Principled Conservatism? Racial Resentment and White Opinion toward Paying College Athletes".

Political Research Quarterly .

70 (1): 209– 222.

doi : 10.1177/1065912916685186 .

ISSN 1065-9129 .

S2CID 152217074 .

Further reading [ edit ] Chesnutt, Charles W.

(July 1898).

"The Wife of His Youth" .

The Atlantic Magazine .

In depth information regarding the Blue Vein Society.

Don't Play In the Sun by Marita Golden ( ISBN 0-385-50786-0 ) Michael G. Hanchard . 2018.

The Spectre of Race: How Discrimination Haunts Western Democracy . Princeton University Press.

Harrison, Matthew S (2010).

"The Often Un-discussed "ism" in America's Work Force" (PDF) .

The Jury Expert .

22 (1): 67– 77.

Hunter, Margaret (2007). "The Persistent Problem of Colorism: Skin Tone, Status, and Inequality".

Sociology Compass .

1 (1): 237– 254.

doi : 10.1111/j.1751-9020.2007.00006.x .

S2CID 11960841 .

Jablonski, Nina G. (10 January 2014). "Living Color".

Living Color: The Biological and Social Meaning of Skin Color . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-28386-2 .

JSTOR 10.1525/j.ctt1pn64b .

Kerr, Audrey E (2005). "The Paper Bag Principle: Of the Myth and the Motion of Colorism".

Journal of American Folklore .

118 (469): 271– 289.

doi : 10.1353/jaf.2005.0031 .

S2CID 144506962 .

Lee, Jennifer, and Frank D. Bean.

The Diversity Paradox: Immigration and the Color Line in Twenty-First Century America . ( russelsage review ) Rondilla, Joanne L, and Spickard, Paul. Is Lighter Better?: Skin-tone Discrimination Among Asian Americans. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2007. Print.

The Color Complex [Revised Edition]: The Politics of Skin Color in a New Millennium by Kathy Russell, Midge Wilson, and Ronald Hall ( ISBN 978-0-307-74423-4 ) Shikibu, Murasaki.

The Tale of Genji . New York: Knopf, 1976. Print.

Lori L. Tharps (2016).

Same Family, Different Colors: Confronting Colorism in America's Diverse Families . Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0807076781 .

The Blacker the Berry by Wallace Thurman ( ISBN 0-684-81580-X ) Verma, Harsh (2011). "Skin 'fairness'-Culturally Embedded Meaning and Branding Implications".

Global Business Review .

12 (2): 193– 211.

doi : 10.1177/097215091101200202 .

S2CID 145725139 .

External links [ edit ] Dealing with Colorism: A Step Towards the African Revolution Black African Focus Mascaro, Thomas A. (22 March 2004).

"Homicide: Life on the Street: progress in portrayals of African American men" .

Journal of Popular Film and Television .

doi : 10.3200/JPFT.32.1.10-19 .

OCLC 4652347 .

S2CID 143574721 .

"The Face of Colorism" . Archived from the original on 12 April 2008 . Retrieved 28 September 2008 .

Origin of Rainbows: Colorism Exposed Documentary abcnews.go.com " Light, Bright, Damn near White " documentary film Shadeism Documentary Archived 25 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Discrimination_based_on_skin_tone&oldid=1306071874 " Category : Discrimination based on skin tone Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles intentionally citing retracted publications Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from October 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with excerpts Use dmy dates from July 2025 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from October 2023 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2023 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 19:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Discrimination based on skin tone 25 languages Add topic

