Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Notable examples 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Transferable development rights 3 languages العربية Deutsch Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in American planning law Transferable development rights (TDR) is a method by which developers can purchase the development rights of certain parcels within a designated "sending district" and transfer the rights to another "receiving district" to increase the density of their new development. The underlying legal concept of a transfer of development rights programme is the notion that all land has a bundle of property rights.

[ 1 ] It is used for controlling land use to complement land-use planning and zoning for more effective urban growth management and land conservation.

Description [ edit ] The TDR process can be considered a tool for controlling urban sprawl by concentrating development. TDR is a legal mechanism offered in some local government jurisdictions as a form of development control. In the United States, TDR are also a way to avoid constitutional takings issues caused by rezoning areas that would otherwise eliminate a significant amount of value from the property. The procedure offers landowners financial incentives or bonuses for the conservation and maintenance of the environmental, heritage or agricultural values of their land. TDR is based on the concept that with land ownership comes the right of use of land, or land development . These land-based development rights can in some jurisdictions be used, unused, sold, or otherwise transferred by the owner of a parcel.

[ 2 ] : 3 [ 3 ] Sending districts are commonly made up of areas with desirable traits that are at risk of being developed such as agricultural lands or wilderness areas, but may also be newly designated historic sites. Alternatively, parcels with buildings that do not use all of their available size have "excess" developable capacity that can be conveyed to other parcels, possibly adjoining the first parcels.

[ 4 ] Receiving districts are typically are located in urban areas that are ripe for development. Receiving districts are generally areas more suited for higher density developments and sending districts are areas with environmental, heritage or agricultural values that the county, city or town wishes to preserve.

[ 4 ] TDR credit banks can be used to store development rights that have been purchased, if a receiving area development project has not yet been identified. This mechanism is used when the time of the sale in the sending area is not concurrent with a development in the receiving area. It is also useful in communities that have the opportunity to purchase the rights from an area of high conservation interest but do not have a development project that can receive higher density at the time. In Massachusetts it is recommended that TDR credit banks be operated by a third party organization that is empowered to negotiate the sale of development rights, such as a non-profit organization or an agency operating within the community.

[ 5 ] Notable examples [ edit ] Preserved land in the Montgomery County, Maryland Agricultural Reserve A widely-noted example of districted TDRs is the Montgomery County, Maryland Agricultural Reserve .

[ 6 ] TDR programs have been implemented in over 200 U.S. communities, [ 2 ] : 25 in several states, including Colorado , [ 7 ] Massachusetts , [ 8 ] Virginia [ 9 ] and Washington .

[ 10 ] New York City has limits to the air rights of each building, but those are freely transferable.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] One of the most famous examples of a TDR is in the case of Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City (1978). The United States Supreme Court held that the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission did not deny the owners of Grand Central Terminal all economic value by denying them the right to build an office building above the station. The terminal owners possessed air rights which could be used as a TDR to build higher than the conventional zoning allowed on their other properties.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Comprehensive planning Environmental planning References [ edit ] ^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 675.

ISBN 978-0415862875 .

^ a b Nelson, Arthur C.; Pruetz, Rick; Woodruff, Doug (2011).

The TDR Handbook: Designing and Implementing Transfer of Development Rights Programs . Washington, D.C.: Island Press.

ISBN 9781610911597 .

^ "Transfer of Development Rights; Fact Sheet" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: American Farmland Trust. April 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-01-16.

^ a b "Smart Growth/Smart Energy Toolkit Modules—Transfer of Development Rights" . Boston, MA: Massachusetts Executive Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs (Mass EEA) . Retrieved 2022-03-05 .

^ "Transfer of Development Rights; Model Bylaw" (PDF) . Smart Growth/Smart Energy Toolkit Module Bylaws. Mass EEA. 2005.

^ "Agricultural Reserve" . Silver Spring, Maryland: Montgomery County Planning Department. 2018-11-05.

^ "Transferable Development Rights Program" .

Property & Land . Boulder County, Colorado . Retrieved 2022-03-05 .

^ "Case Studies — Transfer of Development Rights" .

Energy and Environmental Affairs . Commonwealth of Massachusetts . Retrieved 2022-03-05 .

^ Lloyd, Jr., T. Preston (2012-09-07).

"Transfer of Development Rights in Virginia: Tapping into a Market for Land Use Entitlements" . Richmond, VA: Williams Mulllen.

^ "Transfer of development rights in King County, Washington" .

Sustainable building . King County, Washington. 2019-08-12.

^ Wainwright, Oliver (2019-02-05).

"Super-tall, super-skinny, super-expensive: the 'pencil towers' of New York's super-rich" .

The Guardian .

'It's a cap-and-trade system,' she says, so once air rights are transferred from a low-rise lot, it will stay low for ever. The rules merely allow potential floor area to be shifted, not created.

^ "Transferable Development Rights" .

Department of City Planning . City of New York . Retrieved 2022-03-05 .

^ Sinclair Colman, Michelle (2017-12-18).

"Understanding the Power of Air Rights" .

Future New York . New York, NY: CityRealty.

^ "Accidental Skyline: A blueprint for a more intentional city" .

Initiatives . The Municipal Art Society of New York . Retrieved 2022-03-05 .

^ Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City , 438 U.S.

104 (1978) v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transferable_development_rights&oldid=1252576867 " Categories : Environmental planning Land use Land law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 October 2024, at 23:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transferable development rights 3 languages Add topic

