Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Lyrics 3 Recordings 4 In popular culture 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Far Above Cayuga's Waters 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cornell University alma mater View of Cayuga Lake from Cornell University "Far Above Cayuga's Waters" is Cornell University 's alma mater .  The lyrics were written circa 1870 by roommates Archibald Croswell Weeks (Class of 1872), and Wilmot Moses Smith (Class of 1874), and set to the tune of " Annie Lisle ", a popular 1857 ballad by H. S. Thompson about a heroine dying of tuberculosis .

History [ edit ] "Far Above Cayuga's Waters" as printed in Songs of Cornell in 1906 This song is one of the better-known alma maters in the United States . It is the only alma mater song included in Ronald Herder's 500 Best-Loved Song Lyrics .

[ 1 ] In a novel, Betty Smith called it "the saddest and oldest of all college songs".

[ 2 ] Edward Abbey , in One Life at a Time, Please, mentions a campfire sing in which he contributed "the first line of the only Ivy League song that occurred to me: 'Far above Cayuga's waters . . .

' ".

[ 3 ] The tune has been used since by dozens of universities , colleges , high schools , and camps worldwide. For example, George Penny, a professor at the University of Kansas , wrote his school's alma mater by changing a few words from Cornell's song, "Far above the golden valley...".

Other colleges and universities that have used the same tune include Centenary College of Louisiana , Michigan State University , University of Wisconsin–La Crosse , the College of William and Mary , the Colorado State University , University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Florida A&M University , Syracuse University , Shippensburg University , the University of Missouri , the University of Georgia , the University of Alabama , Indiana University , Wofford College , Spartanburg Methodist College , Ripon College , Birmingham-Southern College , Emory University , University of Akron , Erskine College , Lehigh University , Lewis & Clark College , Moravian College , Xavier University , Acadia University , Salem College , Swarthmore College , Vanderbilt University , Howard Payne University , the American University of Beirut , Chung Chi College of The Chinese University of Hong Kong , Lingnan University , Lingnan (University) College of China's Sun Yat-sen University , Hwa Chong Institution , Chung Ling High School , East Tennessee State University, Winona State University (Minnesota) and even the hoax Plainfield Teacher's College . It is the tune of the alma mater of New York Military Academy , and the camp song of Boy Scout Camp Tesomas near Rhinelander, Wisconsin ; Boy Scout Camp Napowan in Waushara County, Wisconsin ; Camp Minsi in Pocono Summit, Pennsylvania ; [ 4 ] Camp Emerald Bay on Santa Catalina Island, California ; The Depot Christian School in Greenville, Texas; and Camp Becket in the Berkshires.

The song traditionally concludes campus performances by the Cornell University Chorus and Cornell University Glee Club . It is also heard between the second and third periods of men's ice hockey games, halftime or the end of the third quarter of football games, and half time of other Cornell athletic contests attended by the Cornell Big Red Pep Band . A rendition of the tune is also used to conclude all of the school's daily afternoon chime concerts , whose evening performances traditionally ended with the "Evening Song"; the morning concert begins with the "Jennie McGraw Rag" but has no traditional finale.

The originating melody used was the song  "Annie Lisle", composed by; H S  Thompson in 1857, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] the same melody was used as a church hymn and appears as; "There's a book  I love to read"  in the book "Golden bells, or hymns for our children" London, 1899.

Lyrics [ edit ] Lyrics to the alma mater as they appear in the 1976 Cornell commencement program The first two verses are the best known and are usually the only verses sung. The song, however, has six verses and no refrains. However, in common practice, only the first two verses are sung, and they share the lines "Lift the chorus, speed it onward, loud her praises tell; / Hail to thee our Alma Mater! Hail, all hail, Cornell!" Due to this symmetry, whenever only the first two verses are printed or sung, it is customary to consider lines 1–2 and 5–6 as being verses 1 and 2, respectively, and lines 3–4 and 7–8 as being a single repeated refrain: [ 7 ] Verse one Far above Cayuga's waters, With its waves of blue, Stands our noble Alma Mater, Glorious to view.

Refrain Lift the chorus, speed it onward, Loud her praises tell; Hail to thee, our Alma Mater!

Hail, all hail, Cornell!

Verse two Far above the busy humming Of the bustling town, Reared against the arch of heaven, Looks she proudly down.

Recordings [ edit ] The oldest known recording of the song is the Cornell University Glee Club 's recording made on January 2, 1914, at the Columbia Phonograph Company on 38th Street in New York City.  The record was distributed later that year as a 10-inch 78 RPM recording.  The song "Cornell" was recorded on the other side.

[ 8 ] The song has been recorded many times since by Cornell's various vocal and instrumental ensembles.

In popular culture [ edit ] The song was heard in the 1953 film Titanic , in which it is sung by Robert Wagner and Purdue University students.

The song was in Season 2, Episode 8 of Marvel's Agent Carter .

The song was also sung by the a cappella group Here Comes Treble in Season 9, Episode 5 of The Office and by Andy Bernard in Season 9, Episode 22 , during his audition for America's Next A Cappella Sensation .

The tune, with different lyrics, is used in the parting song for the Kellerman Resort in the 1987 film Dirty Dancing .

See also [ edit ] List of Cornell University songs References [ edit ] ^ Herder, Ronald (1998).

500 Best-Loved Song Lyrics . Courier Dover Publications. pp.

94– 95.

ISBN 978-0-486-29725-5 . Retrieved 18 March 2010 .

^ Smith, Betty (2000).

Joy in the Morning . HarperCollins. pp. 177&178.

ISBN 978-0-06-095686-8 . Retrieved 18 March 2010 .

^ Abbey, Edward (1988).

One Life at a Time, Please . Macmillan. p. 87.

ISBN 978-0-8050-0603-2 . Retrieved 18 March 2010 .

^ "About US" .

^ Spaeth, Sigmund (1936).

"The Tune Detective Goes Collegiate" .

The American Scholar .

5 (1): 23– 26.

ISSN 0003-0937 .

JSTOR 41206409 .

OCLC 5543365200 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ Kane, Martin (11 October 1954).

"The Band Plays On" .

Sports Illustrated . Vol. 1, no. 9. p. 39 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ "Cornell Songs" .

Cornell University Glee Club . Archived from the original on 20 November 2008 . Retrieved 6 April 2010 .

^ Cornell Daily Sun, Columbia Records by the Glee Club , Volume XXXIV, Issue 77, 5 January 1914, Page 1 External links [ edit ] Songs of Cornell at Google Books The Borrowing of the Song Article mentioning its use in a song about the fictitious "Plainfield Teacher's College" Archived 20 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category v t e Alma maters of the Ivy League " Alma Mater " ( Brown ) " Stand, Columbia " ( Columbia ) " Far Above Cayuga's Waters " ( Cornell ) " Alma Mater " ( Dartmouth ) " Fair Harvard " ( Harvard ) " Hail, Pennsylvania!

" ( Penn ) " Old Nassau " ( Princeton ) " Bright College Years " ( Yale ) See also Ivy League fight songs Authority control databases MusicBrainz work Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Far_Above_Cayuga%27s_Waters&oldid=1216857056 " Categories : 1870 songs Alma mater songs American college songs Cornell University Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 April 2024, at 11:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Far Above Cayuga's Waters 1 language Add topic

