Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Club history 3 Education 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Boone and Crockett Club 2 languages العربية Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Non-profit organisation in the USA This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Boone and Crockett Club" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Boone and Crockett Club Formation December 21, 1887 ; 137 years ago ( 1887-12-21 ) Founders Theodore Roosevelt , George Bird Grinnell Type 501(c)(3) nonprofit advocacy organization Headquarters Missoula, Montana , US Website boone-crockett .org The Boone and Crockett Club is an American nonprofit organization that advocates fair chase hunting in support of habitat conservation . The club is North America's oldest wildlife and habitat conservation organization, founded in the United States in 1887 by Theodore Roosevelt and George Bird Grinnell . The club was named in honor of hunter-heroes of the day, Daniel Boone and Davy Crockett , whom the club's founders viewed as pioneering men who hunted extensively while opening the American frontier , but realized the consequences of overharvesting game. In addition to authoring a famous " fair chase " statement of hunter ethics, [ 1 ] the club worked for the expansion and protection of Yellowstone National Park and the establishment of American conservation in general. The club and its members were also responsible for the elimination of commercial market hunting , creation of the National Park and National Forest Services , National Wildlife Refuge system, wildlife reserves , and funding for conservation, all under the umbrella of what is known today as the North American Model of Wildlife Conservation .

[ 2 ] The club is headquartered in Missoula, Montana , which is also the home of the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation .

Background [ edit ] Key members of the club have included Theodore Roosevelt , George Bird Grinnell , Madison Grant , Charles Alexander Sheldon , William Tecumseh Sherman , Boies Penrose , [ 3 ] Gifford Pinchot , Frederick Russell Burnham , Charles Deering and Aldo Leopold .

[ 4 ] The club continues its role as a think-tank, known to the public primarily for maintaining a scoring and data collection system by which native North American big game animals are measured and tracked as a gauge of successful wildlife management.

The structure of the club consists of 17 staff members, 100 Regular Members, 159 Professional Members, and thousands of Club Associates.

Club history [ edit ] In December, 1887, Theodore Roosevelt proposed the formation of the Boone and Crockett Club at a dinner at his residence in New York City.

[ 5 ] In January, 1888, the club was organized with the following officers and members: President: Theodore Roosevelt Secretary: Archibald Rogers Members: Albert Bierstadt , Heber R. Bishop , Benjamin F. Bristow, J. Coleman Drayton, D.G. Elliott, George Bird Grinnell, Arnold Hague, James E. Jones, Clarence King, Wm. H. Merrill Jr, Thomas Paton, John J. Pierrepont, W. Hallett Phillips, E. P. Rogers, Elliott Roosevelt, J.E. Roosevelt, J. W. Roosevelt, Rutherfurd Stuyvesant , W. A. Wadsworth, Bronson Rumsey, Lawrence Rumsey and W.D. Pickett.

The Club set out with the goals of promoting skill with hunting firearms, exploring the wilderness of the United States , preservation of native big game animals, observing and recording wildlife, and engaging in discourse about opinions and ideas pertaining to exploration, hunting, and travel.

[ 6 ] Education [ edit ] The Boone and Crockett Club offers many educational camps and workshops through the Boone and Crockett Club Education Programs [ 7 ] held at the Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Ranch [ 8 ] in Dupuyer, Montana. These education programs at the TRM Ranch are not federally funded. They are supported by the Boone and Crockett Club and by private foundations committed to K–12 education.

The club's Lee and Penny Anderson Conservation Education Program is located on the club's 6,060-acre working cattle ranch, the Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Ranch (TRMR) and bases out of their 5,000-square-foot Rasmuson Wildlife Conservation Center (RWCC). RWCC's typical operating season is from April 1 to October 31. A variety of educational programs are offered during this time, including but not limited to: K–12 Conservation Education-related field trips, the Boone and Crockett Club's own Outdoor Adventure Camps (five-day residential camps for middle school- and high school-aged youth), a nationally accredited Boy Scouts of America High Adventure Camp called MOHAB (Montana High Adventure Base), a series of hunter education courses, shooting sports events and is available for rental to public, private, NGO, agency and other groups.

See also [ edit ] Grancel Fitz James Jordan Buck Hole in the Horn Buck References [ edit ] ^ "Boone and Crockett Club | Fair Chase Statement | Wildlife Conservation | Deer Hunting | Elk Hunting | Big Game Hunting" . Boone-crockett.org . Retrieved 2014-03-08 .

^ The Wildlife Society – The North American Model of Wildlife Conservation and Public Trust Doctrine Archived 2012-01-19 at the Wayback Machine ^ Fraley, John.

"A grizzly attack on Mount Penrose" .

hungryhorsenews.com . Hungry Horse News . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

^ American Big Game: Members of the Boone and Crockett Club ^ Katz, Alan (July 7, 2021).

"How Yellowstone Was Saved by a Teddy Roosevelt Dinner Party and a Fake Photo in a Gun Magazine" .

Unbound . Smithsonian Libraries.

Archived from the original on 2021-07-07 . Retrieved 2022-01-11 .

^ Grantham, Dewey W. (1971).

Theodore Roosevelt . Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. p. 104.

ISBN 0137832419 .

^ "Boone and Crockett Club | Education | Wildlife Conservation | Deer Hunting | Elk Hunting | Big Game Hunting" . Boone-crockett.org. 2012-03-08 . Retrieved 2014-03-08 .

^ "Boone and Crockett Club | Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Ranch | Wildlife Conservation | Deer Hunting | Elk Hunting | Big Game Hunting" . Boone-crockett.org. Archived from the original on August 6, 2002 . Retrieved 2014-03-08 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Boone and Crockett Club's Historical Records (University of Montana Archives) Philip L. Wright's Boone and Crockett Club Papers, 1902-1997 (University of Montana Archives) v t e Davy Crockett History Family and personal life Davy Crockett John Crockett John Wesley Crockett Charles C. Walcutt East Tennessee Historical Society Limestone, Tennessee State of Franklin Rogersville Historic District List of Freemasons Politics United States political families Tennessee's 9th congressional district Tennessee's 12th congressional district U.S. 20th House of Representatives Texas and the Alamo Battle of the Alamo List of Alamo defenders Siege of the Alamo Susanna Dickinson Francisco Antonio Ruiz Sterne-Hoya House Honors and memorials Tennessee Colonel David Crockett statue Crockett County Crockett Tavern Museum David Crockett Birthplace State Park Davy Crockett Lake, Greene County Davy Crockett Lake, Crockett County David Crockett State Park David Crockett High School Texas Alamo Cenotaph Davy Crockett National Forest Crockett County Crockett, Texas Crockett High School David Crockett High School Davy Crockett Lake Fort Crockett Popular culture Television Davy Crockett miniseries Davy Crockett: King of the Wild Frontier Davy Crockett and the River Pirates The Alamo: 13 Days to Glory Tall Tales and Legends James A. Michener's Texas A Line in the Sand MythBusters – "Davy Crockett's Magic Bullet" Film The Alamo (1960) The Alamo (2004) Davy Crockett – In Hearts United Davy Crockett (1910) Martyrs of the Alamo Davy Crockett (1916) With Davy Crockett at the Fall of the Alamo The Painted Stallion Heroes of the Alamo Man of Conquest The Man from the Alamo The Last Command The First Texan Alamo: The Price of Freedom Plays Davy Crockett Music The Ballad of Davy Crockett Riders in the Sky Present: Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier Publications Bibliography of works on Davy Crockett Roswell, Texas (webcomic) Misc Boone and Crockett Club Disney's Davy Crockett Ranch Davy Crockett Explorer Canoes Walt Disney's Riverfront Square v t e Theodore Roosevelt 26th President of the United States (1901–1909) 25th Vice President of the United States (1901) 33rd Governor of New York (1899–1900) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (1897–1898) New York City Police Commissioner (1895–1897) Presidency ( timeline ) First inauguration historic site Second inauguration Foreign policy " Square Deal " Booker T. Washington dinner Conservation Newlands Reclamation Act Transfer Act of 1905 Antiquities Act Pelican Island Devils Tower National Monument Muir Woods National Monument United States Forest Service , United States Reclamation Service National Wildlife Refuge System Roosevelt Arch Conference of Governors Northern Securities Company breakup court case Anthracite coal strike of 1902 Pure Food and Drug Act Food and Drug Administration Meat Inspection Act Expediting Act Elkins Act Hepburn Act Aldrich–Vreeland Act Tillman Act of 1907 Federal Employers Liability Act Kinkaid Act Big stick ideology Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty Panama Canal Zone Panama Canal Venezuelan crisis Roosevelt Corollary Occupation of Cuba Russo-Japanese War Treaty of Portsmouth 1906 Nobel Peace Prize Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907 Army War College Roosevelt Hall College football meetings Bureau of Investigation Department of Commerce and Labor Bureau of Corporations Keep Commission Inland Waterways Commission Bureau of the Census Great White Fleet Perdicaris affair Cabinet White House West Wing State of the Union Address, 1901 1906 1908 White House desk Federal judiciary appointments Other events Spanish–American War Rough Riders Battle of Las Guasimas Battle of San Juan Hill Great Rapprochement "Bull Moose" Progressive Party New Nationalism Assassination attempt Boone and Crockett Club Smithsonian–Roosevelt African expedition "River of Doubt" Amazonian expedition Roosevelt's World War I volunteers Life and homes Birthplace, boyhood home replica Sagamore Hill Home and Museum Maltese Cross Cabin Elkhorn Ranch Pine Knot cabin New York State Executive Mansion Gravesite Writings and speeches Theodore Roosevelt bibliography The Naval War of 1812 (1882 book) "The Strenuous Life" (1899 speech) League to Enforce Peace "Citizenship in a Republic" (1910 speech) "Progressive Cause Greater Than Any Individual" (1912 post-assassination-attempt speech) Theodore Roosevelt: An Autobiography (1913 book) The Forum magazine articles Theodore Roosevelt Cyclopedia Archival collections Elections 1898 New York state election Republican National Convention: 1900 1904 1912 1916 United States presidential elections: 1900 1904 1912 Legacy Bibliography Mount Rushmore Mount Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Center and Digital Library White House Roosevelt Room Theodore Roosevelt National Park Theodore Roosevelt Wilderness Theodore Roosevelt Island Roosevelt National Forest Roosevelt Park (San Antonio) Roosevelt Study Center Theodore Roosevelt Association Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins Statues New York City Portland, Oregon Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Park Monument Assemblage Theodore Roosevelt Monument Roosevelt Memorial, Portland, Oregon Proposed presidential library Theodore Roosevelt United States Courthouse Roosevelt River Theodore Roosevelt Bridge Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Bridge Theodore Roosevelt Award SS President Roosevelt USS Theodore Roosevelt (1906 , 1961 , 1984 ) Roosevelt Road U.S. postage stamps Popular culture Teddy bear "Speak softly, and carry a big stick" Books Films Terrible Teddy, the Grizzly King , 1901 film The 'Teddy' Bears , 1907 film Roosevelt in Africa , 1910 documentary The Rough Riders , 1927 film Teddy, the Rough Rider , 1940 film Rough Riders , 1997 miniseries The Roosevelts , 2014 documentary Theodore Roosevelt , 2022 miniseries Elkhorn , 2024 series Related Political positions " Bully pulpit " Ananias Club " Nature fakers " League to Enforce Peace A Guest of Honor " Muckraker " " Roosevelt Republican " Barnes vs. Roosevelt libel trial Family Alice Hathaway Lee (first wife) Edith Kermit Carow (second wife) Alice Lee Roosevelt (daughter) Theodore Roosevelt III (son) Kermit Roosevelt (son) Ethel Carow Roosevelt (daughter) Archibald Roosevelt (son) Quentin Roosevelt (son) Theodore Roosevelt IV (grandson) Cornelius V. S. Roosevelt III (grandson) Quentin Roosevelt II (grandson) Kermit Roosevelt Jr.

(grandson) Joseph Willard Roosevelt (grandson) Edith Roosevelt Derby (granddaughter) Theodora Roosevelt (granddaughter) Theodore Roosevelt Sr.

(father) Martha Bulloch Roosevelt (mother) Anna "Bamie" Roosevelt (sister) Elliott Bulloch Roosevelt (brother) Corinne Roosevelt (sister) Cornelius Roosevelt (grandfather) James Stephens Bulloch (grandfather) James Alfred Roosevelt (uncle) Robert Barnhill Roosevelt Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (niece) Gracie Hall Roosevelt (nephew) Pete (dog) ← William McKinley William Howard Taft → ← Garret Hobart Category v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boone_and_Crockett_Club&oldid=1302222029 " Categories : Environmental organizations based in Montana Hunting in the United States Hunting records Non-profit organizations based in Montana Organizations based in Missoula, Montana 1888 establishments in Montana Territory Cultural depictions of Davy Crockett Cultural depictions of Daniel Boone Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 03:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boone and Crockett Club 2 languages Add topic

