Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties 2 History 3 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 3.1 Countably infinite sets 3.2 Uncountably infinite sets 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Infinite set 33 languages العربية Беларуская Български Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lombard Македонски Nederlands Português Română Русский Slovenčina کوردی Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set that is not a finite set This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Infinite set" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Set Theory Image In set theory , an infinite set is a set that is not a finite set .

Infinite sets may be countable or uncountable .

[ 1 ] Properties [ edit ] The set of natural numbers (whose existence is postulated by the axiom of infinity ) is infinite.

[ 1 ] It is the only set that is directly required by the axioms to be infinite. The existence of any other infinite set can be proved in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC), but only by showing that it follows from the existence of the natural numbers.

A set is infinite if and only if for every natural number, the set has a subset whose cardinality is that natural number.

[ 2 ] If the axiom of choice holds, then a set is infinite if and only if it includes a countable infinite subset.

If a set of sets is infinite or contains an infinite element, then its union is infinite. The power set of an infinite set is infinite.

[ 3 ] Any superset of an infinite set is infinite. If an infinite set is partitioned into finitely many subsets, then at least one of them must be infinite. Any set which can be mapped onto an infinite set is infinite. The Cartesian product of an infinite set and a nonempty set is infinite. The Cartesian product of an infinite number of sets, each containing at least two elements, is either empty or infinite; if the axiom of choice holds, then it is infinite.

If an infinite set is a well-ordered set , then it must have a nonempty, nontrivial subset that has no greatest element.

In ZF, a set is infinite if and only if the power set of its power set is a Dedekind-infinite set , having a proper subset equinumerous to itself.

[ 4 ] If the axiom of choice is also true, then infinite sets are precisely the Dedekind-infinite sets.

If an infinite set is a well-orderable set , then it has many well-orderings which are non-isomorphic.

History [ edit ] Important ideas discussed by David Burton in his book The History of Mathematics: An Introduction include how to define "elements" or parts of a set, how to define unique elements in the set, and how to prove infinity.

[ 5 ] Burton also discusses proofs for different types of infinity, including countable and uncountable sets.

[ 5 ] Topics used when comparing infinite and finite sets include ordered sets , cardinality, equivalency, coordinate planes , universal sets , mapping, subsets, continuity, and transcendence .

[ 5 ] Cantor's set ideas were influenced by trigonometry and irrational numbers. Other key ideas in infinite set theory mentioned by Burton, Paula, Narli and Rodger include real numbers such as π , integers, and Euler's number .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Both Burton and Rogers use finite sets to start to explain infinite sets using proof concepts such as mapping, proof by induction, or proof by contradiction.

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] Mathematical trees can also be used to understand infinite sets.

[ 8 ] Burton also discusses proofs of infinite sets including ideas such as unions and subsets.

[ 5 ] In Chapter 12 of The History of Mathematics: An Introduction , Burton emphasizes how mathematicians such as Zermelo , Dedekind , Galileo , Kronecker , Cantor, and Bolzano investigated and influenced infinite set theory. Many of these mathematicians either debated infinity or otherwise added to the ideas of infinite sets. Potential historical influences, such as how Prussia's history in the 1800s, resulted in an increase in scholarly mathematical knowledge, including Cantor's theory of infinite sets.

[ 5 ] One potential application of infinite set theory is in genetics and biology.

[ 9 ] Examples [ edit ] Countably infinite sets [ edit ] The set of all integers , {..., −1, 0, 1, 2, ...} is a countably infinite set. The set of all even integers is also a countably infinite set, even if it is a proper subset of the integers.

[ 3 ] The set of all rational numbers is a countably infinite set as there is a bijection to the set of integers.

[ 3 ] Uncountably infinite sets [ edit ] The set of all real numbers is an uncountably infinite set. The set of all irrational numbers is also an uncountably infinite set.

[ 3 ] The set of all subsets of the integers is uncountably infinite.

See also [ edit ] Aleph number Cardinal number Ordinal number References [ edit ] ^ a b Bagaria, Joan (2019), "Set Theory" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2019-11-30 ^ Boolos, George (1998).

Logic, Logic, and Logic (illustrated ed.). Harvard University Press. p. 262.

ISBN 978-0-674-53766-8 .

^ a b c d Caldwell, Chris.

"The Prime Glossary — Infinite" .

primes.utm.edu . Retrieved 2019-11-29 .

^ Boolos, George (1994), "The advantages of honest toil over theft", Mathematics and mind (Amherst, MA, 1991) , Logic Comput. Philos., Oxford Univ. Press, New York, pp.

27– 44, MR 1373892 . See in particular pp. 32–33 .

^ a b c d e f g Burton, David (2007).

The History of Mathematics: An Introduction (6th ed.). Boston: McGraw Hill. pp.

666– 689.

ISBN 9780073051895 .

^ Pala, Ozan; Narli, Serkan (2020-12-15).

"Role of the Formal Knowledge in the Formation of the Proof Image: A Case Study in the Context of Infinite Sets" .

Turkish Journal of Computer and Mathematics Education .

11 (3): 584– 618.

doi : 10.16949/turkbilmat.702540 .

S2CID 225253469 .

^ a b Rodgers, Nancy (2000).

Learning to reason: an introduction to logic, sets and relations . New York: Wiley.

ISBN 978-1-118-16570-6 .

OCLC 757394919 .

^ Gollin, J. Pascal; Kneip, Jakob (2021-04-01).

"Representations of Infinite Tree Sets" .

Order .

38 (1): 79– 96.

arXiv : 1908.10327 .

doi : 10.1007/s11083-020-09529-0 .

ISSN 1572-9273 .

S2CID 201646182 .

^ Shelah, Saharon; Strüngmann, Lutz (2021-06-01).

"Infinite combinatorics in mathematical biology" .

Biosystems .

204 : 104392.

Bibcode : 2021BiSys.20404392S .

doi : 10.1016/j.biosystems.2021.104392 .

ISSN 0303-2647 .

PMID 33731280 .

S2CID 232298447 .

External links [ edit ] A Crash Course in the Mathematics Of Infinite Sets v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Infinite_set&oldid=1289673302 " Categories : Basic concepts in infinite set theory Cardinal numbers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2011 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 03:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Infinite set 33 languages Add topic

