Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History 3 Religious laws about inheritance Toggle Religious laws about inheritance subsection 3.1 Jewish laws 3.2 Christian laws 3.3 Islamic laws 4 Inequality Toggle Inequality subsection 4.1 Social stratification 4.2 Sociological and economic effects of inheritance inequality 4.3 Dynastic wealth 4.4 Soviet response to inheritance 5 Taxation 6 Inheritance and pensions Toggle Inheritance and pensions subsection 6.1 United Arab Emirates 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Inheritance 76 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Башҡортса Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sicilianu Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Practice of passing on property upon the death of individuals This article is about passing on of property or other rights or obligations after a person's death. For inheritance of genes, see heredity . For other uses, see Inheritance (disambiguation) .

"Heir" redirects here. For other uses, see Heir (disambiguation) .

From William Hogarth 's A Rake's Progress . "The Young Heir Takes Possession Of The Miser's Effects".

Inheritance is the practice of receiving private property , titles , debts , entitlements, privileges , rights , and obligations upon the death of an individual . The rules of inheritance differ among societies and have changed over time. Officially bequeathing private property and/or debts can be performed by a testator via will , as attested by a notary or by other lawful means.

Terminology [ edit ] In law, an heir ( FEM (obs): heiress ) is a person who is entitled to receive a share of property from a decedent (a person who died), subject to the rules of inheritance in the jurisdiction where the decedent was a citizen, or where the decedent died or owned property at the time of death.

The inheritance may be either under the terms of a will or by intestacy laws if the deceased had no will. However, the will must comply with the laws of the jurisdiction at the time it was created or it will be declared invalid (for example, some states do not recognise handwritten wills as valid, or only in specific circumstances) and the intestacy laws then apply.

The exclusion from inheritance of a person who was an heir in a previous will, or would otherwise be expected to inherit, is termed disinheritance .

A person does not become an heir before the death of the deceased, since the exact identity of the persons entitled to inherit is determined only then. Members of ruling noble or royal houses who are expected to become heirs are called heirs apparent if first in line and incapable of being displaced from inheriting by another claim; otherwise, they are heirs presumptive . There is a further concept of joint inheritance, pending renunciation by all but one, which is called coparceny .

In modern law, the terms ‘'inheritance'’ and '‘heir’' apply only to property passed by intestate succession –  that is, from a person who dies without a will. Property distributed under a will passes to beneficiaries , who may be called [ a ] devisees for real property , legatees for money, and recipients of bequests for other personal property .

Except in some jurisdictions where a person cannot be legally disinherited (such as the US state of Louisiana , which allows disinheritance only under specifically enumerated circumstances [ 1 ] ), a person who would otherwise be an heir [ b ] may be disinherited completely under the terms of a will (an example is that of the will of comedian Jerry Lewis ; his will specifically disinherited his six children by his first wife, and their descendants, leaving his entire estate to his second wife).

[ 2 ] Inheritance has been compared to nepotism .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Further information: Historical inheritance systems Detailed anthropological and sociological studies have been made about customs of patrimonial inheritance, where only male children can inherit. Some cultures also employ matrilineal succession, where property can only pass along the female line, most commonly going to the sister's sons of the decedent; but also, in some societies, from the mother to her daughters. Some ancient societies and most modern states employ egalitarian inheritance, without discrimination based on gender and/or birth order.

Religious laws about inheritance [ edit ] Jewish laws [ edit ] The inheritance is patrimonial. The father —that is, the owner of the land— bequeaths only to his male descendants, so the Promised Land passes from one Jewish father to his sons. According to the Law of Moses , the firstborn son was entitled to receive twice as much of his father's inheritance as the other sons ( Deuteronomy 21:15–17 ).

If there were no living sons and no descendants of any previously living sons, daughters inherit. In Numbers 27, the five daughters of Zelophehad come to Moses and ask for their father's inheritance, as they have no brothers.

[ 4 ] The order of inheritance is set out: a man's sons inherit first, daughters if no sons, brothers if he has no children, and so on.

[ 5 ] Later, in Numbers 36, some of the heads of the families of the tribe of Manasseh come to Moses and point out that, if a daughter inherits and then marries a man not from her paternal tribe, her land will pass from her birth-tribe's inheritance into her marriage-tribe's. So a further rule is laid down: if a daughter inherits land, she must marry someone within her father's tribe.

[ 6 ] (The daughters of Zelophehad marry the sons' of their father's brothers. There is no indication that this was not their choice.) The laws of Jewish inheritance are discussed in the Talmud , [ 7 ] in the Mishneh Torah [ 8 ] and by Saadiah ben Joseph [ 9 ] among other sources. All these sources agree that the firstborn son is entitled to a double portion of his father's estate.

[ 10 ] This means that, for example, if a father left five sons, the firstborn receives a third of the estate and each of the other four receives a sixth. If he left nine sons, the firstborn receives a fifth and each of the other eight receive a tenth.

[ 8 ] [ 11 ] If the eldest surviving son is not the firstborn son, he is not entitled to the double portion.

Philo of Alexandria [ 12 ] and Josephus [ 13 ] also comment on the Jewish laws of inheritance, praising them above other law codes of their time. They also agreed that the firstborn son must receive a double portion of his father's estate.

Christian laws [ edit ] At first, Christianity did not have its own inheritance traditions distinct from Judaism. With the accession of Emperor Constantine in 306, Christians both began to distance themselves from Judaism and to have influence on the law and practices of secular institutions. From the beginning, this included inheritance. The Roman practice of adoption was a specific target, because it was perceived to be in conflict with the Judeo-Christian doctrine of primogeniture . As Stephanie Coontz documents in Marriage, a History (Penguin, 2006), not only succession but the whole constellation of rights and practices that included marriage, adoption, legitimacy, consanguinity, and inheritance changed in Western Europe from a Greco-Roman model to a Judeo-Christian pattern, based on Biblical and traditional Judeo-Christian principles. The transformation was essentially complete in the Middle Ages, although in English-speaking countries there was additional development under the influence of Protestantism . Even when Europe became secularized and Christianity faded into the background, the legal foundation Christendom had laid remained. Only in the era of modern jurisprudence have there been significant changes.

Islamic laws [ edit ] Main article: Islamic inheritance jurisprudence The Quran introduced a number of different rights and restrictions on matters of inheritance, including general improvements to the treatment of women and family life compared to the pre-Islamic societies that existed in the Arabian Peninsula at the time.

[ 14 ] Furthermore, the Quran introduced additional heirs that were not entitled to inheritance in pre-Islamic times, mentioning nine relatives specifically of which six were female and three were male. However, the inheritance rights of women remained different to those of men because in Islam someone always has a responsibility of looking after a woman's expenses. According to 4:11, for example, a son is entitled to twice as much inheritance as a daughter.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The Quran also presented efforts to fix the laws of inheritance, and thus forming a complete legal system. This development was in contrast to pre-Islamic societies where rules of inheritance varied considerably.

[ 14 ] In addition to the above changes, the Quran imposed restrictions on testamentary powers of a Muslim in disposing his or her property.

Three verses of the Quran, 4:11, 4:12 and 4:176,  give specific details of inheritance and shares, in addition to few other verses dealing with testamentary.

[ 17 ] But this information was used as a starting point by Muslim jurists who expounded the laws of inheritance even further using Hadith , as well as methods of juristic reasoning like Qiyas . Nowadays, inheritance is considered an integral part of Sharia law and its application for Muslims is mandatory, though many peoples (see Historical inheritance systems ), despite being Muslim, have other inheritance customs.

Inequality [ edit ] Inheritance by amount and distribution received and action taken with inheritances in Great Britain between 2008 and 2010 The distribution of the inherited wealth has varied greatly among different cultures and legal traditions. In nations using civil law , for example, the right of children to inherit wealth from parents in pre-defined ratios is enshrined in law, [ 18 ] as far back as the Code of Hammurabi (ca. 1750 BC).

[ 19 ] In the US State of Louisiana, the only US state where the legal system is derived from the Napoleonic Code , this system is known as " forced heirship " which prohibits disinheritance of adult children except for a few narrowly defined reasons that a parent is obligated to prove.

[ 20 ] Other legal traditions, particularly in nations using common law , allow inheritances to be divided however one wishes, or to disinherit any child for any reason.

In cases of unequal inheritance, the majority might receive a small amount while the minority inherits a larger amount. The amount of inheritance is often far less than the value of a business initially given to the son, especially when a son takes over a thriving multimillion-dollar business, yet the daughter is given the balance of the actual inheritance amounting to far less than the value of the business that was initially given to the son. This is especially seen in old world cultures, but continues in many families to this day.

[ 21 ] Arguments for eliminating forced heirship include the right to property and the merit of individual allocation of capital over government wealth confiscation and redistribution, but this does not resolve what some [ who?

] describe as the problem of unequal inheritance. In terms of inheritance inequality, some economists and sociologists focus on the inter generational transmission of income or wealth which is said to have a direct impact on one's mobility (or immobility) and class position in society. Nations differ on the political structure and policy options that govern the transfer of wealth.

[ 22 ] According to the American federal government statistics compiled by Mark Zandi in 1985, the average US inheritance was $39,000. In subsequent years, the overall amount of total annual inheritance more than doubled, reaching nearly $200 billion. By 2050, there will be an estimated $25 trillion inheritance transmitted across generations.

[ 23 ] Some researchers have attributed this rise to the baby boomer generation. Historically, the baby boomers were the largest influx of children conceived after WW2. For this reason, Thomas Shapiro suggests that this generation "is in the midst of benefiting from the greatest inheritance of wealth in history".

[ 24 ] Inherited wealth may help explain why many Americans who have become rich may have had a "substantial head start".

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In September 2012, according to the Institute for Policy Studies , "over 60 percent" of the Forbes richest 400 Americans "grew up in substantial privilege", and often (but not always) received substantial inheritances.

[ 27 ] Other research has shown that many inheritances, large or small, are rapidly squandered.

[ 28 ] Similarly, analysis shows that over two-thirds of high-wealth families lose their wealth within two generations, and almost 80% of high-wealth parents "feel the next generation is not financially responsible [and/or competent] enough to handle inheritance".

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Social stratification [ edit ] It has been argued that inheritance plays a significant effect on social stratification . Inheritance is an integral component of family, economic, and legal institutions, and a basic mechanism of class stratification . It also affects the distribution of wealth at the societal level. The total cumulative effect of inheritance on stratification outcomes takes three forms, according to scholars who have examined the subject.

The first form of inheritance is the inheritance of cultural capital (i.e. linguistic styles, higher status social circles, and aesthetic preferences).

[ 31 ] The second form of inheritance is through familial interventions in the form of inter vivos transfers (i.e. gifts between the living), especially at crucial junctures in the life courses. Examples include during a child's milestone stages, such as going to college, getting married, getting a job, and purchasing a home.

[ 31 ] The third form of inheritance is the transfers of bulk estates at the time of death of the testators, thus resulting in significant economic advantage accruing to their children.

[ 32 ] The average age of receiving an inheritance has been estimated at around 60 years.

[ 33 ] The origin of the stability of inequalities is material (personal possessions one is able to obtain) and is also cultural, rooted either in varying child-rearing practices that are geared to socialization according to social class and economic position. Child-rearing practices among those who inherit wealth may center around favoring some groups at the expense of others at the bottom of the social hierarchy .

[ 34 ] Sociological and economic effects of inheritance inequality [ edit ] It is further argued that the degree to which economic status and inheritance is transmitted across generations determines one's life chances in society. Although many have linked one's social origins and educational attainment to life chances and opportunities, education cannot serve as the most influential predictor of economic mobility . In fact, children of well-off parents generally receive better schooling and benefit from material, cultural, and genetic inheritances.

[ 35 ] Likewise, schooling attainment is often persistent across generations and families with higher amounts of inheritance are able to acquire and transmit higher amounts of human capital . Lower amounts of human capital and inheritance can perpetuate inequality in the housing market and higher education.  Research reveals that inheritance plays an important role in the accumulation of housing wealth. Those who receive an inheritance are more likely to own a home than those who do not regardless of the size of the inheritance.

[ 36 ] Often, racial or religious minorities and individuals from socially disadvantaged backgrounds receive less inheritance and wealth.

[ 37 ] As a result, mixed races might be excluded in inheritance privilege and are more likely to rent homes or live in poorer neighborhoods, as well as achieve lower educational attainment compared with whites in America.

[ 37 ] Nations with the highest income and wealth inequalities often have the highest rates of homicide and disease (such as obesity, diabetes, and hypertension) which results in high mortality rates.

[ 38 ] A New York Times article reveals that the U.S. is the world's wealthiest nation, but "ranks twenty-ninth in life expectancy, right behind Jordan and Bosnia" and "has the second highest mortality rate of the comparable OECD countries".

[ 39 ] This has been regarded as highly attributed to the significant gap of inheritance inequality in the country, [ 40 ] although there are clearly other factors such as the affordability of healthcare .

When social and economic inequalities centered on inheritance are perpetuated by major social institutions such as family, education, religion, etc., these differing life opportunities are argued to be transmitted from each generation.  As a result, this inequality is believed to become part of the overall social structure.

[ 41 ] Women's unequal inheritance rights refer to the disparities and discriminatory practices that women face in inheriting property and assets compared to men. These inequalities stem from a combination of legal, cultural, and religious practices that often prioritize male heirs over female ones, resulting in significant socio-economic consequences for women.

Dynastic wealth [ edit ] Dynastic wealth is monetary inheritance that is passed on to generations that did not earn it.

[ 42 ] Dynastic wealth is linked to the term Plutocracy . Much has been written about the rise and influence of dynastic wealth including the bestselling book Capital in the Twenty-First Century by the French economist Thomas Piketty .

[ 43 ] Bill Gates uses the term in his article "Why Inequality Matters".

[ 44 ] Soviet response to inheritance [ edit ] As Communism is founded on the Marxist Labor Theory of Value , any money collected in the course of a lifetime is justified if it was based on the fruits of the person's own labor and not from exploiting others. The first communist government installed after the Russian Revolution resolved to abolish the right of inheritance regardless of being the result of someone's work or exploitation, [ 45 ] with some exceptions.

Taxation [ edit ] Main article: Inheritance tax Many states have inheritance taxes or estate taxes , under which a portion of any inheritance or estate becomes government revenue .

Inheritance and pensions [ edit ] United Arab Emirates [ edit ] In the United Arab Emirates, government pensions can, under specific conditions, be transferred to heirs after the death of a pensioner. This reflects a broader approach in some countries to support families of deceased retirees.

[ 46 ] See also [ edit ] Beneficiary – Person or other legal entity who receives money or other benefits from a benefactor Civil law – Legal system originating in Western Europe Common law – Law created by judicial precedent Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Digital inheritance – Passing down of digital assets after a person's death Inheritance law in ancient Rome – Roman Legal Concept Inheritance law in Bulgaria Inheritance law in Canada Inheritance law in Switzerland – Succession of rights and obligations of a deceased person Smart contract – Contractual transaction on a decentralized platform Transformative asset – Concept devised by Thomas Shapiro Estate planning – Process of planning for inheritance of property Family law – Area of the law that deals with family matters and domestic relations Notes [ edit ] ^ precise terminology depends on jurisdiction ^ as would be the case if were there no will and distribution if the estate according to the relevant intestacy laws would apply References [ edit ] ^ "LSU Law: Louisiana Civil Code" .

lcco.law.lsu.edu . Retrieved 2022-07-19 .

^ McLevy, Alex (September 22, 2017).

"Jerry Lewis' actual kids excluded from his will" .

The A.V. Club .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2017 . Retrieved September 28, 2017 .

^ Pérez-González, Francisco (1 November 2006). "Inherited Control and Firm Performance".

American Economic Review .

96 (5): 1559– 1588.

doi : 10.1257/aer.96.5.1559 .

ISSN 0002-8282 .

^ Hebrew-English Bible Numbers 27:1–4 ^ Hebrew-English Bible Numbers 27:7–11 ^ Hebrew-English Bible Numbers 36 ^ In tractate Baba Bathra ^ a b "Nachalot - Chapter 2" .

www.chabad.org .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2013 . Retrieved 28 September 2017 .

^ Saʻadia ben Joseph, Joel Müller (28 September 1897).

"Sefer ha-yerushot: ʻim yeter ha-mikhtavim be-divre ha-halakhah be-ʻAravit uve-ʻIvrit uve-Aramit" . Ernest Leroux . Retrieved 28 September 2017 – via Internet Archive.

^ Hebrew-English Bible Deuteronomy 21:17 ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2013-04-02 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Spec. Leg. 2.130 ^ Ant. 4.249 ^ a b C.E. Bosworth; et al., eds. (1993). "Mīrāth".

Encyclopaedia of Islam . Vol. 7 (second ed.). Brill Academic Publishers.

ISBN 90-04-09419-9 .

^ Quran 4:11 ^ "The Quranic Arabic Corpus - Translation" .

corpus.quran.com .

Archived from the original on 1 March 2017 . Retrieved 28 September 2017 .

^ Quran 4:11 , 4:12 , 4:176 ^ Julia Twigg and Alain Grand.

Contrasting legal conceptions of family obligation and financial reciprocity in the support of older people: France and England Archived 2018-02-01 at the Wayback Machine Ageing & Society, 18(2) March 1998, pp. 131-146 ^ Edmond N. Cahn. Restraints on Disinheritance University of Pennsylvania Law Review and American Law Register, Vol. 85, No. 2 (Dec., 1936), pp. 139-153 ^ 43 Loy. L. Rev. 1 (1997-1998) The New Forced Heirship in Louisiana: Historical Perspectives, Comparative Law Analyses and Reflections upon the Integration of New Structures into a Classical Civil Law System Archived 2018-04-29 at the Wayback Machine ^ Davies, James B. "The Relative Impact of Inheritance and Other Factors on Economic Inequality". The Quarterly Journal of Economics , Vol. 97, No. 3, pp. 471 ^ Angel, Jacqueline L. Inheritance in Contemporary America: The Social Dimensions of Giving across Generations. p. 35 ^ Marable, Manning. "Letter From America: Inheritance, Wealth and Race." Google pages.com Archived 2008-12-16 at the Wayback Machine ^ Shapiro, Thomas M. The Hidden Cost of Being African American: How Wealth Perpetuates Inequality. Oxford University Press. 2004. p. 5 ^ Bruenig, Matt (March 24, 2014).

"You call this a meritocracy? How rich inheritance is poisoning the American economy" .

Salon .

Archived from the original on July 31, 2014 . Retrieved August 24, 2014 .

^ Staff (March 18, 2014).

"Inequality – Inherited wealth" .

The Economist .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2014 . Retrieved August 24, 2014 .

^ Pizzigati, Sam (September 24, 2012).

"The 'Self-Made' Hallucination of America's Rich" .

Institute for Policy Studies . Retrieved August 24, 2014 .

^ Elizabeth O'Brien.

One in three Americans who get an inheritance blow it Archived 2018-02-01 at the Wayback Machine , Market Watch.com ^ Chris Taylor.

70% of Rich Families Lose Their Wealth by the Second Generation Archived June 28, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , Time.com, June 17, 2015 ^ Legacy Matters ^ a b (Edited By) Miller, Robert K., McNamee, Stephen J.  Inheritance and Wealth in America. p. 2 ^ (Edited By) Miller, Robert K., McNamee, Stephen L. Inheritance and Wealth in America. p. 4 ^ Sturrock, David; Joyce, Robert; Bourquin, Pascale (22 July 2020).

Inheritances and inequality within generations (PDF) (Report). The IFS.

doi : 10.1920/re.ifs.2020.0173 .

ISBN 978-1-912805-93-8 . Retrieved 30 July 2025 .

^ Clignet, Remi. Death, Deeds, and Descendants: Inheritance in Modern America. p. 3 ^ Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert, "The Inheritance of Inequality." Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 16, No. 3, 2002, p. 4 ^ Flippen, Chenoa A. "Racial and Ethnic Inequality in Homeownership and Housing Equity." The Sociological Quarterly, Volume 42, No. 2 p. 134 ^ a b Strand, Palma Joy (2010).

"Inheriting Inequality: Wealth, Race, and the Laws of Succession" (PDF) .

Oregon Law Review .

89 (2): 453– 503.

hdl : 1794/10955 – via University of Oregon Scholars' Bank.

^ page 20 of "The Spirit Level"by Wilkinson & Pickett, Bloomsbury Press 2009 ^ "How do mortality rates in the U.S. compare to other countries?" .

^ Dubner, Stephen. "How Big of a Deal Is Income Inequality? A Guest Post". The New York Times . August 27, 2008.

^ Rokicka, Ewa. "Local policy targeted at reducing inheritance of inequalities in European countries." May 2006.

Lodz.pl Archived 2008-12-16 at the Wayback Machine (in Polish) ^ John J. Miller, "Open the FloodGates" , "The Wall Street Journal", July 7, 2006 ^ Piketty, Thomas, "Capital in the Twenty-First Century". Harvard University Press, Mar 10, 2014 ^ BILL GATES, "Why Inequality Matters" , "LinkedIn", 15 October 2014 ^ "Abolition of Inheritance" .

Seventeen Moments in Soviet History . 2015-08-26 . Retrieved 2021-01-06 .

^ Kazienė (2024-04-15).

"The country where pension payments continue to heirs" .

Senjorų svetainė (in Lithuanian) . Retrieved 2025-07-07 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Inheritance .

"Inheritance" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 14 (11th ed.). 1911.

26 July 2006 USA Today article on dilemma the rich face when leaving wealth to children v t e Family History Rights Household Nuclear family Extended family Conjugal family Immediate family Matrifocal family First-degree relatives Parent mother father Child son daughter Sibling brother sister Second-degree relatives Grandparent Grandchild Uncle / Aunt Niece and nephew Third-degree relatives Great-grandparent Great-grandchild Great-uncle / Great-aunt Cousin Family-in-law Spouse wife husband Parent-in-law Sibling-in-law Child-in-law daughter-in-law son-in-law Stepfamily Stepparent stepfather stepmother Stepchild Stepsibling Kinship terminology Kinship Australian Aboriginal kinship Adoption Affinity Consanguinity Disownment Divorce Estrangement Family of choice Fictive kinship Marriage Nurture kinship Chinese kinship Hawaiian kinship Sudanese kinship Eskimo kinship Iroquois kinship Crow kinship Omaha kinship Genealogy and lineage Bilateral descent Cadet branch Common ancestor Family name Heirloom Heredity Inheritance Lineal descendant collateral descent Matrilineality Patrilineality Progenitor Clan Royal descent Family trees Pedigree chart Genogram Ahnentafel Genealogical numbering systems Seize quartiers Quarters of nobility Relationships Agape (parental love) Eros (marital love) Philia (brotherly love) Storge (familial love) Filial piety Polyfidelity Holidays Mother's Day U.S.

Father's Day Father–Daughter Day Siblings Day National Grandparents Day Parents' Day Children's Day Japan Family Day Canada American Family Day International Day of Families National Family Week UK National Adoption Day Related Breadwinner model Single parent Wedding anniversary Godparent Birth order Only child Middle child syndrome Sociology of the family Museum of Motherhood Astronaut family Dysfunctional family Domestic violence Incest Sibling abuse Sibling estrangement Sibling rivalry v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e High wealth Concepts Capital accumulation Overaccumulation Economic inequality Wealth distribution Income distribution Consumption distribution History of economic inequality International inequality Elite Oligarchy Overclass Plutocracy Plutonomy Broligarchy Primitive accumulation of capital Upper class Nouveau riche (new money) Vieux riche (old money) Luxury goods Veblen goods Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Luxury beliefs People Billionaire Captain of industry High-net-worth individual Magnate Business Millionaire Oligarch Business Russian Ukrainian Robber baron Wealth Concentration Distribution Effect Geography Inheritance Dynastic Estate planning Management National Paper Religion Tax Lists People Forbes list of billionaires List of centibillionaires Female billionaires Richest royals Wealthiest Americans Wealthiest families Organizations Largest companies by revenue Largest corporate profits and losses Largest corporations by market capitalization Largest financial services companies by revenue Largest manufacturing companies by revenue Largest software companies by revenue Largest technology companies by revenue Religious organizations Charities Philanthropists Universities Endowment size Number of billionaire alumni Other Cities by number of billionaires Countries by number of billionaires Countries by total wealth Countries by wealth inequality Wealth inequality in the United States Income inequality in the United States Most expensive items by category Wealthiest animals Related Diseases of affluence Affluenza Acquired situational narcissism Argumentum ad crumenam Prosperity theology Philanthropy Gospel of Wealth The Giving Pledge Philanthrocapitalism Venture philanthropy Sayings The rich get richer and the poor get poorer Socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor Too big to fail Media Das Kapital Plutus Greek god of wealth Superclass List The Theory of the Leisure Class Wealth The Wealth of Nations Category by country Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐d5nm7
Cached time: 20250818083431
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.670 seconds
Real time usage: 0.863 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5008/1000000
Revision size: 30363/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 135864/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3261/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 110774/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.422/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20363720/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  726.609      1 -total
 28.22%  205.019      2 Template:Reflist
 27.72%  201.393     12 Template:Annotated_link
 15.57%  113.107     10 Template:Cite_web
 12.90%   93.765      8 Template:Navbox
  9.29%   67.473      1 Template:Family
  8.15%   59.251      1 Template:Short_description
  5.63%   40.930      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.14%   37.368      2 Template:Pagetype
  3.59%   26.051      1 Template:Who Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15430:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818083431 and revision id 1305008667. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inheritance&oldid=1305008667 " Categories : Inheritance Scots law legal terminology Wills and trusts Ancestors Social stratification Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2018 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 14:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inheritance 76 languages Add topic

