Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Postmodern techniques 2 Notable examples of postmodern theatre 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Postmodern theatre 2 languages Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Style of theatre influenced by postmodern philosophy This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Postmodern theatre" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Postmodernism Preceded by Modernism Postmodernity Deconstruction Hypermodernity Hyperreality Posthumanism Post-structuralism Fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Criminology Dance Feminism Film Television Literature ( Picture books ) Music International relations Philosophy Anarchism Marxism Postpositivism Psychology Political science Theatre Theology and Religion Reactions Criticism Metamodernism Post-postmodernism Remodernism v t e Postmodern theatre is a recent phenomenon in world theatre, coming as it does out of the postmodern philosophy that originated in Europe in the middle of the twentieth century. Postmodern theatre emerged as a reaction against modernist theatre. Most postmodern productions are centered on highlighting the fallibility of definite truth, instead encouraging the audience to reach their own individual understanding. Essentially, thus, postmodern theatre raises questions rather than attempting to supply answers.

Postmodern techniques [ edit ] A postmodern theatrical production might make use of some or all of the following techniques: The accepted norms of seeing and representing the world are challenged and disregarded, while experimental theatrical perceptions and representations are created.

A pastiche of different textualities and media forms are used, including the simultaneous use of multiple art or media forms, and there is the 'theft' of a heterogeneous group of artistic forms.

The narrative needs not be complete but can be broken, paradoxical and imagistic. There is a movement away from linearity to multiplicity (to inter-related webs of stories), where acts and scenes give way to a series of peripatetic dramatic moments.

Characters are fragmented, forming a collection of contrasting and parallel shards stemming from a central idea, theme or traditional character.

Each new performance of a theatrical pieces is a new Gestalt , a unique spectacle, with no intent on methodically repeating a play.

The audience is integral to the shared meaning-making of the performance process and its members are included in the dialogue of the play.

[ 1 ] There is a rejection of the notions of "High" and "Low" art.

[ 1 ] The production exists only in the viewer's mind as what the viewer interprets – nothing more and nothing less.

The rehearsal process in a theatrical production is driven more by shared meaning-making and improvisation, rather than the scripted text.

The play steps back from reality to create its own self-conscious atmosphere. This is sometimes referred to as metatheatre .

While these techniques are often found in postmodern productions they are never part of a centralised movement or style.  Rather, they are tools for authentic introspection, questioning and representation of human experience.

Notable examples of postmodern theatre [ edit ] Griselda Gambaro's Information For Foreigners Ozono Production's Fuerzabruta Heiner Müller's Hamletmachine Magda Romanska's " Opheliamachine " Dimitris Lyacos's With the People from the Bridge Reza Abdoh's " Quotations from a Ruined City " Dummies Theatre Peter Handke , Sprechstück (1966) [ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Postmodernism Postmodernity Poststructuralism Category:Postmodern theatre References [ edit ] ^ a b Pizzato, M. (2019).

Mapping Global Theatre Histories . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 220.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-12727-5_13 .

^ Landry, Olivia (2020). "1 In Defence of Anger: From a History of Social Justice to the Theatre".

Theatre of Anger . University of Toronto Press.

doi : 10.3138/9781487536756-005 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiversity has learning resources about Collaborative play writing Forced Entertainment http://www.forcedentertainment.com Fuerza Bruta http://www.fuerzabruta.net/ Reckless Sleepers http://www.reckless-sleepers.eu v t e Modern drama Genres Huaju Naturalism Modernism Postmodernism Realism History History of theatre 19th century 20th century 20th-century theatre timeline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postmodern_theatre&oldid=1237237898 " Categories : Postmodern works Postmodern theatre Postmodern plays Postmodernism Postmodern art Contemporary art Theatrical genres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 28 July 2024, at 20:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postmodern theatre 2 languages Add topic

