Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 Analysis 3 Influence 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Nature (essay) 4 languages Eesti Français 한국어 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1836 essay by Ralph Waldo Emerson For the essay by Georg Christoph Tobler, see Nature (Tobler essay) . For the essay by John Stuart Mill, see Three Essays on Religion .

This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Emerson by Eastman Johnson, 1846 Nature is a book-length essay written by Ralph Waldo Emerson , published by James Munroe and Company in 1836.

[ 1 ] In the essay Emerson put forth the foundation of transcendentalism , a belief system that espouses a non-traditional appreciation of nature.

[ 2 ] Transcendentalism suggests that the divine, or God, suffuses nature, and suggests that reality can be understood by studying nature.

[ 3 ] Emerson's visit to the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris inspired a set of lectures he later delivered in Boston which were then published.

Within the essay, Emerson divides nature into four usages: Commodity, Beauty, Language, and Discipline. These distinctions define the ways by which humans use nature for their basic needs, their desire for delight, their communication with one another, and their understanding of the world.

[ 4 ] Emerson followed the success of Nature with a speech, " The American Scholar ", which together with his previous lectures laid the foundation for transcendentalism and his literary career.

Synopsis [ edit ] In Nature , Emerson lays out and attempts to solve an abstract problem: that humans do not fully accept nature's beauty. He writes that people are distracted by the demands of the world, whereas nature gives but humans fail to reciprocate. The essay consists of eight sections: Nature, Commodity, Beauty, Language, Discipline, Idealism, Spirit and Prospects. Each section adopts a different perspective on the relationship between humans and nature.

In the essay Emerson explains that to experience the wholeness with nature for which we are naturally suited, we must be separate from the flaws and distractions imposed on us by society. Emerson believed that solitude is the single mechanism through which we can be fully engaged in the world of nature, writing "To go into solitude, a man needs to retire as much from his chamber as from society. I am not solitary whilst I read and write, though nobody is with me. But if a man would be alone, let him look at the stars." [ 5 ] When a person experiences true solitude, in nature, it "take[s] him away". Society, he says, destroys wholeness, whereas "Nature, in its ministry to man, is not only the material, but is also the process and the result. All the parts incessantly work into each other's hands for the profit of man. The wind sows the seed; the sun evaporates the sea; the wind blows the vapor to the field; the ice, on the other side of the planet, condenses rain on this; the rain feeds the plant; the plant feeds the animal; and thus the endless circulations of the divine charity nourish man." [ 6 ] Emerson defines a spiritual relationship. In nature a person finds its spirit and accepts it as the Universal Being. He writes: "Nature is not fixed but fluid. Spirit alters, moulds, it. ... Know then that the world exists for you. For you is the phenomenon perfect." [ 7 ] Analysis [ edit ] Illustration of Emerson's transparent eyeball metaphor in "Nature" by Christopher Pearse Cranch , ca. 1836-1838 Emerson uses spirituality as a major theme in the essay.

[ citation needed ] Emerson believed in re-imagining the divine as something large and visible, which he referred to as nature; such an idea is known as transcendentalism, in which one perceives a new God and a new body, and becomes one with his or her surroundings. Emerson exemplifies transcendentalism, stating, "From the earth, as a shore, I look out into that silent sea. I seem to partake its rapid transformations: the active enchantment reaches my dust, and I dilate and conspire with the morning wind", [ 8 ] postulating that humans and the wind are one. Emerson referred to nature as the "Universal Being"; he believed that there was a spiritual sense of the natural world around him. Depicting this sense of "Universal Being", Emerson writes, "The aspect of nature is devout. Like the figure of Jesus, she stands with bended head, and hands folded upon the breast. The happiest man is he who learns from nature the lesson of worship".

[ 9 ] According to Emerson, there were three spiritual problems addressed about nature for humans to solve: "What is matter? Whence is it? And Whereto?" [ 10 ] Emerson suggests that such questions can be answered with a single answer, as nature's spirit is expressed through humans, "Therefore, that spirit, that is, the Supreme Being, does not build up nature around us, but puts it forth through us".

[ 11 ] Emerson depicts that everything must be spiritual and moral, in which there should be goodness between nature and humans.

[ 12 ] Influence [ edit ] Nature was controversial to some. One review published in January 1837 criticized the philosophies in Nature and disparagingly referred to the beliefs as "Transcendentalist", coining the term by which the group would become known.

[ 13 ] Henry David Thoreau had read Nature as a senior at Harvard College and took it to heart. It eventually became an essential influence for Thoreau's later writings, including his seminal Walden . In fact, Thoreau wrote Walden after living in a cabin on land that Emerson owned. Their longstanding acquaintance offered Thoreau great encouragement in pursuing his desire to be a published author.

[ 14 ] Emerson's views in Nature were also an influence on Charles Stearns Wheeler building a shanty at Flints Pond in 1836. Considered the first Transcendentalist outdoor living experiment, Wheeler used his shanty during his summer vacations from Harvard from 1836 to 1842. Thoreau stayed at Wheeler's shanty for six weeks during the summer of 1837, and got the idea that he wanted to build his own cabin (later realized at Walden in 1845).

[ 15 ] The exact location of the Wheeler shanty site was discovered by Jeff Craig in 2018, after a five-year search effort.

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ Nature . Boston: James Munroe and Company. 1836 . Retrieved February 3, 2018 – via Internet Archive.

^ Liebman, Sheldon W. “Emerson, Ralph Waldo.” The Oxford Encyclopedia of American Literature . Ed. Jay Parini. Oxford University Press, 2004. Web.

^ “Transcendentalism.” The Oxford Dictionary of English . 2010. Web.

^ Emerson, Ralph Waldo. "Nature".

The Oxford Companion to American Literature . Ed. James D. Hart. Rev. Philip W. Leininger. Oxford University Press, 1995. Web.

^ Nature, Chapter I, "Nature." ^ Nature, Chapter II, "Commodity." ^ Nature, Chapter VIII, "Prospects." ^ Nature, Chapter III, "Beauty." ^ Nature, Chapter VII, "Spirit." ^ Nature, Chapter VII, "Spirit." ^ Nature, Chapter VII, "Spirit." ^ Baym, Nina, Wayne Franklin, Philip F. Gura, and Arnold Krupat.

The Norton Anthology of American Literature .

^ Hankins, Barry.

The Second Great Awakening and the Transcendentalists . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2004: 24.

ISBN 0-313-31848-4 ^ Reidhead, Julia. "Henry David Thoreau", The Norton Anthology of American Literature . New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2008. 825–828. Print.

^ Eidson, John Olin (1951).

Charles Stearns Wheeler – Friend of Emerson .

^ Landrigan, Leslie (2021-10-22).

"Charles Stearns Wheeler, the Transcendentalist Pioneer Who Inspired Walden" .

New England Historical Society . Retrieved 2023-09-21 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Nature (book) "Nature" at emerson central "Nature" by Ralph Waldo Emerson (1836) at Oregon State University Nature public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Ralph Waldo Emerson Speeches " The American Scholar " (1837) " Divinity School Address " (1838) " New England Reformers " (1844) Poetry " The Rhodora " (1834) " Concord Hymn " (1836) " Uriel " (1846) " Brahma " (1856) " Boston Hymn " (1863) Essays " Nature " (1836) " Self-Reliance " (1841) " Compensation " (1841) " The Over-Soul " (1841) " Circles " (1841) " The Poet " (1844) " Experience " (1844) " Politics " (1844) Essay collections Essays: First Series (1841) Essays: Second Series (1844) Representative Men (1850) The Conduct of Life (1860) Related Rev. William Emerson (father) Edward Waldo Emerson (son) Mary Moody Emerson (aunt) Ezra Ripley (stepfather) The Atlantic Correspondence with Carlyle " Letter to Martin Van Buren " Ralph Waldo Emerson House The Old Manse Transcendentalism Transcendental Club Concord Museum Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nature_(essay)&oldid=1300323591 " Categories : 1836 essays Essays by Ralph Waldo Emerson Works by Ralph Waldo Emerson Transcendentalism Works published anonymously Environmental literature 1836 in the environment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from January 2018 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 17:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nature (essay) 4 languages Add topic

