Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Honors 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Alexandre-Théophile Vandermonde 26 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French mathematician, musician and chemist This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Alexandre-Théophile Vandermonde (28 February 1735 – 1 January 1796) was a French mathematician, musician, and chemist who worked with Bézout and Lavoisier ; his name is now principally associated with determinant theory in mathematics. He was born in Paris, and died there.

Biography [ edit ] Vandermonde was a violinist, and became engaged with mathematics only around 1770. In Mémoire sur la résolution des équations (1771) he reported on symmetric functions and solution of cyclotomic polynomials ; this paper anticipated later Galois theory (see also abstract algebra for the role of Vandermonde in the genesis of group theory). In Remarques sur des problèmes de situation (1771) he studied knight's tours , and presaged the development of knot theory by explicitly noting the importance of topological features when discussing the properties of knots: "Whatever the twists and turns of a system of threads in space, one can always obtain an expression for the calculation of its dimensions, but this expression will be of little use in practice. The craftsman who fashions a braid, a net, or some knots will be concerned, not with questions of measurement, but with those of position: what he sees there is the manner in which the theads are interlaced" The same year he was elected to the French Academy of Sciences .

Mémoire sur des irrationnelles de différents ordres avec une application au cercle (1772) was on combinatorics , and Mémoire sur l'élimination (1772) on the foundations of determinant theory. These papers were presented to the Académie des Sciences , and constitute all his published mathematical work. The Vandermonde determinant does not make an explicit appearance.

He was professor at the École Normale Supérieure , member of the Conservatoire national des arts et métiers and examiner at the École polytechnique .

Honors [ edit ] A special class of matrices , the Vandermonde matrices are named after him, as is an elementary fact of combinatorics, Vandermonde's identity .

Vandermonde is the secret society of the Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers .

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Knight's Tour Knot theory Vandermonde's identity Vandermonde polynomial Vandermonde matrix Notes [ edit ] ^ Vandermonde : secret society of the Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers.

Further reading [ edit ] Gilbert Faccarello, Du Conservatoire à l'Ecole Normale , Les cahiers d'histoire du CNAM, 2-3 , 17–57, CNAM, Paris, 1993.

[1] Archived 18 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine Jacqueline Hecht, Un exemple de multidisciplinarité : Alexandre Vandermonde (1735-1796) , Population, 4 , 641–676, INED, Paris, 1971.

[2] External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Alexandre-Théophile Vandermonde" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Belgium Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexandre-Théophile_Vandermonde&oldid=1273364582 " Categories : 1735 births 1796 deaths Scientists from Paris 18th-century French mathematicians Linear algebraists Combinatorialists Members of the French Academy of Sciences Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from February 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 1 February 2025, at 23:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alexandre-Théophile Vandermonde 26 languages Add topic

