Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Territorial Use Rights for Fishing (TURF) 2 Seafood safety regulations Toggle Seafood safety regulations subsection 2.1 U.S. labeling of genetically engineered salmon 2.1.1 Canadian labeling of genetically engineered salmon 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fisheries law 3 languages العربية فارسی Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Regulations regarding fishing activities Part of a series on Environmental law Pollution control law Environmental impact assessment Air quality law Water quality law Waste management law Environmental cleanup law Natural resources law Species protection Water resources law Mining law Forestry law Fisheries law Game law Reference materials Environmental journals International environmental agreements Environmental laws by country Environmental lawsuits Environmental ministries Supranational environmental agencies Related topics Administrative law Bankruptcy law Climate change litigation Earth jurisprudence Earth law Ecocide Energy law Environmental crime poaching Environmental personhood Environmental justice Insurance law International law Land law Land use Law of the sea Property law Public trust doctrine Rights of nature Right to a healthy environment War and environmental law Wild law v t e Fishery on Lake Tondano, Indonesia Fisheries law is an emerging and specialized area of law. Fisheries law is the study and analysis of different fisheries management approaches such as catch shares e.g.

individual transferable quotas ; TURFs; and others. The study of fisheries law is important in order to craft policy guidelines that maximize sustainability and legal enforcement.

[ 1 ] This specific legal area is rarely taught at law schools around the world, which leaves a vacuum of advocacy and research. Fisheries law also takes into account international treaties and industry norms in order to analyze fisheries management regulations.

[ 2 ] In addition, fisheries law includes access to justice for small-scale fisheries and coastal and aboriginal communities and labor issues such as child labor laws, employment law, and family law.

[ 3 ] Another important area of research covered in fisheries law is seafood safety. Each country, or region, around the world has a varying degree of seafood safety standards and regulations. These regulations can contain a large diversity of fisheries management schemes including quota or catch share systems.  It is important to study seafood safety regulations around the world in order to craft policy guidelines from countries that have implemented effective schemes. Also, this body of research can identify areas of improvement for countries that have not yet been able to master efficient and effective seafood safety regulations.

Fisheries law also includes the study of aquaculture laws and regulations.  Aquaculture, also known as aquafarming, is the farming of aquatic organisms, such as fish and aquatic plants. This body of research also encompasses animal feed regulations and requirements. It is important to regulate what feed is consumed by fish in order to prevent risks to human health and safety.

Territorial Use Rights for Fishing (TURF) [ edit ] Territorial Use Rights for Fishing (TURF) programs are a unique type of fishery law applicable for small scale fisheries. These community based programs allocate area based fishing privileges to groups or individuals with the goal of preventing overexploitation and unsustainable fishing.

[ 4 ] TURFs are usually granted to communities with longstanding traditions of sustainable fishing and are managed by the local fishermen.

[ 5 ] Although they are mainly community based, conservation guidelines are set at a federal level and governments have the authority to enforce TURFs. This form of management is used around the world, with the most successful examples being in Chile and Japan, and is modified to fit the social norms, needs, and goals of the community.

[ 6 ] TURFs are being promoted as a potential tool for conserving biodiversity but mainly applicable to non migratory species. However, the exploitation of migratory species can be managed through cooperating neighboring TURFs.

[ 7 ] In Chile there are over 700 TURFs that create a network around 1100 square kilometers.

[ 8 ] As the fishermen rely on these areas for their livelihoods, this system incentivises them to manage these fisheries sustainably.

[ 9 ] Seafood safety regulations [ edit ] U.S. labeling of genetically engineered salmon [ edit ] On November 19, 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved AquaBounty Technologies' application to sell the AquAdvantage salmon to U.S. consumers.

[ 10 ] The possible introduction of genetically engineered salmon into the marketplace furthers discussion involving ethics, protection of the natural environment, international and domestic trade law, labeling practices, nutrition, and constitutional issues. As the FDA points out, nutrition labeling for raw produce (fruits and vegetables), fish, and genetically modified products, is voluntary.

[ 11 ] Under section 403(a)(1) of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act ("FD&C Act"), a food is misbranded if its labeling is “false or misleading in any particular”.

[ 12 ] Section 201(n) of the FD&C Act provides that labeling is misleading if it fails to reveal facts that are material in light of representations made or suggested in the labeling.

[ 13 ] In regards to the AquAdvantage salmon, the FDA has stated: "Based on our assessments of food derived from the AquAdvantage Salmon, we have determined that the term “Atlantic salmon” is the appropriate common or usual name for such food within the meaning of section 403(i) of the FD&C Act because AquAdvantage Salmon meets FDA's regulatory standard for Atlantic salmon (Ref. 10) and the composition and basic nature of food from AquAdvantage Salmon does not significantly differ from its non-GE counterpart—non-GE farm-raised Atlantic salmon. In addition, we have determined that food derived from AquAdvantage Salmon is as safe and nutritious as food from other farm-raised Atlantic salmon. For these reasons, we have concluded that there is no material difference between food derived from AquAdvantage Salmon and food derived from other non-GE, farm-raised Atlantic salmon that is required to be disclosed in the labeling of food derived from AquAdvantage Salmon under the relevant provisions of the FD&C Act, as explained above." [ 14 ] Canadian labeling of genetically engineered salmon [ edit ] In 2014, Canada was a top-five producer of GM crops in the world, and is one of the largest players on the global market.

[ 15 ] Health Canada and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency ("CFIA") carry joint responsibility for federally food labeling policies in Canada under the Food and Drugs Act ("F&D Act").

[ 16 ] Under the F&D Act, GMOs are defined as “novel foods”. A novel food is allowed to enter the Canadian marketplace only after it has passed an assessment undertaken by various stakeholders.

Health Canada is responsible for deciding all health and safety labeling policies for food products, such as special dietary needs or GM products, and ensuring that the products are safe for consumption.

[ 17 ] The CFIA is responsible for the development of all non-health and safety food labeling regulations and policies and the enforcement of labeling legislation.

[ 17 ] Standards are set by the CFIA so that Canadian food labels are truthful and not misleading.

Subsection 5(1) of the F&D Act states that “no person shall label, package, treat, process, sell or advertise any food in a manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression regarding its character, value, quantity, composition, merit or safety”. Food must be labelled only if there are changes in the food such as problematic allergens or a significant nutrient or compositional change. Health Canada has not released an official statement concerning the AquAdvantage salmon, but does state on its website: “after twelve years of reviewing the safety of novel foods, Health Canada is not aware of any published scientific evidence demonstrating that novel foods are any less safe than traditional foods. The regulatory framework put in place by the federal government ensures that new and modified foods can be safely introduced in to the Canadian diet”.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] All the Fish in the Sea: Maximum Sustainable Yield and the Failure of Fisheries Management Fisheries Law Centre Fisheries management Fisheries science Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Overfishing Sustainable seafood References [ edit ] ^ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Fisheries Service,
aboutus.htm ^ Kevern L. Cochrane, A Fishery Manager’s Guidebook: Management Measures and their Application, Fisheries Technical Paper 424, available at ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/004/y3427e/y3427e00.pdf ^ Stewart, Robert (16 April 2009).

"Fisheries Issues" .

Oceanography in the 21st Century – An Online Textbook . OceanWorld. Archived from the original on Apr 28, 2016.

^ "Territorial Use Rights for Fishing (TURF) Programs" .

Fishery Solutions Center . 2013-09-27. Archived from the original on 2022-05-12 . Retrieved 2022-05-28 .

^ Villena, Mauricio G.; Chávez, Carlos A. (2005).

"On the Enforcement of Territorial Use Rights Regulations: A Game Theoretic Approach" .

Economia . Economia. - Associação dos Centros de Pós-Graduação em Economia - ANPEC, ISSN 1517-7580. - Vol. 6.2005, 1, p. 1-44.

6 (1).

^ Cancino, José P.; Uchida, Hirotsugu; Wilen, James E. (2007-01-01).

"TURFs and ITQs: Collective vs. Individual Decision Making" .

Marine Resource Economics .

22 (4): 391– 406.

doi : 10.1086/mre.22.4.42629569 .

ISSN 0738-1360 .

S2CID 150785480 .

^ Christy, Francis T.; Nations, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United (1982).

Territorial Use Rights in Marine Fisheries: Definitions and Conditions . Food & Agriculture Org.

ISBN 978-92-5-101269-7 .

^ Gelcich, Stefan; Donlan, C. Josh (2015-03-03).

"Incentivizing biodiversity conservation in artisanal fishing communities through territorial user rights and business model innovation" .

Conservation Biology .

29 (4): 1076– 1085.

Bibcode : 2015ConBi..29.1076G .

doi : 10.1111/cobi.12477 .

ISSN 0888-8892 .

PMID 25737027 .

S2CID 4978509 .

^ Nguyen Thi Quynh, Chi; Schilizzi, Steven; Hailu, Atakelty; Iftekhar, Sayed (2017-01-01).

"Territorial Use Rights for Fisheries (TURFs): State of the art and the road ahead" .

Marine Policy .

75 : 41– 52.

Bibcode : 2017MarPo..75...41N .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpol.2016.10.004 .

hdl : 10072/407791 .

ISSN 0308-597X .

S2CID 157899226 .

^ FDA, AquAdvantage Salmon Approval Letter and Appendix (November 19, 2015), online: U.S. Food and Drug Administration http://www.fda.gov .

[ full citation needed ] ^ FDA, Labeling & Nutrition , online: U.S. Food and Drug Administration http://www.fda.gov .

^ 21 U.S.C. § 343(a)(1).

^ 21 U.S.C. § 321(n).

^ "Draft Guidance for Industry: Voluntary Labeling Indicating Whether Food Has or Has Not Been Derived From Genetically Engineered Atlantic Salmon" .

Food . US FDA. November 19, 2015. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014.

^ ISAAA, Beyond Promises: Top 10 Facts about Biotech/GM Crops in 2014 , online: ISAA http://www.isaaa.org .

^ RSC 1985, c. F-27.

^ a b Government of Canada, Labelling of Genetically Engineered Foods in Canada , online: Canadian Food Inspection Agency http://www.inspection.gc.ca "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on April 3, 2004 . Retrieved May 22, 2017 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) .

^ Health Canada, Frequently Asked Questions – Biotechnology and Genetically Modified Foods , online: Food and Nutrition http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca .

v t e Fishery science topics Fisheries science and wild fisheries Fisheries science Population dynamics of fisheries Shifting baseline Fish stock Fish mortality Condition index Stock assessment Fish measurement Standard weight in fish Fish counter Data storage tag Catch per unit effort Otolith microchemical analysis Biomass Fisheries acoustics Acoustic tag Coded wire tag GIS and aquatic science Pop-up satellite archival tag EcoSCOPE Age class structure Trophic level Trophic cascades Hydrographic containment Match/mismatch hypothesis Climate change and fisheries Marine biology Aquatic ecosystems Bioeconomics EconMult Ecopath FishBase Census of Marine Life OSTM/Jason-2 Fisheries databases Institutes Fisheries scientists Wild fisheries Ocean fisheries Diversity of fish Coastal fish Coral reef fish Demersal fish Forage fish Pelagic fish Cod fisheries Crab fisheries Eel fisheries Krill fisheries Kelp fisheries Lobster fisheries Shrimp fishery Eel ladder Fish ladder Fish screen Migration Salmon run Sardine run Shoaling and schooling Marine habitat Marine snow Water column Upwelling Humboldt current Algal blooms Dead zones Fish kill Fisheries law , management , sustainability and conservation Law Fisheries law Exclusive economic zone Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement Fisheries Convention Magnuson–Stevens Act Management Fisheries management Monitoring control and surveillance Vessel monitoring system Fishery Resources Monitoring System Catch reporting Fisheries observer Catch share Individual fishing quota Minimum landing size Pulse fishing Slot limit EU Common Fisheries Policy EU MLS European Fisheries Control Agency National Marine Fisheries Service Regional fishery body Regional fishery management organisation Sustainability Sustainable fishery Maximum sustainable yield List of commercially important fish species Sustainable seafood Overfishing Environmental impact of fishing Fishing down the food web Destructive fishing practices Future of Marine Animal Populations The Sunken Billions The End of the Line Bycatch Discards Incidental catch Cetacean bycatch Turtle excluder device Shrimp-Turtle case Conservation Marine protected area Marine reserve Marine conservation Marine conservation activism Salmon conservation Grey nurse shark conservation Shark sanctuary European Environmental Agency U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Advocacy FishAct Marine Stewardship Council Aquaculture Stewardship Council Friend of the Sea SeaChoice Seafood Watch Ocean Conservancy Ocean Outcomes Oceana Save Our Seas Foundation Sea Around Us WorldFish Defying Ocean's End HERMIONE PROFISH International Seafood Sustainability Foundation Sea Shepherd Conservation Society Greenpeace Related issues CalCOFI Fish slaughter Marine pollution Mercury in fish Shark culling Shark finning Threatened sharks Threatened rays Outline of fishing Index of fishing articles Glossary of fishery terms v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases National United States Israel Other NARA Yale LUX v t e Angling topics General Angling Boat fishing Big-game fishing Flats fishing Flosser Float tube Trolling Casting Surf fishing Rock fishing Bank fishing Jet ski fishing Kayak fishing Centerpin fishing Coarse fishing Bottom fishing Urban fishing Tackle Techniques Land-based game fishing Ice fishing Indoor fishing Snagging Spin fishing Skishing Tailrace fishing Tenkara fishing Fish Bass Bait fish Carp Game fish Mahi-mahi Marlin Panfish Porgie (bream) Rough fish Shad Smelt whiting Striped bass Walleye Regulation and sustainability Fishing license Fisheries management Fisheries law Bag limits Catch and release Conservation officer Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Minimum landing size Tag and release Poaching Catch records Europe UK Wisconsin West Virginia Organisations Bass Anglers Sportsman Society Confédération Internationale de la Pêche Sportive International Game Fish Association Nippon Bass Club Prince Albert Angling Society Sport Fishing Association Literature Angler's Mail Angling Times Field & Stream Gray's Sporting Journal List of pseudonyms of angling authors Marlin Outdoor Life Rod and Line Book of the Black Bass Salt Water Sportsman Sports Afield The Secrets of Angling Other Angling at the 1900 Summer Olympics Ikejime Pain in fish Priest (tool) Tournaments Television series World Fishing Network v t e Articles about fly fishing and fly tying Fly fishing Bamboo fly rod Float tube Fly fishing tackle Fly line Fly rod building Furled leader Dry fly fishing Fly casting Fly Casting Analyzer Reach cast Spey casting Manufacturers of fly tying materials and tools Tenkara fishing Trout bum Waders Fly waters: Blue Ribbon fishery Class A Wild Trout Waters North America Europe Artificial flies Adams Alexandra BWO Bonefish flies Brown Bi-visible Bunyan Bug Clouser Deep Minnow Copper John Crazy Charlie Dave's Hopper Diawl bach Egg sucking leech Elk Hair Caddis Flesh Fly Fully dressed flies Grey Ghost Streamer Hare's Ear Humpy Jock Scott Klinkhammer Lefty's Deceiver Mallard and Claret Mickey Finn Muddler Minnow Parks' Salmonfly Partridge and Orange Pheasant Tail Nymph Prince Nymph Popper Red Tag Royal Coachman Royal Wulff Sakasa Kebari Salmon fly patterns Stimulator Surf Candy Terrestrials Tube fly Woolly Bugger Woolly Worm Wulff flies Organizations American Museum of Fly Fishing Anglers' Club of New York Catskill Fly Fishing Center and Museum Flyfishers' Club Fly Fishers International Fly Fishing Team USA Orvis Parks' Fly Shop Scientific Anglers Trout Unlimited World Fly Fishing Championships Literature Bibliography of fly fishing (species related) Bibliography of fly fishing Bibliography of fly fishing (fly tying, stories, fiction) Pseudonyms of notable angling authors The American Angler's Book Blacker's Art of Fly Making Dry-Fly Fishing in Theory and Practice Favorite Flies and Their Histories Floating Flies and How to Dress Them Fly Fishing (Grey book) Fly Fishing: Memories of Angling Days The Fly-fisher's Entomology Minor Tactics of the Chalk Stream The Salmon Fly The Way of a Trout with the Fly People Dan Bailey A.K. Best Megan Boyd Drew Chicone James Deren Edward Fitzgibbon Jack Gartside George F. Grant Frederic M. Halford J. Richard Harris Lefty Kreh George Selwyn Marryat Don Martinez Louis Rhead Edwin Rist Alfred Ronalds Frank Sawyer Carrie G. Stevens Lee Wulff Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fisheries_law&oldid=1305276797 " Category : Fisheries law Hidden categories: All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from November 2019 CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 03:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fisheries law 3 languages Add topic

