Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Roots Toggle Roots subsection 1.1 Early ideas 1.2 Medieval and early modern times 1.3 Economic development, natural state, and social evolution 2 Emergence as a separate field of study Toggle Emergence as a separate field of study subsection 2.1 An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change and beyond 3 Recent developments Toggle Recent developments subsection 3.1 Unified growth theory 4 Criticism 5 Related fields Toggle Related fields subsection 5.1 Evolutionary psychology 5.2 Evolutionary game theory 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 Journals Toggle the table of contents Evolutionary economics 21 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subject inspired by evolutionary biology Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Evolutionary economics is a school of economic thought that is inspired by evolutionary biology . Although not defined by a strict set of principles and uniting various approaches, it treats economic development as a process rather than an equilibrium and emphasizes change (qualitative, organisational , and structural ), innovation , complex interdependencies, self-evolving systems , and limited rationality as the drivers of economic evolution.

[ 1 ] The support for the evolutionary approach to economics in recent decades seems to have initially emerged as a criticism of the mainstream neoclassical economics , [ 2 ] but by the beginning of the 21st century it had become part of the economic mainstream itself.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Evolutionary economics does not take the characteristics of either the objects of choice or of the decision-maker as fixed. Rather, it focuses on the non-equilibrium processes that transform the economy from within and their implications, considering interdependencies and feedback.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] The processes in turn emerge from the actions of diverse agents with bounded rationality who may learn from experience and interactions and whose differences contribute to the change.

[ 1 ] Roots [ edit ] Early ideas [ edit ] From peace and harmony... ( Lucas Cranach the Elder , The Golden Age , 1530) ... to war and sorrow ( Virgil Solis , The Iron Age , 1581) The idea of human society and the world in general as subject to evolution has been following mankind throughout its existence.

Hesiod , an ancient Greek poet thought to be the first Western written poet regarding himself as an individual, [ 6 ] described five Ages of Man —the Golden Age , the Silver Age , the Bronze Age , the Heroic Age , and the Iron Age —following from divine existence to toil and misery. Modern scholars consider his works as one of the sources for early economic thought.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The concept is also present in the Metamorphoses by Ovid , an ancient Roman poet. His Four Ages include technological progress: in the Golden Age, men did not know arts and craft, whereas by the Iron Age people had learnt and discovered agriculture , architecture , mining , navigation , and national boundaries , but had also become violent and greedy. This concept was not exclusive to the Greek and Roman civilizations (see, for instance, Yuga Cycles in Hinduism , the Three Ages of Buddhism , Aztecs’ Five Suns ), but a common feature is the path towards misery and destruction, with technological advancements accompanied by moral degradation.

Medieval and early modern times [ edit ] Medieval views on society, economics and politics (at least in Europe and Pax Islamica ) were influenced by religious norms and traditions.

Catholic and Islamic scholars debated on the moral appropriateness of certain economic practices, such as interest .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The subject of changes was thought of in existential terms. For instance, Augustine of Hippo regarded time as a phenomenon of the universe created by God and a measure of change, whereas God exists outside of time.

[ 12 ] A major contribution to the views on the evolution of society was Leviathan by Thomas Hobbes . A human, according to Hobbes, is a matter in motion with one's own appetites and desires. Due to these numerous desires and the scarcity of resources, the natural state of a human is a war of all against all : [ 13 ] "In such condition, there is no place for Industry ; because the fruit thereof is uncertain; and consequently no Culture of the Earth; no Navigation, nor use of the commodities that may be imported by Sea; no commodious Building; no Instruments of moving, and removing such things as require much force; no Knowledge of the face of the Earth; no account of Time; no Arts; no Letters; no Society; and which is worst of all, continual feare, and danger of violent death; And the life of man, solitary, poore, nasty, brutish, and short." In order to overcome this natural anarchy , Hobbs saw it necessary to impose an ultimate restraint in the form of a sovereign .

Economic development, natural state, and social evolution [ edit ] See also: The Wealth of Nations Adam Smith (1723–1790) A landmark work in many senses, The Wealth of Nations by Adam Smith was also one to offer a description of economic development throughout the history of mankind—as well as insights into the nature of this development. In Book III (Of the different Progress of Opulence in different Nations) , Smith constantly underlines the importance of the natural order of things, which economic improvements follow, and shows the feedback chain that allows economies to progress further, based on what has been achieved. This falls in line with the notion of natural rights shared by other Age of Enlightenment thinkers, such as John Locke and Montesquieu .

A somewhat different view relates to the names of prominent socialists of the 19th century, who viewed economic and political systems as products of social evolution (in contrast to the notions of natural rights and morality ). In his book What is Property?

, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon noted: [ 14 ] "Thus, in a given society, the authority of man over man is inversely proportional to the stage of intellectual development which that society has reached." The approach was also employed by Karl Marx . In his view, over the course of history superior economic systems would replace inferior ones. Inferior systems were beset by internal contradictions and inefficiencies that made them impossible to survive in the long term. In Marx's scheme, feudalism was replaced by capitalism , which would eventually be superseded by socialism.

[ 15 ] Emergence as a separate field of study [ edit ] Thorstein Veblen (1857–1929) is considered by many as the "father" of evolutionary economics.

The term "evolutionary economics" might have been first coined by Thorstein Veblen .

[ 1 ] Veblen saw the need for taking into account cultural variation in his economic approach; no universal "human nature" could possibly be invoked to explain the variety of norms and behaviours that the new science of anthropology showed to be the rule rather than an exception.

[ 16 ] He also argued that social institutions are subject to selection process [ 17 ] and that economic science should embrace the Darwinian theory .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 1 ] Veblen's followers quickly abandoned his evolutionary legacy.

[ 16 ] [ 21 ] When they finally returned to the use of the term "evolutionary", they referred to development and change in general, without its Darwinian meaning.

[ 1 ] Further researchers, such as Joseph Schumpeter , studied entrepreneurship and innovation using this term, but not in the Darwinian sense.

[ 2 ] [ 22 ] Another prominent economist, Friedrich von Hayek , also employed the elements of the evolutionary approach, especially criticizing " the fatal conceit " of socialists who believed they could and should design a new society while disregarding human nature.

[ 23 ] However, Hayek seemed to see the Darwin theory not as a revolution itself, but rather as an intermediary step in the line of evolutionary thinking.

[ 1 ] There were other notable contributors to the evolutionary approach in economics, such as Armen Alchian , who argued that, faced with uncertainty and incomplete information , firms adapt to the environment instead of pursuing profit maximization .

[ 24 ] An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change and beyond [ edit ] Geoffrey Hodgson , recognised as one of the leading figures of modern critical institutionalism , Emeritus Professor in Management, Loughborough University The publication of An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change by Richard R. Nelson and Sidney G. Winter in 1982 marked a turning point in the field of evolutionary economics. Inspired by Alchian's work about the decision-making process of firms under uncertainty and the behavioural theory of the firm by Richard Cyert and James March , [ 25 ] [ 1 ] Nelson and Winter constructed a comprehensive evolutionary theory of business behavior using the concept of natural selection . In this framework, firms operate on the basis of organizational routines, which they evaluate and may change while functioning in a certain selection environment.

[ 26 ] Since then, evolutionary economics, as noted by Nicolai Foss , has been concerned with "the transformation of already existing structures and the emergence and possible spread of novelties." [ 27 ] Economies have been viewed as a complex system, a result of causal interactions (non-linear and chaotic) between different agents and entities with varied characteristics.

[ 28 ] Instead of perfect information and rationality, Herbert Simon's concept of bounded rationality [ 29 ] has become prevailing.

By the 1990s, as put by Geoffrey Hodgson , [ 1 ] "it was possible to write of an international network or ' invisible college ' of 'evolutionary economists' who, despite their analytical differences, were focusing on the problem of analyzing structural, technological, cultural and institutional change in economic systems... They were also united by their common dislike of the static and equilibrium approaches that dominated mainstream economics." Recent developments [ edit ] Main article: Adaptive market hypothesis Andrew W. Lo , a Hong Kong-born Taiwanese-American economist and academic, MIT Sloan professor The role of evolutionary forces in the process of economic development over the course of human history has been further explored during the past decades. For example, Paul Rubin extensively described how apparent anomalies in decision-making, such as violations of the maximization principle, a zero-sum way of thinking , or a dislike of competition and free trade , may be a result of the human brain evolution.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Another concept Rubin and his colleagues viewed through the lenses of evolutionary analysis is the utility function, which may essentially be represented as the fitness evolutionary function.

[ 32 ] Elements of evolutionary approach have also appeared in financial economics . Around 2004, Andrew Lo proposed the adaptive market hypothesis —an extension of the efficient market hypothesis that treats financial market agents as "species" who exist in some environment (e.g., the number of competitors, profit opportunities) and behave accordingly.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] This hypothesis does not deny that efficient financial market equilibria may exist, but it necessarily suggests that other states may emerge and evolve due to adaption and natural selection. Although quite recent, Lo's hypothesis has already been empirically tested with regard to a number of cases, such as the analysis of influence of religious holidays and political regimes on financial markets in Islamic countries [ 35 ] or the evolution of Bitcoin market.

[ 36 ] Unified growth theory [ edit ] Main article: Unified growth theory Known for his unified growth theory , Oded Galor employs principles that may belong to evolutionary economics.

A considerable contribution to the understanding of economies as constantly evolving systems was provided by Oded Galor and his colleagues. A pioneer of the unified growth theory , Galor depicts economic growth and development throughout human history as a continuous process driven by technological progress and the accumulation of human capital as well as by the accumulation of those biological, social and cultural features that favour further development.

According to Galor's model, technological advancements in the early eras of the mankind (during the Malthusian epoch, with limited resources and near- subsistence levels of income) would lead to increases in the size of population, which in turn would further accelerate technological progress due to the production of new ideas and the increase in demand for them. At some point technological advancements would require higher levels of education and generate the demand for educated labour force . After that, an economy would move into a new phase characterised by demographic transition (given that investment into less children, although more costly, would yield higher returns) and sustained economic growth .

[ 37 ] The process is accompanied by improvements in living standards , the position of the working class as necessary in order to complement technological progress (contrary to Marx and his followers, who predicted its further impoverishment), and the position of women, paving the way for further social and gender equality improvements.

[ 5 ] [ 38 ] Interdependent, these elements facilitate each other, creating a unified process of growth and development, although the pace may be different for different societies.

In The Journey of Humanity: The Origins of Wealth and Inequality (2022) Galor provides some statements that further solidify his evolutionary approach: [ 38 ] “Consider… two large clans: the Quanty and the Qualy…
Suppose that Quanty households bear on average four children each, of whom only two reach adulthood and find a reproductive partner. Meanwhile, Qualy households bear on average only two children each, because their budget does not allow them to invest in the education and health of additional offspring [sic!] , and yet, thanks to the investment that they do make, both children not only reach adulthood and find a reproductive partner but they also find jobs in commercial and skill-intensive occupations… Now suppose the society in which they live is one where technological development boosts the demand for the services of blacksmiths, carpenters and other trades who can manufacture tools and more efficient machines. This increase in earning capacity would place the Qualy clan at a distinct evolutionary advantage . Within a generation or two, its families are likely to enjoy higher incomes and amass greater resources.” Criticism [ edit ] The emergence of modern evolutionary economics was welcomed by the critics of the neoclassical mainstream.

[ 4 ] [ 1 ] However, the field, especially the approach by Nelson and Winter , has also drawn critical attitude from other heterodox economists . A year after An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change was published, Philip Mirowski expressed his doubts that this framework represented genuine evolutionary economics research (i.e., in the vein of Veblen) and not just a variant of neoclassical methodology, especially since the authors admitted their framework could include neoclassical orthodoxy.

[ 39 ] Some Veblenian institutionalists claim this framework is only a "protective modification of the neoclassical economics and is antithetical to Veblen's evolutionary economics." [ 40 ] Another possible shortcoming (recognized by the proponents of modern evolutionary economics) is that the field is heterogenous, with no convergence on an integrated approach.

[ 1 ] Related fields [ edit ] Evolutionary psychology [ edit ] Main article: Evolutionary psychology See also: Behavioural economics Evolutionary psychology is a theoretical approach in psychology that examines cognition and behaviour from a modern evolutionary perspective.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] It seeks to identify human psychological adaptations with regards to the ancestral problems they evolved to solve. In this framework, psychological traits and mechanisms are either functional products of natural and sexual selection or non-adaptive by-products of other adaptive traits. Economic concepts can also be viewed through these lenses, as demonstrated by Paul Rubin , among others.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Evolutionary game theory [ edit ] Main article: Evolutionary game theory Evolutionary game theory is the application of game theory to evolving populations in biology. It defines a framework of contests, strategies , and analytics into which Darwinian competition can be modelled. It originated in 1973 with John Maynard Smith and George R. Price's formalisation of contests, analysed as strategies, and the mathematical criteria that can be used to predict the results of competing strategies.

[ 43 ] Evolutionary game theory has helped to explain the basis of altruistic behaviours in Darwinian evolution. It has in turn become of interest to sociologists, anthropologists, philosophers, and economists.

[ 44 ] See also [ edit ] Business and economics portal Economics portal Adaptive market hypothesis Behavioural economics Complexity economics Cultural economics Heterodox economics Institutional economics Mainstream economics Neoclassical economics Non-equilibrium economics Ecological model of competition Population dynamics Creative destruction Innovation system Evolutionary psychology Evolutionary socialism Universal Darwinism Association for Evolutionary Economics European Association for Evolutionary Political Economy Andrew W. Lo Geoffrey Hodgson Oded Galor Paul H. Rubin Richard R. Nelson Sidney G. Winter Thorstein Veblen References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Hodgson, G. M.

(2012).

Evolutionary Economics , in Fundamental Economics, edited by Mukul Majumdar, Ian Wills, Pasquale Michael Sgro, John M. Gowdy, in Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS), Developed under the Auspices of the UNESCO, EOLSS Publishers, Paris, France, [1] .

Archived from [2] on April 24, 2023.

^ a b Hodgson, G. M.

(1993).

Economics and Evolution: Bringing Life Back Into Economics . Cambridge, UK and Ann Arbor, MI: Polity Press and University of Michigan Press.

^ Friedman, D. (1998). Evolutionary Economics Goes Mainstream: A Review of the Theory of Learning in Games.

Journal of Evolutionary Economics. 8 (4), pp. 423–432.

Archived from [3] on March 8, 2022.

^ a b Hodgson, G. M.

(2007). Evolutionary and Institutional Economics as the New Mainstream?

Evolutionary and Institutional Economics Review, 4 (1), pp. 7–25.

Archived from [4] on July 9, 2020.

^ a b Galor, O.

(2005).

From Stagnation to Growth: Unified Growth Theory.

In P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1A, pp. 224–235.

^ Barron, J. P.

, Easterling, P. E.

(1989).

Hesiod . In Easterling, P. E.

, Knox, B. (eds.), The Cambridge History of Classical Literature: Greek Literature. Cambridge University Press, p. 51.

^ Gordon, B. J. (1975).

Economic Analysis Before Adam Smith: Hesiod to Lessius . Palgrave Macmillan, p. 3.

^ Rothbard, M. N.

(1995).

Economic Thought Before Adam Smith: Austrian Perspective on the History of Economic Thought, Vol. 1 . Cheltenham, UK.

^ Brockway, G. P. (2001) The End of Economic Man: An Introduction to Humanistic Economics, 4th edition . W. W. Norton & Company, p. 128.

^ Thomas Aquinas .

Summa Theologica . New York: English Dominican Fathers, 1981. Part II, Q78, A1.

Archived from [5] on March 29, 2023.

^ Institute of Islamic Banking and Finance (2023).

Riba .

Archived from [6] on June 4, 2023.

^ Augustine of Hippo .

Confessions , Book XI.

Project Gutenberg .

Archived from [7] on April 19, 2023.

^ Thomas Hobbes , Leviathan , Chapter XIII.

Project Gutenberg .

Archived from [8] on January 3, 2023.

^ Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph (1994).

What is Property?

Project Gutenberg .

Archived from [9] on April 5, 2023.

^ Gregory, P. R.

, Stuart, R. C. (2005).

Comparing Economic Systems in the Twenty-First Century, Seventh Edition . South-Western College Publishing.

^ a b Hodgson, G. M.

(2004).

The Evolution of Institutional Economics: Agency, Structure and Darwinism in American Institutionalism . London and New York: Routledge.

^ Camic, C.

, Hodgson, G. M.

(eds.) (2011).

Essential Writings of Thorstein Veblen . London and New York: Routledge.

^ Veblen, T. B.

(1898). Why Is Economics Not an Evolutionary Science?

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 12 (3), pp. 373–97.

^ Veblen, T. B.

(1899).

The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study in the Evolution of Institutions . New York: Huebsch.

Archived from [10] on November 22, 2021.

^ Veblen, T. B.

(1919).

The Place of Science in Modern Civilisation and Other Essays . New York: Huebsch.

Project Gutenberg .

Archived from [11] on June 5, 2023.

^ Rutherford, M. H. (2011).

The Institutionalist Movement in American Economics, 1918–1947: Science and Social Control.

Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

^ Witt, U.

(2002). How Evolutionary is Schumpeter's Theory of Economic Development?

Industry and Innovation, 9 (1/2), pp. 7–22.

^ Hayek, F. A.

(1988).

The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism .

In William W. Bartley III (ed.), The Collected Works of Friedrich August Hayek, Vol. I. London: Routledge.

Archived from [12] on March 24, 2023.

^ Alchian, A. A.

(1950).

Uncertainty, Evolution, and Economic Theory .

Journal of Political Economy, 58 (2), pp. 211–22.

Archived from [13] on May 1, 2018.

^ Cyert, R. M.

, March, J. G.

(1963).

A Behavioral Theory of the Firm . Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

^ Nelson, R. R.

, Winter, S. G.

(1982).

An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Archived from [14] on March 23, 2023.

^ Foss, N. J.

(1994). Realism and Evolutionary Economics.

Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems, 17 (1), pp. 21–40.

^ Saviotti, P. P. (1996).

Technological Evolution, Variety and the Economy . Aldershot: Edward Elgar.

^ Simon, H. A.

(1957).

Models of Man: Social and Rational. Mathematical Essays on Rational Human Behavior in a Social Setting . New York: Wiley.

^ a b Rubin, P. H.

(2002).

Darwinian Politics: The Evolutionary Origin of Freedom . Rutgers University Press.

^ a b Rubin, P. H.

(2008). Folk Economics.

Southern Economic Journal, 70 (1), pp. 157–171.

Archived from [15] on January 29, 2025.

^ a b Rubin, P. H.

Capra, C. M. (2011).

The Evolutionary Psychology of Economics.

In Roberts, S. C. (ed.), Applied Evolutionary Psychology. Oxford University Press.

^ Lo, Andrew W.

(2004). The Adaptive Markets Hypothesis: Market Efficiency from an Evolutionary Perspective.

Journal of Portfolio Management, 5 (30), pp. 15–29.

Archived from [16] on January 29, 2025.

^ Lo, Andrew W.

(2017).

Adaptive Markets: Financial Evolution at the Speed of Thought.

Princeton University Press.

^ Shahid, M. N., Sattar, A. (2017). The Behavior of Calendar Anomalies, Market Conditions, and Adaptive Market Hypothesis: Evidence from Pakistan Stock Exchange.

Pakistan Journal of Commerce and Social Sciences, 11 (2), pp. 471–504.

Archived from [17] on January 29, 2025.

^ Khuntia, S., Pattanayak, J. K. (2018). Adaptive Market Hypothesis and Evolving Predictability of Bitcoin" Economics Letters. 167 , pp. 26–28.

^ Galor, O.

(2011).

Unified Growth Theory . Chapter 5. Princeton University Press, 2011.

^ a b Galor, O.

(2022).

The Journey of Humanity: The Origins of Wealth and Inequality . Penguin Random House, 2022.

^ Mirowski, P.

(1983). An Evolutionary Theory of Economics Change: A Review Article.

Journal of Economic Issues, 17 (3), pp. 757–768.

^ Jo, Tae-Hee (2020).

A Veblenian Critique of Nelson and Winter's Evolutionary Theory . MPRA Paper No. 10138.

Archived from [18] on May 15, 2021.

^ Schacter, D. L.

, Gilbert, D. T.

, Wegner, D. M.

(2010).

Psychology . Macmillan, p. 26.

^ Longe, J. L. (2016).

The Gale Encyclopedia of Psychology (3rd ed.) . Gale Research Incorporated, pp. 386–388.

^ Maynard Smith, J.

, Price, G. R.

(1973). The Logic of Animal Conflict.

Nature. 246 (5427), pp. 15–18.

Archived from [19] on June 6, 2023.

^ Michihiro, K.

(1997).

Evolutionary game theory in economics . In Kreps, D. M.

, Wallis, K. F. (eds.). Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications. Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. pp. 243–277.

Further reading [ edit ] Veblen, T. B.

(1898). Why Is Economics Not an Evolutionary Science?

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 12 (3), pp. 373–97.

Veblen, T. B.

(1899).

The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study in the Evolution of Institutions . New York: Huebsch.

Archived from [20] on November 22, 2021.

Nelson, R. R.

, Winter, S. G.

(1982).

An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Archived from [21] on March 23, 2023.

Hodgson, G. M.

(2004) The Evolution of Institutional Economics: Agency, Structure and Darwinism in American Institutionalism . London and New York: Routledge.

Hodgson, G. M.

(2012).

Evolutionary Economics , in Fundamental Economics, edited by Mukul Majumdar, Ian Wills, Pasquale Michael Sgro, John M. Gowdy, in Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS), Developed under the Auspices of the UNESCO, EOLSS Publishers, Paris, France, [22] .

Archived from [23] on April 24, 2023.

Rubin, P. H.

(2002).

Darwinian Politics: The Evolutionary Origin of Freedom . Rutgers University Press.

Lo, Andrew W.

(2017).

Adaptive Markets: Financial Evolution at the Speed of Thought.

Princeton University Press.

Oded Galor (2022).

The Journey of Humanity: The Origins of Wealth and Inequality . Penguin Random House.

Journals [ edit ] Journal of Economic Issues , sponsored by the Association for Evolutionary Economics .

Journal of Evolutionary Economics , sponsored by the International Josef Schumpeter Society.

Journal of Institutional Economics , sponsored by the European Association for Evolutionary Political Economy .

v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems v t e Thorstein Veblen Books The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899) The Theory of Business Enterprise (1904) The Engineers and the Price System (1921) Concepts Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Miscellaneous Institutional economics Evolutionary economics Thorstein Veblen Farmstead Veblen-Commons Award Veblen good v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal v t e Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side Notable macroeconomists François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw Critique Critique of political economy See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Category v t e Microeconomics Major topics Aggregation Budget set Consumer choice Convexity and non-convexity Cost Average Marginal Opportunity Implicit Social Sunk Transaction Cost–benefit analysis Deadweight loss Distribution Economies of scale Economies of scope Elasticity Cross elasticity of demand Income elasticity of demand Price elasticity of demand Price elasticity of supply Equilibrium General Exchange Externality Firms Goods and services Goods Service Household Income–consumption curve Information Indifference curve Intertemporal choice Market Market failure Market structure Competition Monopolistic Perfect Duopoly Monopoly Bilateral Complementary Monopsony Oligopoly Oligopsony Pareto efficiency Preferences Price Price controls Price ceiling Price floor Price discrimination Price signal Price system / Free Pricing Production Profit Public goods Rationing Rent Returns to scale Risk aversion Scarcity Shortage / Excess supply Substitution effect Surplus Social choice Supply and demand Demand / Law of demand Supply / Law of supply Uncertainty Utility Expected Marginal Wage Subfields Behavioral Business Computational Development Statistical decision theory Econometrics Engineering economics Civil engineering economics Evolutionary Experimental Game theory Green Industrial organization Institutional Labour Law Managerial Mathematical Microfoundations of macroeconomics Operations research Optimization Welfare See also Economics Applied Macroeconomics Political economy Business portal Category v t e Institutional economics Institutional economists Werner Abelshauser Clarence Edwin Ayres Joe S. Bain Shimshon Bichler Robert A. Brady Daniel Bromley Ha-Joon Chang John Maurice Clark John R. Commons Richard T. Ely Robert H. Frank John Kenneth Galbraith Walton Hale Hamilton Orris C. Herfindahl Albert O. Hirschman Geoffrey Hodgson János Kornai Simon Kuznets Hunter Lewis Jesse W. Markham Wesley Clair Mitchell Gunnar Myrdal Jonathan Nitzan Warren Samuels François Simiand Herbert A. Simon Frank Stilwell George W. Stocking Sr.

Lars Pålsson Syll Thorstein Veblen Edward Lawrence Wheelwright Erich Zimmermann New institutional economists Daron Acemoglu Armen Alchian Masahiko Aoki Steven N. S. Cheung Ronald Coase Harold Demsetz Avner Greif Claude Ménard Douglass North Mancur Olson Elinor Ostrom ( Bloomington school ) Oliver E. Williamson Behavioral economists George Ainslie Dan Ariely Nava Ashraf Ofer Azar Douglas Bernheim Samuel Bowles Sarah Brosnan Colin Camerer David Cesarini Kay-Yut Chen Rachel Croson Werner De Bondt Paul Dolan Stephen Duneier Catherine C. Eckel Armin Falk Urs Fischbacher Herbert Gintis Uri Gneezy David Halpern Charles A. Holt David Ryan Just Daniel Kahneman Djuradj Caranovic Ariel Kalil George Katona Jeffrey R. Kling George Loewenstein Graham Loomes Brigitte C. Madrian Gary McClelland Matteo Motterlini Sendhil Mullainathan Michael Norton Matthew Rabin Howard Rachlin Klaus M. Schmidt Eldar Shafir Hersh Shefrin Robert J. Shiller Uwe Sunde Richard Thaler Amos Tversky Robert W. Vishny Georg Weizsäcker Economic sociologists Jens Beckert Fred L. Block James S. Coleman Paul DiMaggio Paula England Mark Granovetter Donald Angus MacKenzie Joel M. Podolny Lynette Spillman Richard Swedberg Laurent Thévenot Carlo Trigilia Harrison White Viviana Zelizer Key concepts and ideas Accelerator effect Administered prices Barriers to entry Bounded rationality Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Conventional wisdom Countervailing power Effective competition Herfindahl index Hiding hand principle Hirschman cycle Instrumentalism Kuznets cycles Market concentration Market power Market structure Penalty of taking the lead Satisficing Shortage economy Structure–conduct–performance paradigm Technostructure Theory of two-level planning Veblen goods Veblenian dichotomy Related fields Cultural economics Development economics English historical school of economics Evolutionary economics Evolutionary psychology French historical school Historical school of economics Legal realism Microeconomics Post-Keynesian economics Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hl722
Cached time: 20250812001023
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.704 seconds
Real time usage: 0.862 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2733/1000000
Revision size: 37754/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 225913/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7966/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 120306/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.395/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4999420/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  580.237      1 -total
 57.03%  330.892     11 Template:Navbox
 37.05%  214.982      9 Template:Excerpt
 32.73%  189.902      1 Template:Macroeconomics
 19.46%  112.938      1 Template:Economics_sidebar
 19.16%  111.196      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.04%   69.883      1 Template:Short_description
 11.00%   63.848      1 Template:Economics
  8.29%   48.115      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.25%   47.859      2 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:162791:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001023 and revision id 1305331859. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolutionary_economics&oldid=1305331859 " Categories : Schools of economic thought Thorstein Veblen Criticisms of economics Evolutionary biology Evolutionary psychology Macroeconomics Microeconomics Institutional economics Innovation economics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 12:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evolutionary economics 21 languages Add topic

