Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Definitions Toggle Definitions subsection 2.1 Tourism products 2.2 International tourism 3 Basis 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 Ancient 4.2 Medieval 4.3 Grand Tour 4.4 Emergence of leisure travel 4.5 Tourism, Empire and "Othering" 4.6 Tourism after 1945 4.6.1 Racial segregation and tourism in the United States 5 Economic significance of tourism 6 Tourism, cultural heritage and UNESCO 7 Cruise ships 8 Modern day tourism Toggle Modern day tourism subsection 8.1 Mass tourism 8.2 Niche tourism 8.3 Winter tourism 9 Recent developments Toggle Recent developments subsection 9.1 Sustainable tourism 9.2 Ecotourism 9.3 Volunteer tourism 9.4 Pro-poor tourism 9.5 Recession tourism 9.6 Medical tourism 9.7 Educational tourism 9.8 Event tourism 9.9 Creative tourism 9.10 Experiential tourism 9.11 Dark tourism 9.12 Social tourism 9.13 Doom tourism 9.14 Religious tourism 9.15 DNA tourism 9.16 Sleep tourism 10 Impacts on destinations 11 Tourism industry growth Toggle Tourism industry growth subsection 11.1 Liabilities and insurance 11.2 Space tourism 11.3 Sports tourism 11.4 Security in Tourism 11.5 Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic 12 See also 13 References 14 Bibliography 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Tourism 149 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Tok Pisin Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws 中文 Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Travel for recreational or leisure purposes For other uses, see Tourism (disambiguation) .

"Tourist" redirects here. For other uses, see Tourist (disambiguation) .

Tourists at the Temple of Apollo , Delphi, Greece Tourism is travel for pleasure , and the commercial activity of providing and supporting such travel.

[ 1 ] UN Tourism defines tourism more generally, in terms which go "beyond the common perception of tourism as being limited to holiday activity only", as people "travelling to and staying in places outside their usual environment for not more than one consecutive year for leisure and not less than 24 hours, business and other purposes".

[ 2 ] Tourism can be domestic (within the traveller's own country) or international .

International tourism has both incoming and outgoing implications on a country's balance of payments .

Between the second half of 2008 and the end of 2009, tourism numbers declined due to a severe economic slowdown (see Great Recession ) and the outbreak of the 2009 H1N1 influenza virus .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] These numbers, however, recovered until the COVID-19 pandemic put an abrupt end to the growth.

[ 5 ] The United Nations World Tourism Organization has estimated that global international tourist arrivals might have decreased by 58% to 78% in 2020, leading to a potential loss of US$0.9–1.2 trillion in international tourism receipts.

[ 6 ] Globally, international tourism receipts (the travel item in the balance of payments) grew to US$1.03 trillion ( €740 billion) in 2005, corresponding to an increase in real terms of 3.8% from 2010.

[ 7 ] International tourist arrivals surpassed the milestone of 1 billion tourists globally for the first time in 2012.

[ 8 ] Emerging source markets such as China , Russia , and Brazil had significantly increased their spending over the previous decade.

[ 9 ] Global tourism accounts for c.

8% of global greenhouse-gas emissions.

[ 10 ] Emissions as well as other significant environmental and social impacts are not always beneficial to local communities and their economies. Many tourist development organizations are shifting focus to sustainable tourism to minimize the negative effects of growing tourism. This approach aims to balance economic benefits with environmental and social responsibility. The United Nations World Tourism Organization emphasized these practices by promoting tourism as part of the Sustainable Development Goals , through programs such as the International Year for Sustainable Tourism for Development in 2017.

[ 11 ] Tourism has reached new dimensions with the emerging industry of space tourism , as well as the cruise ship industry.

Etymology [ edit ] The English-language word tourist was used in 1772 [ 12 ] and tourism in 1811.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] These words derive from the word tour , which comes from Old English turian , from Old French torner , from Latin tornare - "to turn on a lathe", which is itself from Ancient Greek tornos ( τόρνος ) - "lathe".

[ 15 ] Definitions [ edit ] In 1936, the League of Nations defined a foreign tourist as "someone traveling abroad for at least twenty-four hours". Its successor, the United Nations , amended this definition in 1945, by including a maximum stay of six months.

[ 16 ] In 1941, Hunziker and Kraft defined tourism as "the sum of the phenomena and relationships arising from the travel and stay of non-residents, insofar as they do not lead to permanent residence and are not connected with any earning activity." [ 17 ] [ 18 ] In 1976, the Tourism Society of England's definition was: "Tourism is the temporary, short-term movement of people to destinations outside the places where they normally live and work and their activities during the stay at each destination. It includes movements for all purposes." [ 19 ] In 1981, the International Association of Scientific Experts in Tourism defined tourism in terms of particular activities chosen and undertaken outside the home.

[ 20 ] In 1994, the United Nations identified three forms of tourism in its Recommendations on Tourism Statistics : [ 21 ] Domestic tourism , involving residents of the given country traveling only within this country Inbound tourism, [ 22 ] involving non-residents traveling in the given country Outbound tourism, involving residents traveling in another country Other groupings derived from the above grouping: [ 23 ] National tourism, a combination of domestic and outbound tourism Regional tourism, a combination of domestic and inbound tourism International tourism , a combination of inbound and outbound tourism The terms tourism and travel are sometimes used interchangeably. In this context, travel has a similar definition to tourism but implies a more purposeful journey. The terms tourism and tourist are sometimes used pejoratively, to imply a shallow interest in the cultures or locations visited. By contrast, traveller is often used as a sign of distinction. The sociology of tourism has studied the cultural values underpinning these distinctions and their implications for class relations.

[ 24 ] The first sunrise seen from the torii gate on the sea, which is considered a sacred place ( Ōarai in Japan ) There are many varieties of tourism. Of those types, there are multiple forms of outdoor-oriented tourism. Outdoor tourism is generally categorized into nature, eco, and adventure tourism (NEAT). These categories share many similarities but also possess definite and unique characteristics.

Nature tourism generally encompasses tourism activities that would take place outside. Nature tourism appeals to a large audience of tourists and many may not know they are participating in this form of tourism. This type of tourism has a low barrier to entry and is accessible to a large population.

Ecotourism focuses on education, maintaining a social responsibility for the community and the environment, as well as centering economic growth around the local economy. Weaver describes ecotourism as sustainable nature-based tourism.

[ 25 ] Ecotourism is more specific than nature tourism and works toward accomplishing a specific goal through the outdoors. Finally, we have adventure tourism.

Adventure tourism is the most extreme of the categories and includes participation in activities and sports that require a level of skill or experience, risk, and physical exertion.

[ 25 ] Adventure tourism often appeals less to the general public than nature and ecotourism and tends to draw in individuals who partake in such activities with limited marketing.

It is important to understand that these definitions may vary. Perceived risk in adventure tourism is subjective and may change for each individual.

Examples of these tourism types include...

Nature tourism Hiking , walking , camping Ecotourism Guided tours focusing on educating, summer camps , outdoor classes Adventure tourism White water rafting , ice climbing , mountaineering Tourism products [ edit ] According to the World Tourism Organization , a tourism product is: [ 26 ] "a combination of tangible and intangible elements, such as natural, cultural, and man-made resources, attractions, facilities, services and activities around a specific center of interest which represents the core of the destination marketing mix and creates an overall visitor experience including emotional aspects for the potential customers. A tourism product is priced and sold through distribution channels and it has a life-cycle." A tourist map shows the functional zones of a city.

[ 27 ] Tourism products cover a wide variety of services including: [ 28 ] Accommodation services from low-cost homestays to five-star hotels Hospitality services including food and beverage serving centers Health care services like massages All modes of transport, its booking and rental Travel agencies , guided tours and tourist guides Cultural services such as religious monuments, museums , and historical places Shopping Additional travel services like airport parking , airport hotels and travel insurance International tourism [ edit ] International tourist arrivals per year by region International tourism is tourism that crosses national borders.

Globalisation has made tourism a popular global leisure activity. The World Tourism Organization defines tourists as people "traveling to and staying in places outside their usual environment for not more than one consecutive year for leisure, business and other purposes".

[ 29 ] The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that up to 500,000 people are in flight at any one time.

[ 30 ] In 2010, international tourism reached US$919B, growing 6.5% over 2009, corresponding to an increase in real terms of 4.7%.

[ 31 ] In 2010, there were over 940 million international tourist arrivals worldwide.

[ 32 ] By 2016 that number had risen to 1,235 million, producing $1.22 trillion USD in destination spending.

[ 33 ] The COVID-19 crisis had significant negative effects on international tourism significantly slowing the overall increasing trend.

International tourism has significant impacts on the environment, exacerbated in part by the problems created by air travel but also by other issues, including wealthy tourists bringing lifestyles that stress local infrastructure, water and trash systems among others. In many countries, there have been protests against Air bnb tourism raising rents.

Basis [ edit ] Tourism typically requires the tourist to feel engaged in a genuine experience of the location they are visiting. According to Dean MacCannell, tourism requires that the tourist can view the toured area as both authentic and different from their own lived experience.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] : 113 [ better source needed ] By viewing the "exotic," tourists learn what they themselves are not: that is, they are "un-exotic," or normal.

[ 35 ] [ better source needed ] According to MacCannell, all modern tourism experiences the "authentic" and "exotic" as "developmentally inferior" to the modern—that is, to the lived experience of the tourist.

[ 35 ] : 114 [ better source needed ] History [ edit ] Ancient [ edit ] See also: Travel literature Travel outside a person's local area for leisure was largely confined to wealthy classes, who at times travelled to distant parts of the world, to see great buildings and works of art, learn new languages , experience new cultures, enjoy pristine nature and to taste different cuisines . As early as Shulgi , however, kings praised themselves for protecting roads and building way stations for travellers.

[ 36 ] Travelling for pleasure can be seen in Egypt as early on as 1500 BC.

[ 37 ] Ancient Roman tourists during the Republic would visit spas and coastal resorts such as Baiae . They were popular among the rich. The Roman upper class used to spend their free time on land or at sea and travelled to their villa urbana or villa maritima . Numerous villas were located in Campania , around Rome and in the northern part of the Adriatic as in Barcola near Trieste.

Pausanias wrote his Description of Greece in the second century AD. In ancient China , nobles sometimes made a point of visiting Mount Tai and, on occasion, all five Sacred Mountains .

Medieval [ edit ] A Japanese tourist consulting a tour guide and a guide book from Akizato Ritō's Miyako meisho zue (1787) By the post-classical era, many religions, including Christianity , Buddhism , and Islam had developed traditions of pilgrimage .

The Canterbury Tales ( c.

1390s ), which uses a pilgrimage as a framing device , remains a classic of English literature , and Journey to the West ( c.

1592 ), which holds a seminal place in Chinese literature , has a Buddhist pilgrimage at the center of its narrative.

In medieval Italy , Petrarch wrote an allegorical account of his 1336 ascent of Mont Ventoux that praised the act of travelling and criticized frigida incuriositas (a 'cold lack of curiosity'); this account is regarded as one of the first known instances of travel being undertaken for its own sake.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] The Burgundian poet Michault Taillevent [ fr ] later composed his own horrified recollections of a 1430 trip through the Jura Mountains .

[ 40 ] In China, 'travel record literature' ( 遊記文學 ; yóujì wénxué ) became popular during the Song Dynasty (960–1279).

[ 41 ] Travel writers such as Fan Chengda (1126–1193) and Xu Xiake (1587–1641) incorporated a wealth of geographical and topographical information into their writing, while the 'daytrip essay' Record of Stone Bell Mountain by the noted poet and statesman Su Shi (1037–1101) presented a philosophical and moral argument as its central purpose.

[ 42 ] Grand Tour [ edit ] See also: Grand Tour Prince Ladislaus Sigismund of Poland visiting Gallery of Cornelis van der Geest in Brussels in 1624 Modern tourism can be traced to what was known as the Grand Tour , which was a traditional trip around Europe (especially Germany and Italy ), undertaken by mainly upper-class European young men of means, mainly from Western and Northern European countries. In 1624, the young Prince of Poland , Ladislaus Sigismund Vasa , the eldest son of Sigismund III , embarked on a journey across Europe, as was in custom among Polish nobility.

[ 43 ] He travelled through territories of today's Germany, Belgium , the Netherlands , where he admired the siege of Breda by Spanish forces, France , Switzerland to Italy, Austria , and the Czech Republic .

[ 43 ] It was an educational journey [ 44 ] and one of the outcomes was introduction of Italian opera in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth .

[ 45 ] The custom flourished from about 1660 until the advent of large-scale rail transit in the 1840s and generally followed a standard itinerary . It was an educational opportunity and rite of passage . Though primarily associated with the British nobility and wealthy landed gentry , similar trips were made by wealthy young men of Protestant Northern European nations on the Continent , and from the second half of the 18th century some South American, US, and other overseas youth joined in. The tradition was extended to include more of the middle class after rail and steamship travel made the journey easier, and Thomas Cook made the "Cook's Tour" a byword.

The Grand Tour became a status symbol for upper-class students in the 18th and 19th centuries. In this period, Johann Joachim Winckelmann 's theories about the supremacy of classic culture became very popular and appreciated in the European academic world. Artists, writers, and travellers (such as Goethe ) affirmed the supremacy of classic art of which Italy, France, and Greece provide excellent examples. For these reasons, the Grand Tour's main destinations were to those centers, where upper-class students could find rare examples of classic art and history.

The New York Times recently described the Grand Tour in this way: Three hundred years ago, wealthy young Englishmen began taking a post- Oxbridge trek through France and Italy in search of art, culture and the roots of Western civilization . With nearly unlimited funds, aristocratic connections and months (or years) to roam, they commissioned paintings , perfected their language skills and mingled with the upper crust of the Continent.

— Gross, Matt., Lessons From the Frugal Grand Tour ." New York Times 5 September 2008.

The primary value of the Grand Tour, it was believed, laid in the exposure both to the cultural legacy of classical antiquity and the Renaissance , and to the aristocratic and fashionably polite society of the European continent.

Emergence of leisure travel [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) English postcard of the old town of Alsfeld in Germany, with tourists on the market square The Slatina Spa in Slatina , Bosnia and Herzegovina, is famous for its characteristics and had attracted tourists since 1870s.

Leisure travel was associated with the Industrial Revolution in the United Kingdom – the first European country to promote leisure time to the increasing industrial population.

[ 46 ] Initially, this applied to the owners of the machinery of production, the economic oligarchy, factory owners and traders. These comprised the new middle class .

[ 46 ] Cox & Kings was the first official travel company to be formed in 1758.

[ 47 ] The British origin of this new industry is reflected in many place names. In Nice , France, one of the first and best-established holiday resorts on the French Riviera , the long esplanade along the seafront is known to this day as the Promenade des Anglais ; in many other historic resorts in continental Europe , old, well-established palace hotels have names like the Hotel Bristol , Hotel Carlton , or Hotel Majestic – reflecting the dominance of English customers.

A pioneer of the travel agency business, Thomas Cook 's idea to offer excursions came to him while waiting for the stagecoach on the London Road at Kibworth . With the opening of the extended Midland Counties Railway , he arranged to take a group of 540 temperance campaigners from Leicester Campbell Street station to a rally in Loughborough , eleven miles (18 km) away. On 5 July 1841, Thomas Cook arranged for the rail company to charge one shilling per person; this included rail tickets and food for the journey. Cook was paid a share of the fares charged to the passengers, as the railway tickets, being legal contracts between company and passenger, could not have been issued at his own price.

[ clarification needed ] This was the first privately chartered excursion train to be advertised to the general public; Cook himself acknowledged that there had been previous, unadvertised, private excursion trains.

[ 48 ] During the following three summers he planned and conducted outings for temperance societies and Sunday school children. In 1844, the Midland Counties Railway Company agreed to make a permanent arrangement with him, provided he found the passengers. This success led him to start his own business running rail excursions for pleasure, taking a percentage of the railway fares.

[ 49 ] In 1855, he planned his first excursion abroad, when he took a group from Leicester to Calais to coincide with the Paris Exhibition . The following year he started his "grand circular tours" of Europe.

[ 50 ] During the 1860s he took parties to Switzerland, Italy, Egypt, and the United States. Cook established "inclusive independent travel", whereby the traveller went independently but his agency charged for travel, food, and accommodation for a fixed period over any chosen route. Such was his success that the Scottish railway companies withdrew their support between 1862 and 1863 to try the excursion business for themselves.

Tourism, Empire and "Othering" [ edit ] Le charmeur de serpents by Jean-Léon Gérôme (c. 1879).

La Toilette au Harem by Gaspard de Toursky, 20th century.

Although tourism is more often associated with cultural appreciation and leisure, it is also directly connected with power dynamics, cultural representations, and conflicts.

[ 51 ] As a matter of fact, tourism developed alongside violent colonial domination in many regions of the world.

[ 52 ] Colonial authorities often developed transportation infrastructure that facilitated the growth of tourism, while simultaneously promoting racialized and demeaning representations of native populations.

[ 53 ] The violence of the colonial powers was justified by labelling European culture as superior and civilized, while labeling others as inferior, uncivilized and in-need of domestication.

[ 54 ] European people often depicted non-European peoples and cultures as fundamentally different and inferior, establishing hierarchical representations of societies in various kinds of media such as academic books, travel journals, and travel guidebooks.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] By portraying colonized societies as inferior on the hierarchy of cultural value, they "othered" these populations.

[ 58 ] The concept of "othering" refers to the representation of individuals and cultures in a way that simultaneously romanticizes and devalues them, with the goal of establishing dominance.

[ 59 ] "Othering" also refers to  representing peoples while ignoring their own self-representations.

[ 60 ] Cook's Oriental Travellers Gazette, 1892.

In the 19th century, in order to foster the development of tourism in the colonies, touristic enterprises used tourist media to present them as attractive destinations for European travelers.

[ 61 ] Consequently, tourism media not only promoted the colonies as touristic destinations and helped shape popular conceptions about them, but also helped consolidate ideas of Western cultural superiority.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] One notable example is Thomas Cook 's travel enterprise established in the United Kingdom in 1841 and his travel newspaper called “The Excursionist”.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Thomas Cook enterprise promoted touristic excursions and package tours all over the world. In the case of the tour to Egypt, Thomas Cook & Son ’s promotional materials aimed to portray it as an “out-of-the-ordinary”, wild, yet safe and domesticated destination, appealing to European tourists’ desire for both familiarity and adventure.

[ 66 ] Thomas Cook & Son collaboration with the British Empire during the occupation of Egypt facilitated European access to the Middle East through the construction of transportation networks such as steamships on the River Nile.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] At the same time, it reinforced Eurocentric and imperial politics.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] These narratives, as reflected in travel guidebooks present in the Orientalist collection , often reveal more about the symbolic authority of European powers over colonized regions than they do about the actual cultures depicted.

[ 71 ] The process of othering and categorizing societies into simplistic binary oppositions—such as civilized/primitive and superior/inferior — contributes to the perpetuation of imperialist ideologies because it silences the voices of local communities and obscures their cultural complexity.

[ 72 ] Tourism after 1945 [ edit ] In the period following World War II , an increasing number of individuals from diverse backgrounds were able to participate in tourism.

[ 73 ] Racial segregation and tourism in the United States [ edit ] Prior to the Civil Rights Act , Black travellers encountered specific challenges when travelling within the United States.

[ 74 ] Jim Crow legislation enforced racial segregation in numerous public spaces, including public transport, accommodation, and tourist sites in general.

[ 75 ] [ 74 ] The Negro Motorist Green Book was a travel guide published from 1936 to 1967 by Victor and Alma Duke Green. It was aimed at Black travellers in the United States during the era of segregation and listed places where Black travellers were welcome.

[ 76 ] Several major companies collaborated with the Green Book. For instance, the Esso Standard Oil Company placed advertisements in the Green Book and sold it at their nationwide gas stations.

[ 76 ] Economic significance of tourism [ edit ] Photochrom of the Blackpool promenade c. 1898 The tourism industry, as part of the service sector , [ 77 ] has become an important source of income for many regions and even for entire countries. The Manila Declaration on World Tourism of 1980 recognized its importance as "an activity essential to the life of nations because of its direct effects on the social, cultural, educational, and economic sectors of national societies, and on their international relations." [ 2 ] [ 78 ] Tourism brings large amounts of income into a local economy in the form of payment for goods and services needed by tourists, accounting as of 2011 [update] for 30% of the world's trade in services, and, as an invisible export , for 6% of overall exports of goods and services.

[ 7 ] It also generates opportunities for employment in the service sector of the economy associated with tourism.

[ 79 ] It is also claimed that travel broadens the mind.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] The hospitality industries which benefit from tourism include transportation services (such as airlines , cruise ships , transits , trains and taxicabs ); lodging (including hotels , hostels , homestays , resorts and renting out rooms); and entertainment venues (such as amusement parks , restaurants , casinos , festivals , shopping malls , music venues , and theatres ). This is in addition to goods bought by tourists, including souvenirs .

On the flip-side, tourism can degrade people [ 82 ] and sour relationships between host and guest.

[ 83 ] Tourism frequently also puts additional pressure on the local environment.

[ 84 ] The economic foundations of tourism are essentially the cultural assets, the cultural property and the nature of the travel location. The World Heritage Sites are particularly worth mentioning today because they are real tourism magnets. But even a country's current or former form of government can be decisive for tourism. For example, the fascination of the British royal family brings millions of tourists to Great Britain every year and thus the economy around £550 million a year. The Habsburg family can be mentioned in Central Europe. According to estimates, the Habsburg brand should generate tourism sales of 60 million euros per year for Vienna alone. The tourist principle "Habsburg sells" applies.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Tourism, cultural heritage and UNESCO [ edit ] Blue Shield fact-finding mission in Egypt Shanidar Cave in the Erbil Governorate of Kurdistan Region in northern Iraq Cultural and natural heritage are in many cases the absolute basis for worldwide tourism. Cultural tourism is one of the mega-trends that is reflected in massive numbers of overnight stays and sales. As UNESCO is increasingly observing, the cultural heritage is needed for tourism, but also endangered by it. The "ICOMOS - International Cultural Tourism Charter" from 1999 is already dealing with all of these problems. As a result of the tourist hazard, for example, the Lascaux cave was rebuilt for tourists.

Overtourism is an important buzzword in this area. Furthermore, the focus of UNESCO in war zones is to ensure the protection of cultural heritage in order to maintain this future important economic basis for the local population. And there is intensive cooperation between UNESCO, the United Nations , the United Nations peacekeeping and Blue Shield International . There are extensive international and national considerations, studies and programs to protect cultural assets from the effects of tourism and those from war. In particular, it is also about training civilian and military personnel. But the involvement of the locals is particularly important. The founding president of Blue Shield International Karl von Habsburg summed it up with the words: "Without the local community and without the local participants, that would be completely impossible'.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] Cruise ships [ edit ] The modern cruise ship Seabourn Ovation in the Mediterranean Cruising is a popular form of water tourism . Leisure cruise ships were introduced by the P&O in 1844, sailing from Southampton to destinations such as Gibraltar , Malta and Athens .

[ 91 ] In 1891, German businessman Albert Ballin sailed the ship Augusta Victoria from Hamburg into the Mediterranean Sea. 29 June 1900 saw the launching of the first purpose-built cruise ship was Prinzessin Victoria Luise , built in Hamburg for the Hamburg America Line .

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Modern day tourism [ edit ] Mass tourism [ edit ] Tourists at the Mediterranean Coast of Barcelona 2007 Mass tourism and its tourist attractions have emerged as among the most iconic demonstration of western consumer societies.

[ 94 ] Academics have defined mass tourism as travel by groups on pre-scheduled tours, usually under the organization of tourism professionals. This form of tourism developed during the second half of the 19th century in the United Kingdom and was pioneered by Thomas Cook . Cook took advantage of Europe's rapidly expanding railway network and established a company that offered affordable day trip excursions to the masses , in addition to longer holidays to Continental Europe, India, Asia and the Western Hemisphere which attracted wealthier customers. By the 1890s over 20,000 tourists per year used Thomas Cook & Son .

The relationship between tourism companies, transportation operators and hotels is a central feature of mass tourism. Cook was able to offer prices that were below the publicly advertised price because his company purchased large numbers of tickets from railroads. One contemporary form of mass tourism, package tourism , still incorporates the partnership between these three groups.

Travel developed during the early 20th century and was facilitated by the development of the automobiles and later by airplanes.
Improvements in transport allowed many people to travel quickly to places of leisure interest so that more people could begin to enjoy the benefits of leisure time.

In Continental Europe , early seaside resorts included: Heiligendamm , founded in 1793 at the Baltic Sea , being the first seaside resort; Ostend , popularized by the people of Brussels ; Boulogne-sur-Mer and Deauville for the Parisians ; Taormina in Sicily . In the United States , the first seaside resorts in the European style were at Atlantic City , New Jersey and Long Island , New York .

By the mid-20th century, the Mediterranean Coast became the principal mass tourism destination. The 1960s and 1970s saw mass tourism play a major role in the Spanish economic "miracle" .

[ 95 ] In the 1960s and 1970s, scientists discussed negative socio-cultural impacts of tourism on host communities. Since the 1980s the positive aspects of tourism began to be recognized as well.

[ 96 ] In more recent times, mass tourism is something which has become a negative experience for local residents of cities and destinations that experience heavy tourism, especially in summer months. In July 2024 for example, protests by local residents in Barcelona, Spain were held in the city, where ″thousands of people joined an anti-tourism protest amid rising housing costs.″ [ 97 ] Niche tourism [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of adjectival tourisms .

The Sanctuary of Christ the King , in Almada , has become one of the places most visited for religious tourism.

Niche tourism refers to the specialty forms of tourism that have emerged over the years, each with its own adjective. Many of these terms have come into common use by the tourism industry and academics.

[ 98 ] Others are emerging concepts that may or may not gain popular usage. Examples of the more common niche tourism markets are: Agritourism Birth tourism Coastal island tourism Culinary tourism Cultural tourism Dark tourism (also called "black tourism" or "grief tourism") Eco tourism Extreme tourism Film tourism Geotourism Heritage tourism LGBT tourism Medical tourism Nautical tourism Pop-culture tourism Religious tourism Sex tourism Slum tourism Sports tourism Tallest buildings tourism Trains tourism (e.g., steam and model railways) Virtual tourism War tourism Wellness tourism Wildlife tourism Other terms used for niche or specialty travel forms include the term "destination" in the descriptions, such as destination weddings , and terms such as location vacation .

Winter tourism [ edit ] See also: List of ski areas and resorts and Winter sport The Santa Claus Village at the Arctic Circle in Rovaniemi , Finland is one of the significant tourist places in the Northern Europe.

[ 99 ] St. Moritz , Switzerland became the cradle of the developing winter tourism in the 1860s: hotel manager Johannes Badrutt invited some summer guests from England to return in the winter to see the snowy landscape, thereby inaugurating a popular trend.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] It was, however, only in the 1970s when winter tourism took over the lead from summer tourism in many of the Swiss ski resorts. Even in winter, up to one third of all guests (depending on the location) consist of non-skiers.

[ 102 ] Major ski resorts are located mostly in the various European countries (e.g.

Andorra , Austria , Bulgaria , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , Czech Republic , Cyprus , Finland , France , Germany , Greece , Iceland , Italy , Norway , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland , Romania , Serbia , Sweden , Slovakia , Slovenia , Spain , Switzerland , Turkey ), Canada , the United States (e.g. Montana, Utah, Colorado, California, Wyoming, Vermont, New Hampshire, New York) Argentina , New Zealand , Japan , South Korea , Chile , and Lebanon .

Recent developments [ edit ] A destination hotel in Germany : Yacht Harbour Residence in Rostock , Mecklenburg There has been an up-trend in tourism over the last few decades, [ vague ] especially in Europe, where international travel for short breaks is common. Tourists have a wide range of budgets and tastes, and a wide variety of resorts and hotels have developed to cater for them. For example, some people prefer simple beach vacations, while others want more specialized holidays, quieter resorts, family-oriented holidays, or niche market-targeted destination hotels .

The developments in air transport infrastructure, such as jumbo jets , low-cost airlines , and more accessible airports have made many types of tourism more affordable. A major factor in the relatively low cost of air travel is the tax exemption for aviation fuels . The WHO estimated in 2009 that there are around half a million people on board aircraft at any given time.

[ 30 ] There have also been changes in lifestyle, for example, some retirement-age people sustain year-round tourism. This is facilitated by internet sales of tourist services. Some sites have now started to offer dynamic packaging , in which an inclusive price is quoted for a tailor-made package requested by the customer upon impulse.

There have been a few setbacks in tourism, such as the September 11 attacks and terrorist threats to tourist destinations , such as in Bali and several European cities. Also, on 26 December 2004, a tsunami , caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake , hit the Asian countries on the Indian Ocean , including the Maldives . Thousands of people died including many tourists. This, together with the vast clean-up operations, stopped or severely hampered tourism in the area for a time.

[ 103 ] Individual low-price or even zero-price overnight stays have become more popular in the 2000s, especially with a strong growth in the hostel market and services like CouchSurfing and airbnb being established.

[ 104 ] There has also been examples of jurisdictions wherein a significant portion of GDP is being spent on altering the primary sources of revenue towards tourism, as has occurred for instance in Dubai .

[ 105 ] Sustainable tourism [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Sustainable tourism .

[ edit ] Not to be confused with Ecotourism .

A canopy walkway at Kakum National Park in Ghana, ensuring that tourists have least direct impact on the surrounding ecology. The visitor park received the Global Tourism for Tomorrow Award in 1998.

Sustainable tourism is a concept that covers the complete tourism experience, including concern for economic, social, and environmental issues as well as attention to improving tourists' experiences and addressing the needs of host communities.

[ 106 ] Sustainable tourism should embrace concerns for environmental protection , social equity, and the quality of life, cultural diversity, and a dynamic, viable economy delivering jobs and prosperity for all.

[ 107 ] It has its roots in sustainable development and there can be some confusion as to what "sustainable tourism" means.

[ 108 ] : 23 There is now broad consensus that tourism should be sustainable .

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] In fact, all forms of tourism have the potential to be sustainable if planned, developed and managed properly.

[ 108 ] Tourist development organizations are promoting sustainable tourism practices in order to mitigate negative effects caused by the growing impact of tourism , for example its environmental impacts.

The United Nations World Tourism Organization emphasized these practices by promoting sustainable tourism as part of the Sustainable Development Goals , through programs like the International Year for Sustainable Tourism for Development in 2017.

[ 111 ] There is a direct link between sustainable tourism and several of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

[ 108 ] : 26 Tourism for SDGs focuses on how SDG 8 ("decent work and economic growth"), SDG 12 ("responsible consumption and production") and SDG 14 ("life below water") implicate tourism in creating a sustainable economy .

[ 112 ] According to the World Travel & Tourism Travel, tourism constituted "10.3 percent to the global gross domestic product, with international tourist arrivals hitting 1.5 billion marks (a growth of 3.5 percent) in 2019" and generated $1.7 trillion export earnings yet, improvements are expected to be gained from suitable management aspects and including sustainable tourism as part of a broader sustainable development strategy.

[ 113 ] Ecotourism [ edit ] Main article: Ecotourism Ecotourism , also known as ecological tourism, is responsible travel to fragile, pristine, and usually protected areas that strives to be low-impact and (often) small-scale. It helps educate the traveller; provides funds for conservation; directly benefits the economic development and political empowerment of local communities, and fosters respect for different cultures and for human rights.

Take only memories and leave only footprints is a very common slogan in protected areas.

[ 114 ] Tourist destinations are shifting to low carbon emissions following the trend of visitors more focused in being environmentally responsible adopting a sustainable behavior.

[ 115 ] Volunteer tourism [ edit ] Main article: Volunteer tourism Volunteer tourism (or voluntourism) is growing as a largely Western phenomenon, with volunteers travelling to aid those less fortunate than themselves in order to counter global inequalities. Wearing (2001) defines volunteer tourism as applying "to those tourists who, for various reasons, volunteer in an organised way to undertake holidays that might involve aiding or alleviating the material poverty of some groups in society".

[ 116 ] VSO was founded in the UK in 1958 and the US Peace Corps was subsequently founded in 1960. These were the first large scale voluntary sending organisations, initially arising to modernise less economically developed countries, which it was hoped would curb the influence of communism.

[ 117 ] This form of tourism is largely praised for its more sustainable approach to travel, with tourists attempting to assimilate into local cultures, and avoiding the criticisms of consumptive and exploitative mass tourism.

[ 118 ] However, increasingly, voluntourism is being criticised by scholars who suggest it may have negative effects as it begins to undermine local labour, and force unwilling host communities to adopt Western initiatives, [ 119 ] while host communities without a strong heritage fail to retain volunteers who become dissatisfied with experiences and volunteer shortages persist.

[ 120 ] Increasingly, organisations such as VSO have been concerned with community-centric volunteer programmes where power to control the future of the community is in the hands of local people.

[ 121 ] Pro-poor tourism [ edit ] Community tourism in Sierra Leone → The story of a community in Sierra Leone trying to manage tourism in a responsible manner Pro-poor tourism, which seeks to help the poorest people in developing countries, has been receiving increasing attention by those involved in development; the issue has been addressed through small-scale projects in local communities and through attempts by Ministries of Tourism to attract large numbers of tourists.

[ 122 ] Research by the Overseas Development Institute suggests that neither is the best way to encourage tourists' money to reach the poorest as only 25% or less (far less in some cases) ever reaches the poor; successful examples of money reaching the poor include mountain-climbing in Tanzania and cultural tourism in Luang Prabang , Laos .

[ 123 ] There is also the possibility of pro-poor tourism principles being adopted in centre sites of regeneration in the developed world.

[ 124 ] Recession tourism [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Recession tourism is a travel trend which evolved by way of the world economic crisis. Recession tourism is defined by low-cost and high-value experiences taking place at once-popular generic retreats. Various recession tourism hotspots have seen business boom during the recession thanks to comparatively low costs of living and a slow world job market suggesting travellers are elongating trips where their money travels further. This concept is not widely used in tourism research. It is related to the short-lived phenomenon that is more widely known as staycation . In general, studies have primarily focused on the short-term effects of the crisis on tourism demand, often overlooking the long-term implications for the competitive positioning of the impacted destinations.

[ 125 ] Medical tourism [ edit ] Main article: Medical tourism When there is a significant price difference between countries for a given medical procedure, particularly in Southeast Asia , India , Sri Lanka , Eastern Europe , Cuba [ 126 ] and Canada [ 127 ] where there are different regulatory regimes, in relation to particular medical procedures (e.g.

dentistry ), travelling to take advantage of the price or regulatory differences is often referred to as "medical tourism".

Educational tourism [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Educational tourism is developed because of the growing popularity of teaching and learning of knowledge and the enhancing of technical competency outside of the classroom environment. Brent W. Ritchie, publisher of Managing Educational Tourism, created a study of a geographic subdivision to demonstrate how tourism educated high school students participating in foreign exchange programs over the last 15 years.

[ 128 ] In educational tourism, the main focus of the tour or leisure activity includes visiting another country to learn about the culture, study tours, or to work and apply skills learned inside the classroom in a different environment, such as in the International Practicum Training Program.

[ 129 ] In 2018, one impact was many exchange students traveled to America to assist students financially in order to maintain their secondary education.

[ 130 ] Event tourism [ edit ] Light Move Festival in Łódź , Poland This type of tourism is focused on tourists coming into a region to either participate in an event or to see an organized event put on by the city/region.

[ 131 ] This type of tourism can also fall under sustainable tourism as well and companies that create a sustainable event to attend open up a chance to not only the consumer but their workers to learn and develop from the experience. Creating a sustainable atmosphere creates a chance to inform and encourage sustainable practices. An example of event tourism would be the music festival South by Southwest that is hosted in Austin, Texas annually. Every year people from all over the world flock to the city for one week to sit in on technology talks and see bands perform. People are drawn here to experience something that they are not able to experience in their hometown, which defines event tourism.

Creative tourism [ edit ] Friendship Force visitors from Indonesia meeting their hosts in Hartwell, Georgia , United States Creative tourism has existed as a form of cultural tourism , since the early beginnings of tourism itself. Its European roots date back to the time of the Grand Tour , which saw the sons of aristocratic families travelling for the purpose of mostly interactive, educational experiences. More recently, creative tourism has been given its own name by Crispin Raymond and Greg Richards, [ 132 ] who as members of the Association for Tourism and Leisure Education (ATLAS), have directed a number of projects for the European Commission , including cultural and crafts tourism, known as sustainable tourism . They have defined "creative tourism" as tourism related to the active participation of travellers in the culture of the host community, through interactive workshops and informal learning experiences.

[ 132 ] Meanwhile, the concept of creative tourism has been picked up by high-profile organizations such as UNESCO , who through the Creative Cities Network , have endorsed creative tourism as an engaged, authentic experience that promotes an active understanding of the specific cultural features of a place . UNESCO wrote in one of its documents: "'Creative Tourism' involves more interaction, in which the visitor has an educational, emotional, social, and participative interaction with the place, its living culture, and the people who live there. They feel like a citizen." [ 133 ] Saying so, the tourist will have the opportunity to take part in workshops, classes and activities related to the culture of the destination.

More recently, creative tourism has gained popularity as a form of cultural tourism, drawing on active participation by travellers in the culture of the host communities they visit. Several countries offer examples of this type of tourism development, including the United Kingdom, Austria, France, the Bahamas, Jamaica, Spain, Italy, New Zealand and South Korea.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] The growing interest of tourists [ 136 ] in this new way to discover a culture regards particularly the operators and branding managers, attentive to the possibility of attracting a quality tourism, highlighting the intangible heritage (craft workshops, cooking classes, etc.) and optimizing the use of existing infrastructure (for example, through the rent of halls and auditoriums).

Experiential tourism [ edit ] Experiential travel (or "immersion travel") is one of the major market trends in the modern tourism industry. It is an approach to travelling which focuses on experiencing a country, city or particular place by connecting to its history , people, food and culture .

[ 137 ] The term "experiential travel" has been mentioned in publications since 1985, [ 138 ] but it was not discovered as a meaningful market trend until much later.

Dark tourism [ edit ] Main article: Dark tourism The Skull Chapel in Kudowa-Zdrój , Lower Silesian Voivodeship , Poland , is an example of an attraction for dark tourism . Its interior walls, ceiling and foundations are adorned by human remains. It is the only such monument in Poland, and one of six in Europe .

One emerging area of special interest has been identified by Lennon and Foley (2000) [ 139 ] [ 140 ] as "dark" tourism . This type of tourism involves visits to "dark" sites, such as battlegrounds, scenes of horrific crimes or acts of genocide , for example concentration camps . Its origins are rooted in fairgrounds and medieval fairs.

[ 141 ] Social tourism [ edit ] Social tourism is making tourism available to poor people who otherwise could not afford to travel for their education or recreation. It includes youth hostels and low-priced holiday accommodation run by church and voluntary organisations , trade unions , or in Communist times publicly owned enterprises . In May 1959, at the second Congress of Social Tourism in Austria, Walter Hunziker proposed the following definition: "Social tourism is a type of tourism practiced by low-income groups, and which is rendered possible and facilitated by entirely separate and therefore easily recognizable services".

[ 142 ] Doom tourism [ edit ] Perito Moreno Glacier , Patagonia , Argentina Also known as "tourism of doom," or "last chance tourism", involves travelling to places that are environmentally or otherwise threatened (such as the ice caps of Mount Kilimanjaro , the melting glaciers of Patagonia , or the coral of the Great Barrier Reef ) before it is too late. The trend emerged in the 21st century, identified in 2007 by travel trade magazine in 2007 [ 143 ] and explored in The New York Times , [ 144 ] This type of tourism has been on the rise. Some see the trend as related to sustainable tourism or ecotourism due to the fact that a number of these tourist destinations are considered threatened by environmental factors such as global warming, overpopulation or climate change. Others worry that travel to many of these threatened locations increases an individual's carbon footprint and only hastens problems threatened locations are already facing.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] As of 2024, climate change has been making Last Chance Tourism more popular, and riskier. In August 2024, an American was killed visiting an ice cave at the foot of the Breidamerkurjokull glacier.

[ 148 ] Religious tourism [ edit ] Main article: Religious tourism St. Peter's Basilica in Vatican City , the papal enclave within the Italian city of Rome, one of the largest religious tourism sites in the world Religious tourism, in particular pilgrimage , can serve to strengthen faith and to demonstrate devotion.

[ 149 ] Religious tourists may seek destinations whose image encourages them to believe that they can strengthen the religious elements of their self-identity in a positive manner. Given this, the perceived image of a destination may be positively influenced by whether it conforms to the requirements of their religious self-identity or not.

[ 150 ] DNA tourism [ edit ] DNA tourism, also called "ancestry tourism" or "heritage travel", is tourism based on DNA testing. These tourists visit their remote relatives or places where their ancestors came from, or where their relatives reside, based on the results of DNA tests. DNA tourism became a growing trend in 2019.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] Sleep tourism [ edit ] Main article: Sleep tourism Sleep tourism focuses on medical treatments or other approaches, and may focus on people who have difficulty falling asleep, people who experience interrupted sleep, people who don't feel rested after sleeping, snoring, breathing difficulties, and dreaming.

[ 153 ] Impacts on destinations [ edit ] Main article: Impacts of tourism This section is an excerpt from Impacts of tourism .

[ edit ] Impacts of tourism Tourism has a significant impact on destinations , influencing their economy , culture , environment , and communities . Tourism positively affects many parties in society but can also be detrimental in certain situations.

In general, tourism positively affects the economy of its destination. The purchasing of commodities, and the usage of hotels and transport by tourists all contribute to economic activity within the country.

The sociocultural impacts of tourism are less straightforward, bringing both benefits and challenges to the destination. The interactions between tourists and locals foster a cultural exchange , particularly exposing tourists to a different culture through direct interactions and overall immersion . However, differing expectations in the societal and moral values of the tourists and those from the host location can cause friction between the two parties.

While tourism may have positive impacts environmentally , through an increase in awareness of certain environmental issues , tourism overall negatively impacts the environment. Tourist destinations and attractions located in the wild may neglect environmental concerns to satisfy the demands of tourists, creating issues such as pollution and deforestation .

Tourism also has positive and negative health outcomes for local people.

[ 154 ] The short-term negative impacts of tourism on residents' health are related to the density of tourist arrivals, the risk of disease transmission , road accidents, higher crime levels , as well as traffic congestion , crowding , and other stressful factors.

[ 155 ] In addition, residents can experience anxiety and depression related to their risk perceptions about mortality rates , food insecurity , contact with infected tourists, etc.

[ 156 ] At the same time, there are positive long-term impacts of tourism on residents' health and well-being outcomes through improving healthcare access, positive emotions, novelty , and social interactions.

Tourism industry growth [ edit ] Cultural tourism : tourists outside a Geghard monastery in Armenia , 2015 In 2004 the World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) forecasts that international tourism will continue growing at the average annual rate of 4 percent.

[ 157 ] With the advent of e-commerce , tourism products have become prominent traded items on the internet.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] Tourism products and services have been made available through intermediaries, although tourism providers (hotels, airlines, etc.), including small-scale operators, can sell their services directly.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] As a result of the late-2000s recession , international arrivals experienced a strong slowdown beginning in June 2008. Growth from 2007 to 2008 was only 3.7 percent during the first eight months of 2008. This slowdown on international tourism demand was also reflected in the air transport industry, with negative growth in September 2008 and a 3.3% growth in passenger traffic through September. The hotel industry also reported a slowdown, with room occupancy declining. In 2009 worldwide tourism arrivals decreased by 3.8 percent.

[ 162 ] By the first quarter of 2009, real travel demand in the United States had fallen 6 percent over six quarters. While this was considerably milder than what occurred after the September 11 attacks , the decline was at twice the rate, as real GDP has fallen.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] However, evidence suggests that tourism as a global phenomenon shows no signs of substantially abating in the long term.

[ 165 ] The UNWTO has noted, that tourists increasingly view vacations and travel as a necessity rather than a luxury, and that this shift in attitudes may explain tourist numbers recovering globally in 2009.

[ 162 ] It has been suggested there is a strong correlation between tourism expenditure per capita and the degree to which countries play in the global context.

[ 166 ] Not only as a result of the important economic contribution of the tourism industry, but also as an indicator of the degree of confidence with which global citizens leverage the resources of the globe for the benefit of their local economies . This is why any projections of growth in tourism may serve as an indication of the relative influence that each country will exercise in the future.

Liabilities and insurance [ edit ] After the September 11 attacks the tourism industry operators had to consider the health and safety of tourists because it became increasingly difficult to obtain liability insurance . The organisations willing to provide insurance to tourism industry operators required, that operators put in place best practice risk management structures. This included, that whatever was promised in the contract about the holiday was really delivered by the operator.

[ 167 ] Space tourism [ edit ] Main article: Space tourism SpaceShipTwo , a major project in space tourism There has been a limited amount of orbital space tourism , with only the Russian Space Agency providing transport to date. A 2010 report into space tourism anticipated that it could become a billion-dollar market by 2030.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] The space market has been around since 1979, however, there has been a limited amount of orbital space tourism , with only the Russian Space Agency providing transport on its Soyuz and the Chinese Shenzhou being the only two spacecrafts suitable for human travel . In April 2001, Dennis Tito, a customer of the Russian Soyuz became the first tourist to visit space. In May 2011, Virgin Galactic launched its SpaceShipTwo plane that allows people to travel 2 hours space at the advertised price of $200,000 per seat. A challenge that the commercial space tourism industry faces is to be able to have fundings from private investments needed to lower the cost of access to space in addition to being able to encourage both private and public sector support to increase capacity to allow commercial passengers. With space tourism still being new concept, there are many factors that needs to be considered for the industry. From its actual demand to its risk factor to its liabilities and insurance issues, there are still a lot of research that needs to be conducted. A 2010 report into space tourism anticipated that the industry is expected to grow by 18% - 26% per year during 2020 to 2030.

Sports tourism [ edit ] Main article: Sports tourism Sports tourism that attracts spectators is associated with negative impacts such as traffic congestion, vandalism, and anti-social behaviour. Sports tourist destinations may therefore be subject public displays of resentment and antagonism even though the host community benefits substantially. Sports tourism growth and decline can be subject to international commercial sporting events. For example, the irreversible environmental damage caused by the 1992 Winter Olympics is cited as a reason for stagnating ski tourism.

[ 170 ] Security in Tourism [ edit ] Security in Tourism is a sub-discipline of tourist studies that explores the factors that affect the ontological security of tourists. Risks are evaluated by their impact and nature.

[ 171 ] Tourism security includes methodologies, theories and techniques oriented to protect the organic image of tourist destinations.

[ 172 ] Three academic waves are significant in tourism security: risk perception theory, disaster management, and post-disaster consumption.

[ 173 ] Andrew Spencer & Peter Tarlow argue that tourism security is not an easy concept to define. It includes a set of sub-disciplines, and global risks different in nature which cause different effects in the tourism industry. The rise of tourism security and safety as a consolidated discipline coincides with the globalization and ultimate maturation of the industry worldwide. Some threats include, for example, terrorist groups looking to destabilize governments affecting not only the local economies but killing foreign tourists to cause geopolitical tensions between delivery-country and receiving-tourist countries. Today, island destinations are more affected by terrorism and other global risks than other continent destinations [ 174 ] [ 175 ] Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic [ edit ] Main article: Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism In 2020 the COVID-19 pandemic travel bans and a substantial reduction in passenger travel by air and sea contributed to a sharp decline in tourism activity .

[ 176 ] The World Tourism Organization (WTO) reported a 70% decrease in international travel in 2020, where 165 of 217 worldwide destinations completely stopped international tourism by April 2020. Since every country imposes different travel restrictions, it makes traveling plans complicated and often too difficult to figure out, thus the willingness to travel for the general population decreases. It is estimated that the United States lost 147 billion U.S. dollars in revenue from tourism between January and October 2020. Spain had the next highest loss of revenue at around 46.7 billion U.S dollars, and countries in Africa collectively lost about 55 billion dollars during April and June 2020.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Business tourism – Type of tourism Cultural travel – Style of tourism Environmental effects of aviation – Effect of emissions from aircraft engines Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets International tourism advertising Medical tourism – People traveling abroad to obtain medical treatment Outline of tourism – Overview and topical guide of tourism Overtourism – Excessive number of tourists Science tourism – Travel to notable science locations Scuba diving tourism – Industry based on recreational diver travel Sex tourism – Travel to engage in sexual activity Snorkeling – Swimming while inhaling through a snorkel Terminal tourism Tombstone tourist – Person who visits grave sites Tour guide – Person who provides cultural heritage interpretation to tourists Tourist attraction – Place of interest where tourists visit Touron – Pejorative for irresponsible tourists Travel agency – Retailer that provides tourism-related services Travel visa – Authority to enter, stay in, or exit a territory World Tourism rankings – List compiled by the UN World Tourism Organization Tourismphobia References [ edit ] ^ "tourism" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ a b "UNWTO technical manual: Collection of Tourism Expenditure Statistics" (PDF) . World Tourism Organization. 1995. p. 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 September 2010 . Retrieved 26 March 2009 .

^ "International tourism challenged by deteriorating global economy" (PDF) .

UNWTO World Tourism Barometer .

7 (1). January 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 October 2013 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ "UNWTO World Tourism Barometer Interim Update" (PDF) .

UNWTO World Tourism Barometer . August 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 October 2013 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ "International Tourist Arrivals Reach 1.4 billion Two Years Ahead of Forecasts | UN Tourism" .

www.unwto.org . Retrieved 1 May 2025 .

^ "International Tourist Numbers Could Fall 60-80% in 2020" .

www.unwto.org . Retrieved 16 September 2020 .

^ a b Magalhães, Bianca dos Santos (1 July 2017).

UNWTO Tourism Highlights: 2017 Edition . World Tourism Organization (UNWTO).

doi : 10.18111/9789284419029 .

ISBN 978-92-844-1902-9 .

^ "UNWTO World Tourism Barometer" (PDF) .

UNWTO World Tourism Barometer .

11 (1). January 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 February 2013 . Retrieved 9 April 2013 .

^ "China – the new number one tourism source market in the world" .

World Tourism Organization . 4 April 2013. Archived from the original on 8 April 2013 . Retrieved 9 April 2013 .

^ Lenzen, Manfred; Sun, Ya-Yen; Faturay, Futu; Ting, Yuan-Peng; Geschke, Arne; Malik, Arunima (7 May 2018). "The carbon footprint of global tourism".

Nature Climate Change .

8 (6). Springer Nature Limited: 522– 528.

Bibcode : 2018NatCC...8..522L .

doi : 10.1038/s41558-018-0141-x .

ISSN 1758-6798 .

S2CID 90810502 .

[...] between 2009 and 2013, tourism's global carbon footprint has increased from 3.9 to 4.5 GtCO2e, four times more than previously estimated, accounting for about 8% of global greenhouse gas emissions. Transport, shopping and food are significant contributors. The majority of this footprint is exerted by and in high-income countries.

^ Tourism and the Sustainable Development Goals – Journey to 2030, Highlights . World Tourism Organization (UNWTO). 18 December 2017.

doi : 10.18111/9789284419340 .

ISBN 978-92-844-1934-0 .

^ Griffiths, Ralph ; Griffiths, G.E. (1772).

"Pennant's Tour in Scotland in 1769" .

The Monthly Review, Or, Literary Journal .

46 : 150 . Retrieved 23 December 2011 .

^ Harper, Douglas .

"tour (n.)" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 23 December 2011 .

^ "tourism" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

etymonline.com . Retrieved 3 June 2016 .

^ Theobald, William F. (1998).

Global Tourism (2nd ed.). Oxford [England]: Butterworth–Heinemann . pp.

6– 7.

ISBN 978-0-7506-4022-0 .

OCLC 40330075 .

^ Hunziker, W ; Krapf, K (1942).

Grundriß Der Allgemeinen Fremdenverkehrslehre (in German). Zurich: Polygr. Verl.

OCLC 180109383 .

^ Spode, Hasso (1998). "Geschichte der Tourismuswissenschaft". In Haedrich, Günther (ed.).

Tourismus-management: Tourismus-marketing Und Fremdenverkehrsplanung (in German). Berlin: [u.a.] de Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-11-015185-5 .

OCLC 243881885 .

^ Beaver, Allan (2002).

A Dictionary of Travel and Tourism Terminology . Wallingford: CAB International. p. 313.

ISBN 978-0-85199-582-3 .

OCLC 301675778 .

^ International Association of Scientific Experts in Tourism.

"The AIEST, its character and aims" . Archived from the original on 26 November 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2008 .

^ "Recommendations on Tourism Statistics" (PDF) .

Statistical Papers (83): 5. 1994 . Retrieved 12 July 2010 .

^ "ww.oicstatcom.org" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 19 June 2019 .

^ "Glossary:Tourism - Statistics Explained" .

ec.europa.eu . 30 October 2020. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020 . Retrieved 17 December 2020 .

^ Edensor, Tim (1998).

Tourists at the Taj: Performance and Meaning at a Symbolic Site . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-16712-3 .

^ a b Weaver, David B. (2008).

Ecotourism . Wiley Australia tourism series (2nd ed.). Milton, Qld: Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-470-81304-1 .

^ "Product Development" . unwto.org. 21 November 2020. Archived from the original on 21 November 2020.

^ Erin H. Fouberg; Alexander B. Murphy (2020).

Human Geography: People, Place, and Culture . Wiley. p. 268.

ISBN 9781119577607 .

^ "Introduction to tourism" . visitbritain.org. 11 April 2020. Archived from the original on 11 April 2020.

^ "UNWTO technical manual: Collection of Tourism Expenditure Statistics" (PDF) . World Tourism Organization. 1995. p. 14. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 September 2010 . Retrieved 26 March 2009 .

^ a b Swine flu prompts EU warning on travel to US .

The Guardian.

28 April 2009.

^ "UNWTO World Tourism Barometer June 2009" (PDF) .

UNWTO World Tourism Barometer .

7 (2). World Tourism Organization. June 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 November 2011 . Retrieved 3 August 2009 .

^ "2011 Highlights" (PDF) .

UNWTO World Tourism Highlights . UNWTO. June 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 January 2012 . Retrieved 9 January 2012 .

^ World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) (1 July 2017).

UNWTO Tourism Highlights: 2017 Edition . World Tourism Organization (UNWTO).

doi : 10.18111/9789284419029 .

ISBN 978-92-844-1902-9 .

^ Maccannell, Dean (1999).

The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class (2nd ed.). University of California Press. p. 12.

ISBN 9780520218925 .

^ a b c Nolt, Steven (2016).

The Amish and the Media | Johns Hopkins University Press Books . jhupbooks.press.jhu.edu.

doi : 10.1353/book.44948 .

ISBN 9781421419572 . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

^ Jayapalan, N. (2001).

Introduction To Tourism . Atlantic Publishers & Dist.

ISBN 978-81-7156-977-9 .

^ Casson, Lionel (1994).

Travel in the Ancient World . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 32.

^ Cassirer, Ernst (January 1943). "Some Remarks on the Question of the Originality of the Renaissance".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

4 (1). University of Pennsylvania Press: 49– 74.

doi : 10.2307/2707236 .

ISSN 0022-5037 .

JSTOR 2707236 .

^ Halsall, Paul (August 1998).

"Petrarch: The Ascent of Mount Ventoux" .

fordham.edu . Fordham University . Retrieved 5 March 2014 .

^ Deschaux, Robert; Taillevent, Michault (1975).

Un poète bourguignon du XVe siècle, Michault Taillevent: édition et étude . Librairie Droz. pp.

31– 32.

ISBN 978-2-600-02831-8 .

^ Hargett 1985, p. 67.

^ Hargett, James M. (1985). "Some Preliminary Remarks on the Travel Records of the Song Dynasty (960-1279)".

Chinese Literature: Essays, Articles, Reviews .

7 (1/2): 67– 93.

doi : 10.2307/495194 .

JSTOR 495194 .

^ a b Tomasz Bohun , Podróże po Europie , Władysław IV Wasa , Władcy Polski, p. 12 ^ Adam Kucharski.

"Dyplomacja i turystyka – królewicz Władysław Waza w posiadłościach hiszpańskich (1624–1625)" .

Silva Rerum . Archived from the original on 14 August 2019 . Retrieved 7 June 2017 .

^ The Oxford Illustrated History of Opera , ed.

Roger Parker (1994): a chapter on Central and Eastern European opera by John Warrack, p. 240; The Viking Opera Guide , ed. Amanda Holden (1993): articles on Polish composers, p. 174 ^ a b Singh, L.K. (2008).

"Issues in Tourism Industry" .

Fundamental of Tourism and Travel . Delhi: Isha Books. p. 189.

ISBN 978-81-8205-478-3 .

^ "History: Centuries of Experience" .

Cox & Kings . Archived from the original on 25 May 2011 . Retrieved 23 December 2011 .

^ Ingle, R., 1991 Thomas Cook of Leicester , Bangor, Headstart History ^ "Thomas Cook History" .

Thomas Cook . Archived from the original on 19 September 2018 . Retrieved 12 May 2017 .

^ "Key Dates 1841–2014" .

Thomas Cook . Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 12 May 2017 .

^ Hunter, F. Robert (2004). "Tourism and Empire: The Thomas Cook & Son Enterprise on the Nile, 1868–1914".

Middle Eastern Studies .

40 (5): 28.

doi : 10.1080/0026320042000265666 .

^ Baranowski, Shelley; Endy, Christopher; Hazbun, Waleed; Hom, Stephanie M.; Pirie, Gordon; Simmons, Tony; Zuelow, Eric G. E. (2015).

"Tourism and Empire" .

Journal of Tourism History .

7 ( 1– 2): 101.

doi : 10.1080/1755182X.2015.1063709 .

^ Hunter, F. Robert (2004). "Tourism and Empire: The Thomas Cook & Son Enterprise on the Nile, 1868–1914".

Middle Eastern Studies .

40 (5): 28– 29.

doi : 10.1080/0026320042000265666 .

^ Hunter, F. Robert (2004). "Tourism and Empire: The Thomas Cook & Son Enterprise on the Nile, 1868–1914".

Middle Eastern Studies .

40 (5): 29.

doi : 10.1080/0026320042000265666 .

^ Zuelow, Eric G. E. (2016). "Chapter 5. Guidebooks and the importance of seeing the sights".

A History of Modern Tourism . London: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

76– 90.

ISBN 9780230369641 .

^ MacKenzie, John M. (2005). "Chapter 1. Empires of Travel: British Guide Books and Cultural Imperialism in the 19th and 20th Centuries". In John K. Walton (ed.).

Histories of Tourism: Representation, Identity and Conflict . Bristol, Blue Ridge Summit: Channel View Publications. p. 31.

doi : 10.21832/9781845410339-003 .

^ Said, Edward W. (1979).

Orientalism . New York: Vintage Books. p. 20.

ISBN 9780394740676 .

^ Said, Edward W. (1979).

Orientalism . New York: Vintage Books. p. 20.

ISBN 9780394740676 .

^ Said, Edward W. (1979).

Orientalism . New York: Vintage Books. p. 20.

ISBN 9780394740676 .

^ Said, Edward W. (1979).

Orientalism . New York: Vintage Books. p. 20.

ISBN 9780394740676 .

^ MacKenzie, John M. (2005). "Chapter 1. Empires of Travel: British Guide Books and Cultural Imperialism in the 19th and 20th Centuries". In John K. Walton (ed.).

Histories of Tourism: Representation, Identity and Conflict . Bristol, Blue Ridge Summit: Channel View Publications. p. 31.

doi : 10.21832/9781845410339-003 .

^ Hunter, F. Robert (2004). "Tourism and Empire: The Thomas Cook & Son Enterprise on the Nile, 1868–1914".

Middle Eastern Studies .

40 (5): 28– 29.

doi : 10.1080/0026320042000265666 .

^ MacKenzie, John M. (2005). "Chapter 1. Empires of Travel: British Guide Books and Cultural Imperialism in the 19th and 20th Centuries". In John K. Walton (ed.).

Histories of Tourism: Representation, Identity and Conflict . Bristol, Blue Ridge Summit: Channel View Publications. p. 21.

doi : 10.21832/9781845410339-003 .

^ Hunter, F. Robert (2004). "Tourism and Empire: The Thomas Cook & Son Enterprise on the Nile, 1868–1914".

Middle Eastern Studies .

40 (5): 30.

doi : 10.1080/0026320042000265666 .

^ Zuelow, Eric G. E. (2016). "Chapter 5".

A History of Modern Tourism . London: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

76– 90.

ISBN 9780230369641 .

^ MacKenzie, John M. (2005). "Chapter 1. Empires of Travel: British Guide Books and Cultural Imperialism in the 19th and 20th Centuries". In John K. Walton (ed.).

Histories of Tourism: Representation, Identity and Conflict . Bristol, Blue Ridge Summit: Channel View Publications. p. 20.

doi : 10.21832/9781845410339-003 .

^ Hunter, F. Robert (2004). "Tourism and Empire: The Thomas Cook & Son Enterprise on the Nile, 1868–1914".

Middle Eastern Studies .

40 (5): 31– 32.

doi : 10.1080/0026320042000265666 .

^ Baranowski, Shelley; Endy, Christopher; Hazbun, Waleed; Hom, Stephanie M.; Pirie, Gordon; Simmons, Tony; Zuelow, Eric G. E. (2015).

"Tourism and Empire" .

Journal of Tourism History .

7 ( 1– 2): 101.

doi : 10.1080/1755182X.2015.1063709 .

^ MacKenzie, John M. (2005). "Chapter 1. Empires of Travel: British Guide Books and Cultural Imperialism in the 19th and 20th Centuries". In John K. Walton (ed.).

Histories of Tourism: Representation, Identity and Conflict . Bristol, Blue Ridge Summit: Channel View Publications. p. 25.

doi : 10.21832/9781845410339-003 .

^ Baranowski, Shelley; Endy, Christopher; Hazbun, Waleed; Hom, Stephanie M.; Pirie, Gordon; Simmons, Tony; Zuelow, Eric G. E. (2015).

"Tourism and Empire" .

Journal of Tourism History .

7 ( 1– 2): 101.

doi : 10.1080/1755182X.2015.1063709 .

^ Said, Edward W. (1979).

Orientalism . New York: Vintage Books. p. 6.

ISBN 9780394740676 .

^ Said, Edward W. (1979).

Orientalism . New York: Vintage Books. p. 33.

ISBN 9780394740676 .

^ Zuelow, Eric (2016).

A History of Modern Tourism . Palgrave. pp.

149– 164.

ISBN 978-0-230-36965-8 .

^ a b Zuelow, Eric (2016).

A History of Modern Tourism . Palgrave. p. 171.

ISBN 978-0-230-36965-8 .

^ Jackson, Antoinette T. (2020).

Heritage, Tourism, and Race: The Other Side of Leisure . Taylor & Francis. p. 12.

ISBN 978-1-00-004806-3 .

^ a b Jackson, Antoinette T. (2020).

Heritage, Tourism, and Race: The Other Side of Leisure . Taylor & Francis. p. 13.

ISBN 978-1-00-004806-3 . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ Tassiopoulos, Dimitri (2008). Tassiopoulos, Dimitri (ed.).

New Tourism Ventures: An Entrepreneurial and Managerial Approach . Cape Town: Juta and Company Ltd. p. 10.

ISBN 9780702177262 .

^ Manila Declaration on World Tourism (PDF) . World Tourism Conference.

Manila , Philippines . 10 October 1980. pp.

1– 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2012.

^ "2012 Tourism Highlights" (PDF) . UNWTO. June 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 July 2012 . Retrieved 17 June 2012 .

^ "Travel broadens the mind, but can it alter the brain?" .

theguardian.com . 18 January 2016.

^ Rebanks, James (2019).

"James Rebanks: One shepherd and his beloved Herdwick sheep" .

bbc.co.uk .

"People think travel broadens the mind, I'm not so sure. I think a focus on, and love of, one place can make people rather sensible, decent, and wise' —James Rebanks ^ O'Grady, Alison, ed. (1990).

The Challenge of Tourism: Learning Resources for Study and Action . Ecumenical Coalition on Third World Tourism. p. 19.

ISBN 9789748555706 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 .

[...] the products to be sold to international tourists are not only natural resources such as sea, sand and sun, but also the subservience of people in receiving countries.

^ Smith, Melanie K. (2003).

Issues in Cultural Tourism Studies . Tourism / Routledge. London: Routledge. p.

50 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25638-4 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

The globalisation of tourism has partially exacerbated the relationships of inequality and subservience that are so commonplace in host-guest encounters. It is not simply enough for local people to accept their role as servants, guides or companions to a range of ever-changing tourists. They are also confronted increasingly by the luxurious global products of Western indulgence which remain far from their reach, rather like the thirsty Tantalus in his elusive pool of water.

^ Gössling, Stefan; Hansson, Carina Borgström; Hörstmeier, Oliver; Saggel, Stefan (1 December 2002).

"Ecological footprint analysis as a tool to assess tourism sustainability" .

Ecological Economics .

43 (2): 199– 211.

Bibcode : 2002EcoEc..43..199G .

doi : 10.1016/S0921-8009(02)00211-2 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ Laurajane Smith "Uses of Heritage" (2006); Regina Bendix, Vladimir Hafstein "Culture and Property. An Introduction" (2009) in Ethnologia Europaea 39/2 ^ Gerhard Bitzan, Christine Imlinger "Die Millionen-Marke Habsburg" (German), in Die Presse, 15 July 2011.

^ Rick Szostak: The Causes of Economic Growth: Interdisciplinary Perspectives.

Springer Science & Business Media, 2009, ISBN 9783540922827 ; Markus Tauschek "Kulturerbe" (2013), p 166; Laurajane Smith "Uses of Heritage" (2006).

^ "UNESCO Legal Instruments: Second Protocol to the Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict 1999" .

; Roger O'Keefe, Camille Péron, Tofig Musayev, Gianluca Ferrari "Protection of Cultural Property. Military Manual." UNESCO, 2016, p 73; Action plan to preserve heritage sites during conflict - UNITED NATIONS, 12 Apr 2019 ^ "Austrian Armed Forces Mission in Lebanon" (in German). 28 April 2019.

; Jyot Hosagrahar: Culture: at the heart of SDGs.

UNESCO-Kurier, April-Juni 2017.

^ Simon Osborne (27 September 2016).

"Don't look now, Venice tourists – the locals are sick of you" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 May 2018 .

^ "Cruise News" . June 2012 . Retrieved 17 December 2012 .

^ "The Prinzessin Victoria Luise – world's first cruise ship" .

Cruising the Past . Retrieved 12 August 2018 .

^ Russell, Mark A. (2020).

Steamship nationalism: ocean liners and national identity in Imperial Germany and Atlantic world . Routledge studies in modern European history. Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-429-02771-0 .

^ Pau Obrador Pons; Mike Crang; Penny Travlou, eds. (2016).

Cultures of Mass Tourism: Doing the Mediterranean in the Age of Banal Mobilities . Taylor & Francis. p. 2.

ISBN 9781317155652 .

^ S. Pack (2006).

Tourism and Dictatorship Europe's Peaceful Invasion of Franco's Spain . Palgrave Macmillan US. p. 141.

ISBN 9780230601161 .

^ Putova, Barbora (2018).

"Anthropology of Tourism: Researching Interactions between Hosts and Guests" (PDF) .

Czech Journal of Tourism .

7 (1): 71– 92.

doi : 10.1515/cjot-2018-0004 .

S2CID 159280794 .

^ Al Jazeera Staff.

" 'Tourists go home': Why Barcelona residents sprayed water on visitors" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ Lew, Alan A. (2008).

"Long Tail Tourism: New geographies for marketing niche tourism products" (PDF) .

Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing .

25 ( 3– 4): 409– 19.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.467.6320 .

doi : 10.1080/10548400802508515 .

S2CID 16085592 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2010 . Retrieved 22 December 2011 .

^ "Rovaniemi Lapland Holidays – Discovering Finland" .

^ "Birthplace of winter tourism" . Archived from the original on 17 October 2013.

^ "Early Winter Tourism" .

Tradition & History .

St. Moritz : Kulm Hotel. Archived from the original on 19 December 2011 . Retrieved 23 December 2011 .

^ "Winter hiking in Switzerland-Graubünden" . graubuenden.ch. Archived from the original on 29 January 2012 . Retrieved 23 December 2011 .

^ "India Top Tourist Destinations & Attractions" .

TravelCupio . Archived from the original on 8 June 2017 . Retrieved 9 April 2017 .

^ Marx, Patricia.

"Couch-surfing the globe" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 15 March 2014 .

^ Cadene, Philippe (2013).

Atlas of the Gulf States . p. 29.

^ "Sustainable development | UNWTO" .

www.unwto.org . Retrieved 25 September 2020 .

^ Zeng, L. Economic Development and Mountain Tourism Research from 2010 to 2020: Bibliometric Analysis and Science Mapping Approach. Sustainability 2022, 14, 562.

https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010562 .

^ a b c Fennell, David A.; Cooper, Chris (2020).

Sustainable Tourism: Principles, Contexts and Practices . Bristol, Blue Ridge Summit: Multilingual Matters. pp. 198, 234.

doi : 10.21832/9781845417673 .

ISBN 978-1-84541-767-3 .

S2CID 228913882 .

^ Peeters P., Gössling S., Ceron J.P., Dubois G., Patterson T., Richardson R.B., Studies E. (2004).

The Eco-efficiency of Tourism.

^ Bramwell, B., & Lane, B. (1993). Sustainable tourism: An evolving global approach. Journal of sustainable tourism, 1(1), 1-5.

^ Tourism and the Sustainable Development Goals – Journey to 2030, Highlights . World Tourism Organization. 18 December 2017.

doi : 10.18111/9789284419340 .

ISBN 978-92-844-1934-0 .

^ "Tourism & Sustainable Development Goals – Tourism for SDGs" . Retrieved 10 January 2021 .

^ "Travel & Tourism Economic Impact | World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC)" .

wttc.org . Retrieved 21 October 2022 .

^ "Morgan Gamble" .

Pinterest . Retrieved 9 June 2015 .

^ Entrepreneuring Sustainable Tourism , Jack Soifer Editor, Lisboa, 2008, ISBN 978-989-95976-0-0 ^ Volunteer Tourism: Experiences That Make a Difference . CABI.

^ Butcher, J; Smith, P (2010).

" 'Making a difference': Volunteer tourism and development" (PDF) .

Tourism Recreation Research .

35 : 27– 36.

doi : 10.1080/02508281.2010.11081616 .

S2CID 51729611 .

^ Terry, W (2014). "Solving labor problems and building capacity unsustainable agriculture through volunteer tourism".

Annals of Tourism Research .

49 : 94– 107.

doi : 10.1016/j.annals.2014.09.001 .

^ Guttentag, D (2009). "The possible negative impacts of volunteer tourism".

International Journal of Tourism Research .

11 (6): 537– 51.

doi : 10.1002/jtr.727 .

S2CID 153993554 .

^ Curran, Ross; Taheri, Babak; MacIntosh, Robert; O'Gorman, Kevin (2016). "Nonprofit Brand Heritage: Its Ability to Influence Volunteer Retention, Engagement, and Satisfaction".

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly .

45 (6): 1234– 57.

doi : 10.1177/0899764016633532 .

S2CID 147490099 .

^ Thompson, Jamie; Curran, Ross; O'Gorman, Kevin (2017).

"A modern day panopticon: Using power and control theory to manage volunteer tourists in Bolivia" .

Tourism Management Perspectives .

22 : 34– 43.

doi : 10.1016/j.tmp.2017.01.003 .

hdl : 10373/2606 .

^ Freire-Medeiros, B. (2014). Touring poverty. Routledge.

^ Jonathan Mitchel (2009).

"Value chain analysis and poverty reduction at scale" . Overseas Development Institute. Archived from the original on 26 August 2010 . Retrieved 3 October 2010 .

^ Butler, Richard; Curran, Ross; O'Gorman, Kevin D. (1 September 2013). "Pro-Poor Tourism in a First World Urban Setting: Case Study of Glasgow Govan".

International Journal of Tourism Research .

15 (5): 443– 57.

doi : 10.1002/jtr.1888 .

ISSN 1522-1970 .

^ Ramón, Ana (1 January 2014).

"The effects of economic crises on tourism success: an integrated model" .

Tourism Economics .

^ Neuman, William (17 February 2015).

"Americans May See Appeal of Medical Tourism in Cuba" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 12 September 2016 .

^ "Evolving medical tourism in Canada | Deloitte Canada" .

Deloitte Canada . Retrieved 12 September 2016 .

^ McGladdery, Christine A.; Lubbe, Berendien A. (1 January 2017).

"Rethinking educational tourism: proposing a new model and future directions" .

Tourism Review .

72 (3): 319– 329.

doi : 10.1108/TR-03-2017-0055 .

hdl : 2263/62536 .

ISSN 1660-5373 .

^ Seraphin, H., Bah, M., Fyall, A., & Gowreesunkar, V. (2021). Tourism education in France and sustainable development goal 4 (quality education). Worldwide Hospitality and Tourism Themes.

^ Shulman, Robyn D.

"5 Ways Student Exchange Programs Affect The American Economy" .

Forbes . Retrieved 17 February 2022 .

^ Clare., Inkson (2012).

Tourism management : an introduction . Minnaert, Lynn. Los Angeles: Sage.

ISBN 978-1-84860-869-6 .

OCLC 760291882 .

^ a b Wurzburger, Rebecca; et al. (2009).

Creative Tourism: A Global Conversation: How to Provide Unique Creative Experiences for Travelers Worldwide: As Presented at the 2008 Santa Fe & UNESCO International Conference on Creative Tourism in Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA . Santa Fe: Sunstone Press.

ISBN 978-0-86534-724-3 .

OCLC 370387178 .

^ "Towards Sustainable Strategies for Creative Tourism: discussion report of the planning meeting for the 2008 International Conference on Creative Tourism" .

UNESCO Digital Library . 2006.

^ Lau, Samantha (14 November 2016).

"Creative tourism" .

Legislative Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2024.

^ "Creative Friendly Destinations" .

Creative Tourism Network . Retrieved 20 February 2022 .

^ Charlie Mansfield Lecturer in Tourism Management and French.

"JTCaP Tourism Consumption Online Journal" . Tourismconsumption.org. Archived from the original on 15 April 2013 . Retrieved 10 August 2013 .

^ Bellafante, Ginia (6 July 2012).

"Your Home, the New Frontier for Tourists in New York City" .

The New York Times .

^ Gattorna, John (1985).

Insights in Strategic Retail Management . MCB University Press.

ISBN 9780861762378 . Retrieved 9 June 2015 .

^ Quinion, Michael (26 November 2005).

"Dark Tourism" .

World Wide Words . Retrieved 9 April 2010 .

^ Lennon, J. John; Foley, Malcolm (2000).

Dark Tourism . London: Continuum.

ISBN 978-0-8264-5063-0 .

OCLC 44603703 .

^ Cooper, Chris; et al. (2005).

Tourism: Principles and Practice (3rd ed.). Harlow: Pearson Education .

ISBN 978-0-273-68406-0 .

OCLC 466952897 .

^ R., Goeldner, Charles (2009).

Tourism : principles, practices, philosophies . Ritchie, J.R. Brent. (Eleventh ed.). Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-470-38213-4 .

OCLC 261135450 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Shapiro, Kenneth (11 May 2007).

"The Tourism of Doom" . TravelAge West.

^ Salkin, Allen (16 December 2007).

" 'Tourism of doom' on rise" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 30 October 2012 .

^ Lemelin, H., Dawson, J., & Stewart, E.J. (Eds.). (2013). Last chance tourism: adapting tourism opportunities in a changing world. Routledge.

^ Frew, E. (2008). Climate change and doom tourism: Advertising destinations 'before they disappear'. In J. Fountain & K. Moore (Chair), Symposium conducted at the meeting of the New Zealand Tourism & Hospitality Research Conference.

^ Hall, C.M. (2010). Crisis events in tourism: subjects of crisis in tourism. Current Issues in Tourism, 13(5), 401–17.

^ "Climate Change Is Making 'Last Chance Tourism' More Popular, and Riskier" .

NYT . 4 September 2024.

^ Jafari, Jafar; Scott, Noel (1 January 2014).

"Muslim world and its tourisms" (PDF) .

Annals of Tourism Research .

44 : 1– 19.

doi : 10.1016/j.annals.2013.08.011 .

hdl : 10072/63617 .

^ Compare: Gannon, Martin Joseph; Baxter, Ian W.F.; Collinson, Elaine; Curran, Ross; Farrington, Thomas; Glasgow, Steven; Godsman, Elliot M.; Gori, Keith; Jack, Gordon R.A. (11 June 2017).

"Travelling for Umrah: destination attributes, destination image, and post-travel intentions" (PDF) .

The Service Industries Journal .

37 ( 7– 8): 448– 65.

doi : 10.1080/02642069.2017.1333601 .

ISSN 0264-2069 .

S2CID 54745153 .

The result from the structural model suggests that destination attributes influence perceived destination image. Further, such tourists are likely to revisit or recommend Islamic destinations if their experience matches their perceived image of the destination. This implies that, while the religious characteristics of the destination remain important, destination managers cannot disregard the tangential, non-religious attributes of a destination which are crucial in order to satisfy more conventional tourist desires.

^ "Why DNA tourism may be the big travel trend of 2019" .

NBC News . Retrieved 7 October 2019 .

^ Okona, Nneka M. (18 September 2019).

" "Heritage travel" is surging in the era of DNA testing. It has a special significance for black Americans" .

Vox . Retrieved 7 October 2019 .

^ Bennett, Elizabeth (15 March 2025).

"What is sleep tourism and why is it on the rise?" .

National Geographic . Retrieved 15 March 2025 .

^ Godovykh, Maksim; Ridderstaat, Jorge (1 September 2020).

"Health outcomes of tourism development: A longitudinal study of the impact of tourism arrivals on residents' health" .

Journal of Destination Marketing & Management .

17 100462.

doi : 10.1016/j.jdmm.2020.100462 .

ISSN 2212-571X .

PMC 7376339 .

S2CID 220688162 .

^ Gursoy, Dogan; Ouyang, Zhe; Nunkoo, Robin; Wei, Wei (17 September 2018).

"Residents' impact perceptions of and attitudes towards tourism development: a meta-analysis" .

Journal of Hospitality Marketing & Management .

28 (3): 306– 333.

doi : 10.1080/19368623.2018.1516589 .

ISSN 1936-8623 .

S2CID 149483878 .

^ Zhang, Yingfei; Ma, Zheng Feei (20 August 2020).

"Psychological responses and lifestyle changes among pregnant women with respect to the early stages of COVID-19 pandemic" .

International Journal of Social Psychiatry .

67 (4): 344– 350.

doi : 10.1177/0020764020952116 .

ISSN 0020-7640 .

PMC 8191160 .

PMID 32815434 .

^ "Long-term Prospects: Tourism 2020 Vision" . World Tourism. 2004. Archived from the original on 19 June 2004.

^ Lock, S. (3 July 2018).

"Online travel market - Statistics & Facts" .

Statista .

^ Statista Research Department (23 July 2019).

"Digital travel sales worldwide from 2014 to 2020" .

Statista .

^ Lu, Jie; Lu, Zi (1 July 2004). "Development, Distribution and Evaluation of Online Tourism Services in China".

Electronic Commerce Research .

4 (3): 221– 39.

doi : 10.1023/B:ELEC.0000027981.81945.2a .

ISSN 1389-5753 .

S2CID 6473875 .

^ Karanasios, Stan; Burgess, Stephen (1 March 2008). "Tourism and internet adoption: a developing world perspective".

International Journal of Tourism Research .

10 (2): 169– 82.

doi : 10.1002/jtr.649 .

ISSN 1522-1970 .

^ a b UNWTO.

"UNWTO Tourism Highlights" (PDF) . UNWTO. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 January 2012 . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

^ "Impacts of the World Recession and Economic Crisis on Tourism: North America" .

JournalistsResource.org. Retrieved 22 June 2012 ^ Ritchie, J.R. Brent; Amaya Molinar, Carlos Mario; Frechtling, Douglas C. (2011). "Impacts of the World Recession and Economic Crisis on Tourism: North America".

Journal of Travel Research .

49 (1): 5– 15.

doi : 10.1177/0047287509353193 .

S2CID 154854770 .

^ Spencer, A., Tarlow, P. E., Gowreesunkar, V. G., Maingi, S. W., Roy, H., Micera, R., ... & Lane, W. (2021). Tourism Destination Management in a Post-Pandemic Context, New York, Emerald.

^ "airports & tourists" . Global Culture. 2007. Archived from the original on 5 June 2009 . Retrieved 1 May 2007 .

^ Jeff Wilks; Stephen J Stephen, eds. (2013).

Managing Tourist Health and Safety in the New Millennium . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9781136381348 .

^ "The Economic Impact of Commercial Space Transportation on the U. S Economy in 2009" (PDF) . Federal Aviation Administration. September 2010. p. 11 . Retrieved 5 May 2012 .

^ Cohen, E. (2017). The paradoxes of space tourism. Tourism Recreation Research, 42(1), 22-31.

^ James Higham (2007).

Sport Tourism Destinations . Taylor & Francis. p. 225.

ISBN 9781136364617 .

^ Mansfeld, Y., & Pizam, A. (Eds.). (2006). Tourism, security and safety. Routledge.

^ Tarlow, P. (2014). Tourism security: strategies for effectively managing travel risk and safety. Elsevier.

^ Vanessa GB Gowreesunkar et al. 2020. Tourism Destination Management in a Post-Pandemic Context: Global Issues and Destination Management Solutions, Emerald ^ Tourism Security . 2014.

doi : 10.1016/c2012-0-06812-3 .

ISBN 9780124115705 .

^ Spencer, Andrew; Tarlow, Peter (22 February 2021), "Introduction" , Tourism Safety and Security for the Caribbean , Emerald Publishing Limited, pp.

1– 14, doi : 10.1108/978-1-80071-318-520211003 , ISBN 978-1-80071-319-2 , S2CID 240831742 , retrieved 30 November 2021 ^ Tate, Curtis.

"International tourism won't come back until late 2021, UN panel predicts" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved 24 November 2020 .

Bibliography [ edit ] See also: Bibliography of tourism Costa, P (1991). "Managing tourism carrying capacity of art cities".

The Tourist Review .

46 (4): 8– 11.

doi : 10.1108/eb058076 .

Garlick, S (2002). "Revealing the unseen: Tourism, art and photography".

Cultural Studies .

16 (2): 289– 305.

doi : 10.1080/09502380110107599 .

S2CID 143902911 .

Gartner, W.C. (1993). "Image formation process".

Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing .

2 ( 2– 3): 191– 216.

doi : 10.1300/j073v02n02_12 .

Hughes, H.L. (1989). "Tourism and the arts".

Tourism Management .

10 (2): 97– 99.

doi : 10.1016/0261-5177(89)90050-2 .

Phelps, A (1986). "Holiday destination image: The problem of assessment—an example developed in Minorca".

Tourism Management .

7 (3): 168– 80.

doi : 10.1016/0261-5177(86)90003-8 .

Richardson, S.; Crompton, J. (1988). "Cultural variations in perceptions of vacation attributes".

Tourism Management .

9 (2): 128– 36.

doi : 10.1016/0261-5177(88)90022-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Holder IV, Floyd William (2009).

An Empirical Analysis of the State's Monopolization of the Legitimate Means of Movement: Evaluating the Effects of Required Passport use on International Travel (M.P.A. thesis). Texas State University-San Marcos.

OCLC 564144593 . Docket Applied Research Projects . Paper 308.

Wilkerson, Chad (2003).

"Travel and Tourism: An Overlooked Industry in the U.S. and Tenth District" (PDF) .

Economic Review .

88 (Third Quarter): 45– 72.

ISSN 0161-2387 .

OCLC 295437935 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 January 2011 . Retrieved 31 October 2007 .

Antje Monshausen, Sustainable and development friendly In: D+C Vol.42.2015:4 External links [ edit ] Tourism at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage v t e Tourism Types Accessible Adventure Agritourism Alternative Astrotourism Atomic Backpacking Beachgoing Bicycle touring Birth Business Crime Culinary Enotourism Cultural Archaeological Film Literary Bookstore Tolkien Music Pop-culture Dark Disaster Holocaust War Domestic Ecotourism Shark Experiential Extreme Fashion Garden Genealogy Heritage Identity Geotourism Industrial Instagram tourism International Volunteering Jungle Justice LGBT Medical MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) Nautical Orphanage Recreational drug Red Religious Christian Halal Kosher Pilgrimage Rural Science Sensory Sleep Slum Smart Space Lunar Sports Sustainable Urban Virtual Visiting friends and relatives Wellness Wildlife Safari Scuba Yoga Hospitality industry Bed and breakfast Boutique hotel Convention center Cruise ship Destination spa Front desk Guest house Guest ranch Heuhotel Homestay Hospitality management studies Hostel Hotel Manager Inn Motel Pension Referral chain Resort Hotel Island Seaside Ski Town Restaurant Terminology College tour Convention (meeting) Destination marketing organization Escorted tour Excursion Factory tour Gift shop Grand Tour Holiday Honeymoon Hypermobility Journey planner Package tour Passport Perpetual traveler Road trip Roadside attraction Souvenir Staycation Tour bus service Tour guide Tour operator Tourism geography Tourism minister Tourism region Tourist attraction Tourist gateway Tourist trap Touron Transport Travel Travel agency Travel behavior Travel document Travel insurance Travel medicine Travel survey Travel technology Travel visa Travel warning Vacation Visitor center Travel literature Guide book Outdoor literature Tourism journals Travel magazines Wikivoyage Trade associations American Bus Association American Hotel and Lodging Association American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute BEST Education Network Caribbean Tourism Organization European Travel Commission Historical Archive on Tourism Life Beyond Tourism Musement Pacific Asia Travel Association South-East Asian Tourism Organisation Tourism Radio Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report World Federation of Travel Journalists and Writers World Tourism Organization World Tourism rankings World Travel and Tourism Council World Travel Monitor Trade fairs and events Akwaaba African Travel Market Arabian Travel Market Cruise of the Kings Festival del Viaggio FITUR ITB Berlin World Tourism Day Issues Heritage commodification Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism Impacts of tourism Leakage effect Overtourism Tourism improvement district Tourist tax Lists Adjectival tourisms Attractions Bibliography Casino hotels Casinos Cities by international visitors Convention and exhibition centers Cruise lines Hotels Largest Motels Passenger airlines UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists World Heritage Sites by country Category v t e Tourism in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) v t e Tourism in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Tourism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard v t e Tourism in North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e Tourism in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e Tourism in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands v t e Major industries by economic sector Primary sector or ′Natural sector′ ( raw materials ) Biotic Agriculture Arable farming Cereals Legumes Vegetables Fiber crops Oilseeds Sugar Tobacco Permanent crops Apples et al.

Berries Citrus Stone fruits Tropical fruit Viticulture Cocoa Coffee Tea Nuts Olives Medicinal plants Spices Horticulture Flowers Seeds Animal husbandry Beef cattle Dairy farming Fur farming Horses Other livestock Pig Wool Poultry Beekeeping Cochineal Shellac Silk Hunting Fur trapping Forestry Silviculture Bamboo Logging Firewood Rattan Tree tapping Frankincense Gum arabic Gutta-percha Maple syrup Mastic Natural rubber Palm sugar , syrup , & wine Pine resin Wild mushrooms Fungiculture Truffles Aquatic Fishing Anchovies Herring Sardines Cod Haddock Pollock Mackerel Shark Swordfish Tuna Crabs Lobsters Sea urchins Squid Whaling Aquaculture Carp Catfish Tilapia Abalone Mussels Oysters Pearls Microalgae Seaweed Both Clams Sea cucumbers Scallops Salmon Shrimp Geological Fossil fuels Coal Peat Natural gas Oil shale Petroleum Tar sands Mining of ores Aluminum Copper Iron Gold Silver Palladium Platinum Lithium Rare-earth metals Uranium Other minerals Gemstones Phosphorus Potash Salt Sulfur Quarrying Gravel Sand Chalk Clay Gypsum Limestone Dimension stone Granite Marble Secondary sector or ′Industrial sector′ ( goods manufacturing ) Manufacturing Light industry Food Animal feed Baking Canning Dairy products Flour Meat Prepared Preserved Sweets Vegetable oils Beverages Beer Bottled water Liquor Soft drinks Wine Textiles Carding Dyeing Prints Spinning Weaving Carpets Lace Linens Rope Clothing Accessories Dressmaking Furs Hatmaking Sewing Shoemaking Tailoring Printing Bookbinding Embossing Engraving Secure Typesetting Media reproduction Cassette tapes Phonographs Optical discs Metal fabrication Boilermaking Builders' & household hardware Cutlery Gunsmithing Locksmithing Machining Other smithing Powder metallurgy Prefabrication Surface finishing Other fabrication 3D printing Blow molding Drawing Extrusion Glassblowing Injection moulding Pottery Sintering Stonemasonry Woodworking Furniture Other goods Baggage Bicycles Jewellery Medical supplies Musical instruments Office supplies Outdoors & sports equipment Personal protective equipment Toys Electrical & optical Electronics Components Circuit boards Semiconductors Computers Computer systems Parts & peripherals Blank storage media Communications equipment Mobile phones Network infrastructure Consumer electronics Televisions Video game consoles Instrumentation Clocks and watches GPS devices Scientific instruments Medical imaging systems Optical instruments Cameras Gun & spotting scopes Laser construction Lens grinding Microscopes Telescopes Electrical equipment Batteries Electrical & fiber optic cables Electric lighting Electric motors Home appliances Transformers Chemicals Coal & oil refining Bitumen Coke Diesel fuel Fuel oil Gasoline Jet fuel Kerosene Mineral oil Paraffin wax Petrochemicals Petroleum jelly Propane Synthetic oil Tar Commodity chemicals Fertilizers Industrial gases Pigments Pure elements Speciality chemicals Adhesives Agrochemicals Aroma compounds Cleaning products Cosmetics Explosives Fireworks Paints & inks Perfumes Soap Toiletries Fine chemicals Pharmaceuticals Antibiotics Blood products Chemical & hormonal contraceptives Generic drugs Illegal drugs Supplements Vaccines Materials Leather Liming & deliming Tanning Currying & oiling Wood Drying Sawmilling Engineered Lumber Composite Paper Sizing Cardboard Pulp Tissue Rubber Tires Vulcanized rubber Plastics Commodity Engineered Specialty Pellets Synthetic fibers Thermoplastics & thermosets Glass Borosilicate Fused quartz Soda-lime Float glass Glass fiber Glass wool & fiberglass Safety glass Ceramics Brick Earthenware Porcelain Refractory Tile Cement Mortar Plaster Ready-mix concrete Other mineral Abrasives Carbon fibers & advanced materials Mineral wool Synthetic gems Metal refining Iron Aluminum Copper Alloys Steel Formed metal Rolled Forged Cast metal Heavy industry Machinery Conveyors Heavy Hydraulic Machine tools Power & wind turbines Automobiles Other heavy vehicles Aerospace & space Rail vehicles Ships & offshore platforms Weapons Utilities Power Electric Gas distribution Renewable Water Sewage Waste management Collection Dumping Hazardous Recycling Remediation Telecom networks Cable TV Internet Mobile Satellite Telephone Construction Buildings Commercial Industrial Residential Civil engineering Bridges Railways Roads Tunnels Canals Dams Dredging Harbors Specialty trades Cabinetry Demolition Electrical wiring Elevators HVAC Painting and decorating Plumbing Site preparation Tertiary sector or ′Service sector′ ( services ) Sales Retail Car dealership Consumer goods General store Grocery store Department store Mail order Online shopping Specialty store Wholesale Auction Brokerage Distribution Transport & Storage Cargo Air cargo Intermodal Mail Moving company Rail Trucking Passenger transport Airlines Car rentals Passenger rail Ridesharing Taxis Warehousing Self storage Hospitality Foodservice Drink service Cafés Catering Fast food Food delivery Restaurants Teahouses Hotels Asset management Financial services Banking Credit Financial advice Holding company Money transfer Payment cards Risk management Securities Insurance Health Life Pension funding Property Reinsurance Real estate Brokerage Property management Professional Accounting Assurance Audit Bookkeeping Tax advice Architecture & engineering Inspection Surveying Physical , product , & system testing Design Fashion Interior Product Legal services Management Consulting Public relations Marketing Advertising Creative Language Research and development Basic research Healthcare Medicine Dentist offices Hospitals Nursing Residential care Veterinary medicine Entertainment & leisure Audio-visual Film Music Video games Broadcasting News Radio Television Sport Travel Business travel Cruise lines Tourism Gambling Online Venues Arcades Amusement parks Fairgrounds Nightclubs Tabletop games Publishing & Mass media Written Books Periodicals Software Internet Hosting Social networks Streaming Websites Education Primary Secondary Tertiary Vocational school University Testing Tutoring Other Administrative Customer service Leasing Renting Staffing Private investigation & security Maintenance Janitors Landscaping Repairs Personal services Beauty Dry cleaning Funeral Maid service Pet care Sex Poverty Related Classification standards Production-based ANZSIC ISIC NACE NAICS SIC UKSIC Market-based GICS ICB TRBC Other Aftermarket Generic OEM Inputs & outputs Externalities Community Crime Culture Pollution Well-being Funding Goods Commodities Final Intermediate Raw material Innovation Primary inputs Labor Natural resources Physical capital Services Technology Organization Centralization Cartel Conglomerate Horizontal integration Mergers and acquisitions Monopoly Monopsony Vertical integration Decentralization Enforced breakup Freelancing Homesteading Outsourcing Putting-out system Spinning-off Temporary work Ownership Cooperative Joint-stock company Nationalization Nonprofit organization Partnership Privatization Sole proprietorship State-owned enterprise Category Commons Outline Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Korea Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hj8fc
Cached time: 20250817062356
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.851 seconds
Real time usage: 3.435 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 41234/1000000
Revision size: 114776/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 711737/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21726/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 38/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 673178/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.701/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19817803/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2848.521      1 -total
 44.12% 1256.796      1 Template:Reflist
 13.46%  383.352     52 Template:Cite_book
 11.01%  313.733     45 Template:Cite_journal
  9.45%  269.163     50 Template:Cite_web
  9.28%  264.410     11 Template:Navbox
  7.49%  213.212    105 Template:Iso2country
  5.93%  168.809      2 Template:Excerpt
  5.51%  156.832     20 Template:Annotated_link
  4.76%  135.707      1 Template:Tourism_in_Asia Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:29789:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817062356 and revision id 1303491412. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tourism&oldid=1303491412 " Categories : Tourism 1770s neologisms Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2021 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles needing additional references from February 2013 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011 All articles containing potentially dated statements All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2013 Articles with excerpts Articles needing additional references from June 2021 Articles needing additional references from October 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 09:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tourism 149 languages Add topic

