Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins 2.2 Early research 2.3 1960–1995 2.4 Since 1995 3 Initiatives 4 User facilities 5 Centers 6 Educational and community outreach 7 Directors 8 In media 9 Notable staff 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Argonne National Laboratory 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català الدارجة Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°42′33″N 87°58′55″W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.709166°N 87.981992°W ﻿ / 41.709166; -87.981992 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American science and engineering research laboratory in Illinois Argonne National Laboratory Aerial view of Argonne National Laboratory Established February 8, 1946 ; 79 years ago ( 1946-02-08 ) Research type Research Budget $1.1 billion (2022) [ 1 ] Field of research Physical science Life science Environmental science Energy science Photon science Data science Computational science Director Paul Kearns Staff 3400 Address 9700 S. Cass Avenue Location Lemont , Downers Grove Township, DuPage County , Illinois, USA Campus 1,700 acres (6.9 km 2 ) Affiliations United States Department of Energy University of Chicago Jacobs Engineering Operating agency UChicago Argonne LLC Nobel laureates Enrico Fermi Maria Goeppert Mayer Alexei Alexeyevich Abrikosov Website anl.gov Argonne National Laboratory is a federally funded research and development center in Lemont, Illinois , United States. Founded in 1946, the laboratory is owned by the United States Department of Energy and administered by UChicago Argonne LLC of the University of Chicago .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The facility is the largest national laboratory in the Midwest .

Argonne had its beginnings in the Metallurgical Laboratory of the University of Chicago , formed in part to carry out Enrico Fermi 's work on nuclear reactors for the Manhattan Project during World War II . After the war, it was designated as the first national laboratory in the United States on July 1, 1946.

[ 4 ] In its first decades, the laboratory was a hub for peaceful use of nuclear physics ; nearly all operating commercial nuclear power plants around the world have roots in Argonne research.

[ 5 ] More than 1,000 scientists conduct research at the laboratory, in the fields of energy storage and renewable energy ; fundamental research in physics , chemistry , and materials science ; environmental sustainability ; supercomputing ; and national security .

Argonne formerly ran a smaller facility called Argonne National Laboratory-West (or simply Argonne-West) in Idaho next to the Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory. In 2005, the two Idaho-based laboratories merged to become the Idaho National Laboratory .

[ 6 ] Argonne is a part of the expanding Illinois Technology and Research Corridor .

Fermilab , which is another USDoE National Laboratory , is located approximately 20 miles (32 km) away.

Overview [ edit ] Argonne has five areas of focus, as stated by the laboratory in 2022, including scientific discovery in physical and life sciences; energy and climate research; global security advances to protect society; operating research facilities that support thousands of scientists and engineers from around the world; and developing the scientific and technological workforce.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] Argonne began in 1942 as the Metallurgical Laboratory , part of the Manhattan Project at the University of Chicago . The Met Lab built Chicago Pile-1 , the world's first nuclear reactor , under the stands of the University of Chicago sports stadium. In 1943, CP-1 was reconstructed as CP-2, in the Argonne Forest , a forest preserve location outside Chicago.  The laboratory facilities built here became known as Site A .

On July 1, 1946, Site A of the "Metallurgical Laboratory" was formally re-chartered as Argonne National Laboratory for "cooperative research in nucleonics." At the request of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission , it began developing nuclear reactors for the nation's peaceful nuclear energy program. In the late 1940s and early 1950s, the laboratory moved west to a larger location in unincorporated DuPage County and established a remote location in Idaho , called "Argonne-West," to conduct further nuclear research.

Early research [ edit ] The lab's early efforts focused on developing designs and materials for producing electricity from nuclear reactions. The laboratory designed and built Chicago Pile 3 (1944), the world's first heavy-water moderated reactor , and the Experimental Breeder Reactor I (Chicago Pile 4) in Idaho, which lit a string of four light bulbs with the world's first nuclear-generated electricity in 1951. The BWR power station reactor, now the second most popular design worldwide, came from the BORAX experiments .

The knowledge gained from the Argonne experiments was the foundation for the designs of most of the commercial reactors used throughout the world for electric power generation, and inform the current evolving designs of liquid-metal reactors for future power stations.

Meanwhile, the laboratory was also helping to design the reactor for the world's first nuclear-powered submarine , the U.S.S.

Nautilus , which steamed for more than 513,550 nautical miles (951,090 km) and provided a basis for the United States' nuclear navy .

Not all nuclear technology went into developing reactors, however. While designing a scanner for reactor fuel elements in 1957, Argonne physicist William Nelson Beck put his own arm inside the scanner and obtained one of the first ultrasound images of the human body.

[ 8 ] Remote manipulators designed to handle radioactive materials laid the groundwork for more complex machines used to clean up contaminated areas, sealed laboratories or caves.

[ 9 ] In addition to nuclear work, the laboratory performed basic research in physics and chemistry . In 1955, Argonne chemists co-discovered the elements einsteinium and fermium , elements 99 and 100 in the periodic table .

[ 10 ] 1960–1995 [ edit ] Albert Crewe (right), Argonne's third director, stands next to the Zero Gradient Synchrotron 's Cockcroft–Walton generator In 1962, Argonne chemists produced the first compound of the inert noble gas xenon , opening up a new field of chemical bonding research.

[ 11 ] In 1963, they discovered the hydrated electron .

[ 12 ] Argonne was chosen as the site of the 12.5 GeV Zero Gradient Synchrotron , a proton accelerator that opened in 1963. A bubble chamber allowed scientists to track the motions of subatomic particles as they zipped through the chamber; they later observed the neutrino in a hydrogen bubble chamber for the first time.

[ 13 ] In 1964, the "Janus" reactor opened to study the effects of neutron radiation on biological life, providing research for guidelines on safe exposure levels for workers at power plants, laboratories and hospitals.

[ 14 ] Scientists at Argonne pioneered a technique to analyze the Moon 's surface using alpha radiation , which launched aboard the Surveyor 5 [ 15 ] in 1967 and later analyzed lunar samples from the Apollo 11 mission.

In 1978, the Argonne Tandem Linac Accelerator System (ATLAS) opened as the world's first superconducting accelerator for projectiles heavier than the electron.

[ 16 ] Nuclear engineering experiments during this time included the Experimental Boiling Water Reactor , the forerunner of many modern nuclear plants, and Experimental Breeder Reactor II (EBR-II), which was sodium-cooled, and included a fuel recycling facility. EBR-II was later modified to test other reactor designs, including a fast-neutron reactor and, in 1982, the Integral Fast Reactor concept—a revolutionary design that reprocessed its own fuel, reduced its atomic waste and withstood safety tests of the same failures that triggered the Chernobyl and Three Mile Island disasters.

[ 17 ] In 1994, however, the U.S. Congress terminated funding for the bulk of Argonne's nuclear programs.

Argonne moved to specialize in other areas, while capitalizing on its experience in physics, chemical sciences and metallurgy . In 1987, the laboratory was the first to successfully demonstrate a pioneering technique called plasma wakefield acceleration , which accelerates particles in much shorter distances than conventional accelerators.

[ 18 ] It also cultivated a strong battery research program.

Following a major push by then-director Alan Schriesheim, the laboratory was chosen as the site of the Advanced Photon Source , a major X-ray facility which was completed in 1995 and produced the brightest X-rays in the world at the time of its construction.

A Department of Energy video about the IVN-Tandem at the Argonne National Laboratory Since 1995 [ edit ] The laboratory continued to develop as a center for energy research, as well as a site for scientific facilities too large to be hosted at universities.

In the early 2000s, the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility (ALCF) was founded and hosted multiple supercomputers , several of which ranked among the top 10 most powerful in the world at the time of their construction. The laboratory also built the Center for Nanoscale Materials for conducting materials research at the atomic level; and greatly expanded its battery research and quantum technology programs.

[ 19 ] Chicago Tribune reported in March 2019 that the laboratory was constructing the world's most powerful supercomputer. Costing $500 million, it will have the processing power of 1 quintillion FLOPS . Applications will include the analysis of stars and improvements in the power grid.

[ 20 ] Initiatives [ edit ] Argonne's IBM Blue Gene/Q supercomputer Hard X-ray Sciences : Argonne is home to one of the world's largest high-energy light sources: the Advanced Photon Source (APS). Each year, scientists make thousands of discoveries while using the APS to characterize both organic and inorganic materials and even processes, such as how vehicle fuel injectors spray gasoline in engines.

[ 21 ] Leadership Computing : Argonne maintains its Argonne Leadership Computing Facility (ALCF) for one of the fastest computers for open science and has developed system software for these massive machines. Argonne works to drive the evolution of leadership computing from petascale to exascale , develop new codes and computing environments, and expand computational efforts to help solve scientific challenges. For example, in October 2009, the laboratory announced that it would be embarking on a joint project to explore cloud computing for scientific purposes.

[ 22 ] In the 1970s Argonne translated the Numerische Mathematik numerical linear algebra programs from ALGOL to Fortran and this library was expanded into LINPACK and EISPACK , by Cleve Moler , et al.

Materials for Energy : Argonne scientists work to predict, understand, and control where and how to place individual atoms and molecules to achieve desired material properties. Among other innovations, Argonne scientists helped develop an ice slurry to cool the organs of heart attack victims, [ 23 ] described what makes diamonds slippery at the nanoscale level, [ 24 ] and discovered a superinsulating material that resists the flow of electric current more completely than any other previous material.

[ 25 ] Electrochemical Energy Storage : Argonne develops batteries for electric transportation technology and grid storage for intermittent energy sources like wind or solar , as well as the manufacturing processes needed for these materials-intensive systems.  The laboratory has been working on advanced battery materials research and development for over 50 years.

[ 26 ] In the past 10 years, the laboratory has focused on lithium-ion batteries , and in September 2009, it announced an initiative to explore and improve their capabilities.

[ 27 ] Argonne also maintains an independent battery-testing facility, which tests sample batteries from both government and private industry to see how well they perform over time and under heat and cold stresses.

[ 28 ] Alternative Energy and Efficiency : Argonne develops both chemical and biological fuels tailored for current engines as well as improved combustion schemes for future engine technologies. The laboratory has also recommended best practices for conserving fuel; for example, a study that recommended installing auxiliary cab heaters for trucks in lieu of idling the engine.

[ 29 ] Meanwhile, the solar energy research program focuses on solar-fuel and solar-electric devices and systems that are scalable and economically competitive with fossil energy sources.

[ 30 ] Argonne scientists also explore best practices for a smart grid , both by modeling power flow between utilities and homes and by researching the technology for interfaces.

[ 31 ] Nuclear Energy : Argonne generates advanced reactor and fuel cycle technologies that enable the safe, sustainable generation of nuclear power . Argonne scientists develop and validate computational models and reactor simulations of future generation nuclear reactors .

[ 32 ] Another project studies how to reprocess spent nuclear fuel , so that waste is reduced up to 90%.

[ 33 ] Biological and Environmental Systems : Understanding the local effect of climate change requires integration of the interactions between the environment and human activities. Argonne scientists study these relationships from molecule to organism to ecosystem. Programs include bioremediation using trees to pull pollutants out of groundwater ; [ 34 ] biochips to detect cancers earlier; [ 35 ] a project to target cancerous cells using nanoparticles ; [ 36 ] soil metagenomics ; and a user facility for the Atmospheric Radiation Measurement climate change research project.

[ 37 ] National Security : Argonne develops security technologies that will prevent and mitigate events with potential for mass disruption or destruction. These include sensors that can detect chemical, biological, nuclear and explosive materials; [ 38 ] portable Terahertz radiation ("T-ray") machines that detect dangerous materials more easily than X-rays at airports; [ 39 ] and tracking and modeling the possible paths of chemicals released into a subway.

[ 40 ] User facilities [ edit ] Argonne's Center for Nanoscale Materials Argonne builds and maintains scientific facilities that would be too expensive for a single company or university to construct and operate. These facilities are used by scientists from Argonne, private industry, academia, other national laboratories and international scientific organizations.

Advanced Photon Source (APS): a national synchrotron X-ray research facility which produces the brightest X-ray beams in the Western Hemisphere .

[ 41 ] Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM): a user facility located on the APS which provides infrastructure and instruments to study nanotechnology and nanomaterials . The CNM is one of five U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science Nanoscale Science Research Centers.

[ 42 ] Argonne Tandem Linac Accelerator System (ATLAS): ATLAS is the world's first superconducting particle accelerator for heavy ions at energies in the vicinity of the Coulomb barrier . This is the energy domain suited to study the properties of the nucleus, the core of matter and the fuel of stars.

[ 43 ] Centers [ edit ] The Advanced Materials for Energy-Water Systems [ 44 ] (AMEWS) Center is an Energy Frontier Research Center sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy. Led by Argonne National Laboratory and including the University of Chicago and Northwestern University as partners, AMEWS works to solve the challenges that exist at the interface of water and the materials that make up the systems that handle, process and treat water.

Electron Microscopy Center (EMC): one of three DOE-supported scientific user facilities for electron beam microcharacterization. The EMC conducts in situ studies of transformations and defect processes, ion beam modification and irradiation effects, superconductors, ferroelectrics and interfaces. Its intermediate voltage electron microscope, which is coupled with an accelerator, represents the only such system in the United States.

[ 45 ] Biology Center (SBC): The SBC is a user facility located off the Advanced Photon Source X-ray facility, which specializes in macromolecular crystallography . Users have access to an insertion-device, a bending-magnet, and a biochemistry laboratory. SBC beamlines are often used to map out the crystal structures of proteins ; in the past, users have imaged proteins from anthrax , meningitis -causing bacteria, salmonella , and other pathogenic bacteria .

[ 46 ] The Network Enabled Optimization System (NEOS) Server is the first network-enabled problem-solving environment for a wide class of applications in business, science, and engineering. Included are state-of-the-art solvers in integer programming, nonlinear optimization, linear programming , stochastic programming , and complementarity problems. Most NEOS solvers accept input in the AMPL modeling language .

The Joint Center for Energy Storage Research (JCESR) is a consortium of several national laboratories, academic institutions, and industrial partners based at Argonne National Laboratory. The mission of JCESR is to design and build transformative materials enabling next-generation batteries that satisfy all the performance metrics for a given application.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] The Midwest Integrated Center for Computational Materials (MICCoM) is headquartered at the laboratory. MICCoM develops and disseminates interoperable open-source software , data, and validation procedures to simulate and predict properties of functional materials for energy conversion processes.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] The ReCell Center is a national collaboration of industry, academia and national laboratories, led by Argonne National Laboratory, working to advance recycling technologies along the entire battery life cycle. The center aims to grow a sustainable advanced battery recycling industry by developing economic and environmentally sound recycling processes that can be adopted by industry for lithium-ion and future battery chemistries.

Educational and community outreach [ edit ] A student examines Argonne's Gyro Wheel at the Open House.

Argonne welcomes all members of the public age 16 or older to take guided tours of the scientific and engineering facilities and grounds.  For children under 16, Argonne offers hands-on learning activities suitable for K–12 field trips. The laboratory also hosts educational science and engineering outreach for schools in the surrounding area.

Argonne scientists and engineers take part in the training of nearly 1,000 college graduate students and post-doctoral researchers every year as part of their research and development activities.

[ citation needed ] Directors [ edit ] Over the course of its history, 14 individuals have served as Argonne Director: [ 51 ] No.

Image Director Term start Term end Refs.

1 Walter Zinn 1946 1956 2 Norman Hilberry 1957 1961 3 Albert V. Crewe 1961 1967 4 Robert B. Duffield 1967 1973 5 Robert G. Sachs 1973 1979 6 Walter E. Massey 1979 1984 7 Alan Schriesheim 1984 1996 8 Dean E. Eastman 1996 1998 9 Frank Y. Fradin 1998 June 30, 1999 interim Yoon Il Chang July 1, 1999 October 31, 2000 10 Hermann A. Grunder November 1, 2000 April 17, 2005 [ 52 ] 11 Robert Rosner April 18, 2005 April 30, 2008 [ 53 ] 12 Eric Isaacs May 1, 2009 March 31, 2014 [ 54 ] 13 Peter Littlewood April 30, 2014 December 31, 2016 [ 55 ] [ 56 ] interim Paul Kearns January 1, 2017 November 17, 2017 14 November 17, 2017 present [ 57 ] [ 58 ] In media [ edit ] Significant portions of the 1996 chase film Chain Reaction were shot in the Zero Gradient Synchrotron ring room and the former Continuous Wave Deuterium Demonstrator laboratory.

[ 59 ] Notable staff [ edit ] Alexei Alexeyevich Abrikosov Khalil Amine Paul Benioff Charles H. Bennett Sandra Biedron Margaret K. Butler David Callaway Yanglai Cho George Crabtree Seth Darling Harold B. Evans Paul Fenter Enrico Fermi Stuart Freedman Ian Foster Wallace Givens Raymond Goertz Maury C. Goodman Kawtar Hafidi Morton Hamermesh Cynthia Hall Katrin Heitmann Caroline Herzenberg Paul Kearns Harold Lichtenberger Maria Goeppert Mayer William McCune Joël Mesot Carlo Montemagno José Enrique Moyal Gilbert Jerome Perlow Stephen Turnham Pratt Lloyd_Quarterman Aneesur Rahman John P. Schiffer Luise Meyer-Schützmeister Rolf Siemssen Dorothy Martin Simon Lynda Soderholm Marius Stan Rick Stevens Valerie Taylor Marion C. Thurnauer Carlos E.M. Wagner Kameshwar C. Wali Larry Wos Cosmas Zachos Daniel Zajfman Nestor J. Zaluzec See also [ edit ] Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy Automated theorem proving Canadian Penning Trap Spectrometer Center for the Advancement of Science in Space —operates the US National Laboratory on the ISS.

Gammasphere Nanofluid Track Imaging Cherenkov Experiment Notes [ edit ] ^ "Argonne: By the Numbers" . Argonne National Laboratory. 2020 . Retrieved June 1, 2023 .

^ "Master Government List of Federally Funded R&D Centers | NCSES | NSF" .

nsf.gov . Retrieved March 8, 2023 .

^ "About | UChicago Argonne LLC" .

uchicagoargonnellc.org . Retrieved March 8, 2023 .

^ Holl, Hewlett, and Harris, page xx (Introduction).

^ "Reactors Designed by Argonne National Laboratory" . Argonne National Laboratory Nuclear Engineering Division . Retrieved May 22, 2023 .

^ Menser, Paul.

"Cleaning house and charting a future at INL" .

Post Register . Idaho Falls, ID. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013.

^ "Our Path Forward" . Argonne National Laboratory . Retrieved May 22, 2023 .

^ "William Nelson "Nels" Beck: Joliet Physicist's Work Changed Medical World" . CityofJoliet.com. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011 . Retrieved February 4, 2010 .

^ Holl, Hewlett, and Harris, page 126 ^ Holl, Hewlett, and Harris, page 179.

^ Holl, Hewlett, and Harris, page 226.

^ "Argonne History: Innovation and Serendipity" . Argonne National Laboratory. Archived from the original on May 27, 2010 . Retrieved February 4, 2010 .

^ Patel, page 23 ^ "Research helps safeguard nuclear workers worldwide" . Argonne National Laboratory.

^ Jacobsen, Sally (December 1971).

"Getting Aboard Viking: No Room on the Mars Lander" .

^ "About ATLAS" . Argonne National Laboratory . Retrieved May 22, 2023 .

^ "Frontline: Nuclear Reaction: Interview with Dr. Charles Till" . PBS.

^ "Argonne History: Understanding the Physical Universe" . Argonne National Laboratory. Archived from the original on September 9, 2004.

^ "Our History" . Argonne National Laboratory . Retrieved May 22, 2023 .

^ Marotti, Ally (March 18, 2019).

"The fastest computer in the world is being built 25 miles outside Chicago. Its name is Aurora" .

Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on March 19, 2019.

^ "New X-ray technique may lead to better, cleaner fuel injectors for automobiles" . Argonne National Laboratory. February 19, 2008.

^ "DOE to explore scientific cloud computing at Argonne, Lawrence Berkeley national laboratories" . Argonne National Laboratory. October 14, 2009.

^ Gupta, Manya (November 10, 2009).

"Medical care on ice" . Medill Reports. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011.

^ University of Pennsylvania (June 25, 2008).

"Engineers reveal what makes diamonds slippery at the nanoscale" .

ScienceDaily .

^ "Newly discovered 'superinsulators' promise to transform materials research, electronics design" . Argonne National Laboratory. April 4, 2008. Archived from the original on August 26, 2009.

^ "Building better batteries" . U.S. Department of Energy. Archived from the original on May 27, 2010 . Retrieved December 13, 2009 .

^ "Argonne opens new chapter in battery research: Li-Air" . Argonne National Laboratory. September 15, 2009.

^ "Battery Test Facility" . Argonne National Laboratory, Transportation Center. Archived from the original on August 26, 2011 . Retrieved December 13, 2009 .

^ Leavitt, Wendy (August 1, 1998).

"Not Just Idle Talk" . Fleet Owner.

^ "Argonne, Northwestern seek ANSER to solar energy challenges" . Argonne National Laboratory. May 8, 2007.

^ "Grid Research: Making the Grid Smarter" . Argonne National Laboratory Transportation Center. August 1, 2009. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015 . Retrieved December 14, 2009 .

^ "Putting the new in nuclear" . Argonne National Laboratory magazine. Fall 2009.

^ "Doing the impossible: Recycling nuclear waste" . Science Channel.

Archived from the original on December 11, 2021 . Retrieved June 10, 2013 .

^ "Argonne Cleans Up Brownfield Sites [video]" . CleanSkies Network. November 10, 2009. Archived from the original on December 21, 2009.

^ "Biochips can detect cancers before symptoms develop" . Argonne National Laboratory. May 9, 2008.

^ Wang, Ann (December 2, 2009).

"Magnetic microdiscs target and initiate cell death in tumors" . Johns Hopkins Newsletter.

^ "ARRA funding to help scientists better understand climate change" . Argonne National Laboratory. December 8, 2009.

^ "New sensor technology detects chemical, biological, nuclear and explosive materials" . Argonne National Laboratory. March 21, 2006.

^ "New T-ray source could improve airport security, cancer detection" . Argonne National Laboratory. November 23, 2007.

^ Szaniszlo, Marie (December 6, 2009).

"MBTA preps for biological terror attack" .

Boston Herald .

^ "Argonne About the APS" . Archived from the original on September 26, 2009.

^ "Nanoscale Science Research Centers: Scientific User Facilities Division" .

Department of Energy . Archived from the original on December 8, 2009.

^ "Argonne Physics Division – ATLAS" .

phy.anl.gov . Retrieved June 20, 2018 .

^ "Advanced Materials for Energy-Water Systems Center" .

anl.gov . Argonne National Laboratory . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

^ "About the EMC" . Archived from the original on 6 September 2017 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ "MCSG Deposit Their 1,000th Protein Structure into Protein Data Bank" .

AZoNano.com . July 27, 2009 . Retrieved June 20, 2018 .

^ "Joint Center for Energy Storage Research Publication List" .

jcesr.org/publications/published-papers .

^ "Joint Center for Energy Storage Research" .

jcesr.org . Retrieved June 20, 2018 .

^ "DOE creates new Center for Computational Materials at Argonne" . October 2, 2015 . Retrieved January 28, 2019 .

^ "MICCoM Mission" . Retrieved January 28, 2019 .

^ "Argonne National Laboratory" . American Institute of Physics.

^ Koppes, Steve (September 21, 2000).

"University appoints Hermann Grunder as new Argonne Director" .

Chicago Chronicle . University of Chicago.

^ "Rosner named Director of Argonne" .

Chicago Chronicle . University of Chicago. March 17, 2005.

^ "Eric Isaacs named director of Argonne National Laboratory" . ANL. March 11, 2009.

^ "Peter B. Littlewood appointed Director of Argonne National Laboratory" . University of Chicago. March 25, 2014.

Peter B. Littlewood, a Professor of Physics at the University of Chicago and the Associate Laboratory Director for Physical Sciences and Engineering at the U.S. Department of Energy's Argonne National Laboratory, has been selected to serve as Argonne's 13th director, University of Chicago President Robert J. Zimmer announced.

^ Adragna, Anthony (November 23, 2016).

"Greens regroup for unexpected battle" .

Politico .

^ "Paul K. Kearns" . Argonne National Laboratory . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ "Paul K. Kearns appointed director of Argonne National Laboratory" . University of Chicago. November 17, 2017.

Kearns, who has served in multiple leadership roles in the national laboratory system and at the Department of Energy, is currently the interim director of Argonne. His appointment is effective immediately. Kearns is the 14th director of Argonne, a multidisciplinary science and engineering research center that seeks scientific and engineering solutions to the grand challenges of our time: sustainable energy, a healthy environment and a secure nation.

^ "Argonne Basks In Attention Of Anniversary, Film" .

Chicago Tribune . September 17, 1996.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2025 . Retrieved June 20, 2018 .

References [ edit ] Argonne National Laboratory, 1946–96 . Jack M. Holl, Richard G. Hewlett, Ruth R. Harris.

University of Illinois Press , 1997.

ISBN 978-0-252-02341-5 .

Nuclear physics: an introduction . S.B. Patel. New Age International Ltd., 1991.

ISBN 81-224-0125-2 .

Summary of Nuclear Chemistry Work at Argonne , Martin H. Studier, Argonne National Laboratory Report, Declassified June 13, 1949.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Argonne National Laboratory .

Argonne National Laboratory —Official Argonne website Argonne National Laboratory Presentations — Finding aid for Argonne National Laboratory presentations Argonne News —News releases, media center Argonne Software — Open source and commercially available software in or near the "shrink-wrap" phase Photo repository —Photography for public use Historical Argonne National Laboratory reports digitized by the TRAIL project, hosted at University of North Texas Libraries and HathiTrust 41°42′33″N 87°58′55″W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.709166°N 87.981992°W ﻿ / 41.709166; -87.981992 v t e Manhattan Project Timeline Sites Ames Berkeley Chicago ( Site A ) Dayton Hanford Inyokern Los Alamos Montreal New York Oak Ridge Salt Wells Pilot Plant Trinity Wendover Heavy water sites Administrators Vannevar Bush Arthur Compton James B. Conant Priscilla Duffield Thomas Farrell Leslie Groves John Lansdale Ernest Lawrence James Marshall Franklin Matthias Dorothy McKibbin Kenneth Nichols Robert Oppenheimer Deak Parsons Boris Pash William Purnell Frank Spedding Charles Thomas Paul Tibbets Bud Uanna Harold Urey Stafford Warren Ed Westcott Roscoe Wilson Scientists Luis Alvarez Robert Bacher Hans Bethe Aage Bohr Niels Bohr Norris Bradbury James Chadwick John Cockcroft Charles Critchfield Harry Daghlian John R. Dunning Enrico Fermi Richard Feynman Val Fitch James Franck Klaus Fuchs Maria Goeppert Mayer George Kistiakowsky George Koval Willard Libby Edwin McMillan Mark Oliphant George B. Pegram Norman Ramsey Jr.

Isidor Isaac Rabi James Rainwater Bruno Rossi Glenn Seaborg Emilio Segrè Louis Slotin Henry DeWolf Smyth Leo Szilard Edward Teller Stanisław Ulam John von Neumann John Wheeler Eugene Wigner Robert Wilson Leona Woods Chien-Shiung Wu Operations Alsos Mission Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki Operation Crossroads Operation Peppermint Project Alberta Silverplate 509th Composite Group Enola Gay Bockscar The Great Artiste Weapons Fat Man Little Boy Pumpkin bomb Thin Man Related topics African Americans Atomic Energy Act of 1946 Bismuth phosphate process B Reactor British contribution Calutron Girls Chicago Pile-1 Chicago Pile-3 Demon core Einstein–Szilard letter Feed materials Franck Report Interim Committee K-25 Project Los Alamos Primer Nobel Prize laureates Oppenheimer security hearing Plutonium Quebec Agreement RaLa Experiment S-1 Executive Committee S-50 Project Smyth Report Uranium X-10 Graphite Reactor Y-12 Project Category v t e United States Department of Energy Headquarters: James V. Forrestal Building Chris Wright , Secretary of Energy James Danly , Deputy Secretary of Energy Deputy Secretary of Energy Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence Energy Information Administration Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy Under Secretary of Energy for Infrastructure Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, & Energy Response Under Secretary of Energy for Nuclear Security National Nuclear Security Administration Under Secretary of Energy for Science and Innovation Office of Science OSTI Office of Electricity Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management Office of Nuclear Energy Assistant Secretary of Energy for Nuclear Energy Office of Nuclear Energy Power Marketing Administration Bonneville Power Administration Southeastern Power Administration Southwestern Power Administration Western Area Power Administration National Laboratory System Ames Argonne NBL CNM APS ATLAS EMC Berkeley ALS MF NCEM NERSC ESN JGI Brookhaven AGS CFN NSLS NSLS II RHIC Fermilab TeV Idaho RESL JLab Livermore NARAC NIF Los Alamos DARHTF NETL Albany NREL Oak Ridge SNS CNMS HFIR NCCS Pacific Northwest EMSL PPPL NSTX TFTR SRNL Sandia Z SLAC SSRL Energy Department Facilities and Reservations Fernald NLO Hanford K-25 Kansas City Plant Nevada Test Site Area 19 Area 20 NHHOR Pantex Rocky Flats SSFL ETEC SRE SRS SPR WIPP Y-12 Yucca Mountain Related Independent Agency Federal Energy Regulatory Commission v t e Municipalities and communities of DuPage County, Illinois , United States County seat : Wheaton Cities Aurora ‡ Batavia ‡ Chicago ‡ Darien Elmhurst ‡ Naperville ‡ Oakbrook Terrace St. Charles ‡ Warrenville West Chicago Wheaton Wood Dale Map of Illinois highlighting DuPage County Villages Addison Bartlett ‡ Bensenville ‡ Bloomingdale Bolingbrook ‡ Burr Ridge ‡ Carol Stream Clarendon Hills Downers Grove Elk Grove Village ‡ Glen Ellyn Glendale Heights Hanover Park ‡ Hinsdale ‡ Itasca Lemont ‡ Lisle Lombard Oak Brook ‡ Roselle ‡ Schaumburg ‡ Villa Park Wayne ‡ Westmont Willow Springs ‡ Willowbrook Winfield Woodridge ‡ Townships Addison Bloomingdale Downers Grove Lisle Milton Naperville Wayne Winfield York Unincorporated communities Belmont Butterfield Cloverdale Eola Flowerfield Fullersburg Keeneyville Lakewood Medinah Munger North Glen Ellyn Palisades South Elmhurst Swift York Center Ghost towns /Neighborhoods Gostyn Ontarioville Tedens Weston Footnotes ‡This populated place also has portions in an adjacent county or counties Illinois portal United States portal v t e University of Chicago Located in : Chicago, Illinois Schools College Business Social Work Divinity Continuing Education Public Policy Law Medicine Molecular Engineering Librarianship (closed) Research Argonne National Laboratory Becker Friedman Institute Center for Middle Eastern Studies Center for Research in Security Prices Chicago Project on Security and Threats Chicago school of economics Comer Children's Hospital Committee on Social Thought Comprehensive Cancer Center Enrico Fermi Institute Fermilab James Franck Institute Institute for the Study of Ancient Cultures, West Asia & North Africa Institute of Politics Laboratory Schools Marine Biological Laboratory Medical Center National Opinion Research Center Obama Presidential Center Paulson Institute Sonia Shankman Orthogenic School Stieglitz Lecture Toyota Technological Institute University of Chicago Press Journals Campus Bartlett Hall George Herbert Jones Laboratory Hong Kong campus Hutchinson Commons Ida Noyes Hall Lorado Taft Midway Studios Midway Plaisance Quadrangle Club Residence halls Burton–Judson Courts Snell–Hitchcock Rockefeller Chapel Seminary Co-op Library Joe and Rika Mansueto Library John Crerar Library Regenstein Library Museums Renaissance Society Smart Museum of Art Robie House History Cannon v. University of Chicago Chicago Pile-1 Nuclear Energy University of Chicago sit-ins Kenwood Astrophysical Observatory Metallurgical Laboratory Old University of Chicago Yerkes Observatory Chicago Principles Athletics Teams Men's basketball Women's basketball Football Venues Bartlett Hall Gerald Ratner Athletics Center Henry Crown Fieldhouse Men's Gymnasium (1891) Stagg Field Traditions Lascivious Costume Ball Latke–Hamantash Debate Scavenger Hunt University Athletic Association Students Band The Chicago Maroon Chicago Review Contemporary Chamber Players Doc Films Off-Off Campus Poetry Club Student Government Voices in Your Head WHPK People President Law school dean Alumni Business Law Faculty Business Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Portugal Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Argonne_National_Laboratory&oldid=1304946558 " Categories : Argonne National Laboratory United States Department of Energy national laboratories Federally Funded Research and Development Centers Buildings and structures in DuPage County, Illinois Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design certified buildings Lemont, Illinois Nuclear research institutes Supercomputer sites University of Chicago Tourist attractions in DuPage County, Illinois Argonne National Laboratory people 1946 establishments in Illinois Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 03:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Argonne National Laboratory 20 languages Add topic

