Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Lawsuit 3 Legal proceedings 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents President and Fellows of Harvard College v. Department of Health and Human Services Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US legal case President and Fellows of Harvard College v. United States Department of Health and Human Services, et al.

Court United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts Full case name President and Fellows of Harvard College v. United States Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., United States Department of Justice, Pamela J. Bondi, United States Department of Education, Linda McMahon, United States General Services Administration, Stephen Ehikian, United States Department of Energy, Christopher A. Wright, United States National Science Foundation, Sethuraman Panchanathan, United States Department of Defense, Peter B. Hegseth, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Janet E. Petro Started April 21, 2025 Citation 1:25-cv-11048 Court membership Judge sitting Allison Burroughs President and Fellows of Harvard College v. United States Department of Health and Human Services, et al.

is a lawsuit filed by the Harvard Corporation against the Trump administration .

Background [ edit ] According to university president Alan Garber , funding for research at Harvard was affected by a federal grant pause imposed in January 2025. The pause was later halted by a court order.

[ 1 ] Garber later criticized funding cuts at the National Institute of Health that would reduce grants at Harvard Medical School .

[ 2 ] John Shaw, the vice provost for research, submitted a declaration with a lawsuit filed by thirteen universities, though Harvard did not join the lawsuit.

[ 3 ] In March, the Trump administration stated it would conduct a review of US$9 billion in federal funding to Harvard University .

[ 4 ] Lawsuit [ edit ] On April 21, 2025, the President and Fellows of Harvard College sued several Trump officials, including secretary of health and human services Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

, secretary of education Linda McMahon , acting administrator of the General Services Administration Stephen Ehikian , and attorney general Pam Bondi , as well as their agencies, in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts . Harvard alleged that the Trump administration had levied its response to the university as "leverage to gain control of academic decision-making at Harvard." [ 5 ] Legal proceedings [ edit ] On July 21, 2025, Harvard and the Department of Justice made arguments before judge Allison Burroughs in court. No ruling was made at the time.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Education policy of the second Donald Trump administration Academic freedom References [ edit ] ^ Patel, Dhruv; Yoon, Grace (January 29, 2025).

"Garber Says Some Harvard Research May Halt After Trump Orders Freeze on Federal Grants" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved April 16, 2025 .

^ Patel, Dhruv; Yoon, Grace (February 10, 2025).

"Garber Blasts Trump's Limits on NIH Support for Indirect Costs" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved April 16, 2025 .

^ Patel, Dhruv; Yoon, Grace.

"Harvard Submits Declaration Alongside Lawsuit by 13 Colleges Over NIH Order, Calls Funding Caps 'Disastrous' " .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved April 16, 2025 .

^ Belkin, Douglas; Randazzo, Sara (April 21, 2025).

"Harvard Is Suing the Trump Administration" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved April 21, 2025 .

^ Saul, Stephanie (April 21, 2025).

"Harvard University Sues Trump Administration" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 21, 2025 .

^ Speri, Alice (July 21, 2025).

"Harvard argues in court that Trump administration's $2.6bn cuts are illegal" .

The Guardian . Retrieved July 21, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Docket on CourtListener Complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief on Harvard.edu Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=President_and_Fellows_of_Harvard_College_v._Department_of_Health_and_Human_Services&oldid=1301818508 " Categories : Harvard University Second Trump administration controversies Donald Trump litigation United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts cases 2025 in United States case law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 21:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents President and Fellows of Harvard College v. Department of Health and Human Services Add languages Add topic

