Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 2.1 Folds 2.2 Faults 2.3 Crustal flow 3 Examples 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Thick-skinned deformation 3 languages Català Español 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Thick-skinned deformation is a geological term which refers to crustal shortening that involves basement rocks and deep-seated faults as opposed to only the upper units of cover rocks above the basement which is known as thin-skinned deformation. While thin-skinned deformation is common in many different localities, thick-skinned deformation requires much more strain to occur and is a rarer type of deformation.

Definition [ edit ] Diagram of the thick-skinned deformation of a thrust-fault.

Diagram of the thin-skinned deformation of a thrust-fault.

Different processes can deform rocks, the deformation is almost always the result of stress . This stress leads to the formation of fault and fold structures, both can either extend or shorten of the Earth's crust. Thick-skinned deformation specifically affects deep crystalline rock of the basement and may extend deeper into the lower crust.

Thin-skinned deformation affects the upper crustal layers and does not deform the deeper basement.

[ 1 ] Causes [ edit ] Thick-skinned deformation is most commonly a result of crustal shortening and occurs when the region is undergoing horizontal compression. This frequently occurs in at the sites of continental collisions where orogenesis , or mountain building, is taking place and during which the crust is shortened horizontally and thickened vertically.

[ 2 ] The massive compressional forces involved in such a collision cause the basement rock and all of the units above it to deform. Deformation occurs in the form of both folds and thrust faults and may form a fold and thrust belt along the collisional zone or as crustal flow.

[ 1 ] Continent-continent collision At convergent plate boundaries two plates move towards each other as one is subducted downwards beneath the other but when the crust of two continents meet at a convergent zone neither one of them will be subducted due to their low density. As the two continents are pushed together by tectonic processes a large amount of stress is put on the rock. Eventually deformation will occur in one or multiple ways in order to relieve the stress.

Folds [ edit ] Folding usually occurs in areas with a very slow strain rate or when the rock being deformed is relatively weak and ductile. As folding occurs the units of rock bend forming anticlines, ridges, and synclines, valleys. While the true thickness of the underlying crust may not be equal to the elevation changes of the resulting mountains and hills, the average crustal thickness is greater than before the deformation occurred. One way in which folding can occur in such a formation is by a small amount of subduction of one plate. One continent may be partially overridden by the other but since the plate is far too light to sink it will uplift the overriding plate creating very large folds that deform the entire crust.

Faults [ edit ] Diagram of the evolution of a thrust-fault.

Thrust faults are another common form of deformation to occur in these areas. Faulting is generally the result of greater strain rates and stronger or more brittle rocks. These faults have a high angle and cause thickening by uplifting the rock onto itself. These types of faults are identified by the vertically repeating stratigraphy that they produce. During a collision when the strain reaches the breaking point of the rock a fracture will form in the rock. This fracture cuts across layers of rock to form a ramp which will allow movement to dissipate the accumulated strain. Under compression the upper hanging wall rises and overrides the lower foot wall.

Crustal flow [ edit ] The final type of deformation is crustal flow. This type of deformation is only able to occur when the crustal material is heated to a very high temperature, approximately 2/3 of its melting temperature. When this occurs in a collisional zone then the rock can be deformed by creep and will behave similarly to a fluid over the long periods of geologic time.

[ 3 ] Examples [ edit ] NASA Landsat-7 imagery of Himalayas Himalayan Mountains - The Himalayas of Tibet are at the location of a continental collision between the Indian and Asian continents and contains many examples of thick-skinned deformation.

Andes Mountains - The Andes of South America are at the location of an subduction zone and are formed by thick-skinned deformation.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Pfiffner, Adrian (2006).

"Thick-skinned and thin-skinned styles of continental contraction" .

Styles of Continental Contraction . Vol. 414. pp.

153– 177.

doi : 10.1130/2006.2414(09) .

ISBN 978-0-8137-2414-0 . Retrieved 5 November 2012 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ "Plate Tectonics" . Archived from the original on 4 December 2012 . Retrieved 2 December 2012 .

^ Copley, Alex; Dan McKenzie (2007).

"Models of crustal flow in the India–Asia collision zone" (PDF) .

Geophysical Journal International .

169 (2): 683– 698.

Bibcode : 2007GeoJI.169..683C .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-246X.2007.03343.x . Retrieved 5 November 2012 .

^ "Thin- and Thick-Skinned Deformation Associated with Flat Subduction" . Retrieved 3 December 2012 .

Sarkarinejad, K., and Goftari F., 2019. Thick-skinned and thin-skinned tectonics of the Zagros orogen, Iran: Constraints from structural, microstructural and kinematics analyses. Journal of Asian Earth Sciences 170, 249-273.

External links [ edit ] Thick-Skinned and Thin-Skinned Tectonics: A Global Perspective by O. Adrian Pfiffner (2017) v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thick-skinned_deformation&oldid=1256016643 " Categories : Deformation (mechanics) Plate tectonics Hidden category: CS1 errors: periodical ignored This page was last edited on 7 November 2024, at 20:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thick-skinned deformation 3 languages Add topic

