Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and education 2 Transcendence proof 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Ferdinand von Lindemann 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Català Čeština Deutsch Dolnoserbski Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hornjoserbsce Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician (1852–1939) Ferdinand von Lindemann Carl Louis Ferdinand von Lindemann Born ( 1852-04-12 ) 12 April 1852 Hannover , German Confederation Died 6 March 1939 (1939-03-06) (aged 86) Munich , Germany Nationality German Alma mater Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg Known for Proving π to be a transcendental number Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions University of Munich , University of Freiburg Doctoral advisor C. Felix Klein [ 1 ] Doctoral students Emil Hilb David Hilbert Martin Kutta Alfred Loewy Hermann Minkowski Oskar Perron Arthur Rosenthal Arnold Sommerfeld Heinrich Wieleitner Carl Louis Ferdinand von Lindemann (12 April 1852 – 6 March 1939) was a German mathematician , noted for his proof, published in 1882, that π (pi) is a transcendental number , meaning it is not a root of any polynomial with rational coefficients .

Life and education [ edit ] Lindemann was born in Hanover , the capital of the Kingdom of Hanover . His father, Ferdinand Lindemann, taught modern languages at a Gymnasium in Hanover. His mother, Emilie Crusius, was the daughter of the Gymnasium's headmaster. The family later moved to Schwerin , where young Ferdinand attended school.

He studied mathematics at Göttingen , Erlangen , and Munich . At Erlangen he received a doctorate, supervised by Felix Klein , [ 1 ] on non-Euclidean geometry . Lindemann subsequently taught in Würzburg and at the University of Freiburg . During his time in Freiburg, Lindemann devised his proof that π is a transcendental number (see Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem ). After his time in Freiburg, Lindemann transferred to the University of Königsberg . While a professor in Königsberg , Lindemann acted as supervisor for the doctoral theses of the mathematicians David Hilbert , Hermann Minkowski , and Arnold Sommerfeld .

[ 2 ] Transcendence proof [ edit ] In 1882, Lindemann published the result for which he is best known, the transcendence of π .  His methods were similar to those used nine years earlier by Charles Hermite to show that e , the base of natural logarithms , is transcendental. Before the publication of Lindemann's proof, it was known that π was irrational, as Johann Heinrich Lambert proved π was irrational in the 1760s .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Ferdinand von Lindemann at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ^ "Ferdinand von Lindemann - Biography" .

Maths History . Retrieved 2022-08-06 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Ferdinand von Lindemann at Wikimedia Commons O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Ferdinand von Lindemann" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Ferdinand von Lindemann at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Lindemann, F.  " Über die Zahl π ", Mathematische Annalen 20 (1882): pp. 213–225.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet Leopoldina People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ferdinand_von_Lindemann&oldid=1294887678 " Categories : 1852 births 1939 deaths 19th-century German mathematicians 20th-century German mathematicians Squaring the circle German number theorists Scientists from Hanover People from the Kingdom of Hanover University of Göttingen alumni University of Erlangen–Nuremberg alumni Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich alumni Academic staff of the University of Königsberg Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 11:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ferdinand von Lindemann 41 languages Add topic

