Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Research design and analysis Toggle Research design and analysis subsection 1.1 Research designs 1.2 Charts and diagrams 1.3 Statistical analyses 2 Laboratory techniques 3 Field techniques 4 Computational tools Toggle Computational tools subsection 4.1 Mathematical models 4.2 Algorithms 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents List of research methods in biology 1 language Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

Part of a series on Biology Index Outline Glossary History ( timeline ) Key components Cell theory Ecosystem Evolution Phylogeny Properties of life Adaptation Energy processing Growth Order Regulation Reproduction Response to environment Domains and Kingdoms of life Archaea Bacteria Eukarya ( Animals , Fungi , Plants , Protists ) Branches Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology Research Biologist ( list) List of biology awards List of journals List of research methods List of unsolved problems Applications Agricultural science Biomedical sciences Health technology Pharming Biology portal Category v t e This list of research methods in biology is an index to articles about research methodologies used in various branches of biology .

Research design and analysis [ edit ] Research designs [ edit ] Research design Utility Potential analysis Between-group design Experiment that has two or more groups of subjects each being tested by a different testing factor simultaneously Student's t-test , Analysis of variance , Mann–Whitney U test Repeated measures design A research design that involves multiple measures of the same variable taken on the same or matched subjects either under different conditions or over two or more time periods.

[ 1 ] Paired t-test , Wilcoxon signed-rank test Charts and diagrams [ edit ] Analysis Utility Branch Dose–response curves Graph that shows the magnitude of the response of an organism , as a function of exposure (or doses ) to a stimulus or stressor (usually a chemical ) after a certain exposure time [ 2 ] Physiology Electroencephalogram Graph that shows voltage fluctuations resulting from ionic current within the neurons of the brain [ 3 ] Neuroscience Electrocardiogram Graph of voltage versus time of the electrical activity of the heart [ 4 ] using electrodes placed on the skin Physiology Identification key Used to identify a specimen organism from a set of known taxa.

[ 5 ] Systematics , Taxonomy Manhattan plot Used to display data with a large number of data-points, many of non-zero amplitude, and with a distribution of higher-magnitude values. The plot is commonly used in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to display significant SNPs .

[ 6 ] Genetics Pedigree chart Used to show the occurrence of phenotypes of a particular gene or organism and its ancestors from one generation to the next, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] most commonly humans , show dogs , [ 10 ] and race horses Genetics Phylogenetic tree Used to show the evolutionary relationships among various biological species or other entities based upon similarities and differences in their physical or genetic characteristics Systematics , Evolutionary biology Population pyramid Used to illustrate the distribution of a population (typically that of a country or region of the world) by age groups and sex; it typically forms the shape of a pyramid when the population is growing [ 11 ] Population ecology Punnett square Used to predict the genotypes of a particular cross or breeding experiment Genetics Statistical analyses [ edit ] Analysis Utility Type Analysis of variance A collection of statistical models and their associated estimation procedures (such as the "variation" among and between groups) used to analyze the differences among means Statistical model Chi-squared test A statistical hypothesis test that is valid to perform when the test statistic is chi-squared distributed under the null hypothesis , specifically Pearson's chi-squared test and variants thereof Statistical hypothesis test Mann–Whitney U test A statistical hypothesis test of the null hypothesis that, for randomly selected values X and Y from two populations, the probability of X being greater than Y is equal to the probability of Y being greater than X Nonparametric statistics Student's t-test Any statistical hypothesis test in which the test statistic follows a Student's t -distribution under the null hypothesis Parametric statistics Laboratory techniques [ edit ] Method Utility Branches Agarose gel electrophoresis Used to separate a mixed population of macromolecules such as DNA or proteins in a matrix of agarose , one of the two main components of agar Biochemistry , Molecular biology , Genetics Animal Model Used for researching diseases and disorders in humans. Some animals may have human-like traits, such as mice , while others may have traits that are ideal for research, such as the squid giant axon Biochemistry , Neuroscience , Physiology Biological ablation Used to remove a biological structure or functionality Genetics , Physiology Calcium imaging Used to optically measure the status of calcium ions (Ca 2+ ) in an isolated cell , tissue or medium Physiology Cell isolation Process of separating individual living cells from a solid block of tissue or cell suspension Cell biology Centrifugation Use of centrifugal force to separate particles from a solution according to their size, shape, density, medium viscosity, and rotor speed Cell biology , Biochemistry CRISPR gene editing Used to modify the genomes of living organisms based on a simplified version of the bacterial CRISPR - Cas9 antiviral defense system Molecular biology DNA sequencer Used to automate the DNA sequencing process Genetics , Molecular biology Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) Used to detect the presence of a ligand (commonly a protein) in a liquid sample using antibodies directed against the protein to be measure Biochemistry , Molecular biology Gene knockout Used to make one of an organism's genes inoperative ("knocked out" of the organism) Molecular biology , Genetics Immunostaining Used of an antibody -based method to detect a specific protein in a sample Molecular biology , Biochemistry Intracellular recording Used to measure the voltage across a cell membrane Neuroscience , Electrophysiology Microarray Assays (tests) large amounts of biological material using high-throughput screening miniaturized, multiplexed and parallel processing and detection methods Genetics , Molecular biology Microelectrode array Devices that contain multiple (tens to thousands) microelectrodes through which neural signals are obtained or delivered, essentially serving as neural interfaces that connect neurons to electronic circuitry Neuroscience Microscope Used to examine objects that are too small to be seen by the naked eye Cell biology Molecular cloning Used to assemble recombinant DNA molecules and to direct their replication within host organisms .

[ 12 ] Molecular biology Northern blot Used to study gene expression by detection of RNA (or isolated mRNA ) in a sample.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Molecular biology Optogenetics Uses light to control neurons that have been genetically modified to express light-sensitive ion channels Neuroscience Oscilloscope Used to graphically displays varying signal voltages , usually as a calibrated two-dimensional plot of one or more signals as a function of time Neuroscience , Physiology Paper chromatography Used to separate coloured chemicals or substances.

[ 15 ] Molecular biology Patch clamp Used to study ionic currents in individual isolated living cells, tissue sections, or patches of cell membrane Electrophysiology , Neuroscience Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) Used to rapidly make millions to billions of copies (complete copies or partial copies) of a specific DNA sample, allowing scientists to take a very small sample of DNA and amplify it (or a part of it) to a large enough amount to study in detail Genetics , Molecular biology Somatic cell nuclear transfer Used for creating a viable embryo from a body cell and an egg cell Developmental biology Southern blot Used to detect specific DNA sequence in DNA samples Molecular biology Test cross Used to determine whether an individual is homozygous or heterozygous dominant Genetics Voltage clamp Used to measure the ion currents through the membranes of excitable cells, such as neurons , while holding the membrane voltage at a set level.

[ 16 ] Physiology , Neuroscience Western blot Used analytical technique in molecular biology and immunogenetics to detect specific proteins in a sample of tissue homogenate or extract Molecular biology X-ray crystallography Used to determine the atomic and molecular structure of a crystal , in which the crystalline structure causes a beam of incident X-rays to diffract into many specific directions Structural biology Field techniques [ edit ] Method Utility Branches Distance sampling Used for estimating the density and/or abundance of populations Ecology Mark and recapture Used to estimate an animal population 's size where it is impractical to count every individual.

[ 17 ] Ecology Computational tools [ edit ] Mathematical models [ edit ] Model Utility Branches Exponential integrate-and-fire Describes compact and computationally efficient nonlinear spiking neuron models with one or two variables Neuroscience FitzHugh–Nagumo model Describes a prototype of an excitable system (e.g., a neuron ) Neuroscience Hardy–Weinberg principle States that allele and genotype frequencies in a population will remain constant from generation to generation in the absence of other evolutionary influences Genetics , Evolutionary biology Hodgkin–Huxley model Describes how action potentials in neurons are initiated and propagated Neuroscience Infinite sites model Allows for the calculation of heterozygosity , or genetic diversity , in a finite population and for the estimation of genetic distances between populations of interest [ 18 ] Evolutionary biology Logistic growth Describes the growth of a population as exponential, followed by a decrease in growth, and bound by a carrying capacity due to environmental pressures.

[ 19 ] Ecology Lotka–Volterra equations Describe the dynamics of biological systems in which two species interact, one as a predator and the other as prey Ecology Moran process Stochastic process that describes finite populations Genetics Species–area relationship describes the relationship between the area of a habitat , or of part of a habitat, and the number of species found within that area Ecology Algorithms [ edit ] Algorithm Utility Branches Evolutionary algorithm Uses mechanisms inspired by biological evolution .

Candidate solutions to the optimization problem play the role of individuals in a population, and the fitness function determines the quality of the solutions.

Neuroscience References [ edit ] ^ Salkind, Neil J. (2010).

Repeated Measures Design . SAGE.

doi : 10.4135/9781412961288 .

ISBN 9781412961271 .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2019 . Retrieved 8 January 2019 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Crump, K. S.; Hoel, D. G.; Langley, C. H.; Peto, R. (1 September 1976).

"Fundamental Carcinogenic Processes and Their Implications for Low Dose Risk Assessment" .

Cancer Research .

36 (9 Part 1): 2973– 2979.

PMID 975067 .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2015 . Retrieved 16 March 2024 .

^ Niedermeyer E.; da Silva F.L. (2004).

Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields . Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

ISBN 978-0-7817-5126-1 .

[ page needed ] ^ Lilly, Leonard S, ed. (2016).

Pathophysiology of Heart Disease: A Collaborative Project of Medical Students and Faculty (sixth ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. p. 74.

ISBN 978-1451192759 .

^ Winston, Judith E. (1999). "Keys".

Describing species: practical taxonomic procedure for biologists . New York: Columbia University Press. pp.

367– 381.

ISBN 978-0-231-06824-6 .

^ Gibson, Greg (2010). "Hints of hidden heritability in GWAS".

Nature Genetics .

42 (7): 558– 560.

doi : 10.1038/ng0710-558 .

PMID 20581876 .

S2CID 34546516 .

^ pedigree chart Archived 2013-12-03 at the Wayback Machine Genealogy Glossary - About.com, a part of The New York Times Company.

^ "HELP - Ancestral File - Pedigree Chart" .

familysearch.org .

Archived from the original on 7 February 2009 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Documenting Your Pedigree Chart Archived 2009-06-07 at the Wayback Machine By Melody Daisson -  GeneaSearch.com ^ "AKC Pedigree: How to Purchase a Document on Your Dog's Lineage" .

Archived from the original on 2015-02-07 . Retrieved 2021-08-10 .

^ "Population Pyramids of the World from 1950 to 2100" .

PopulationPyramid.net .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2018 . Retrieved 21 April 2018 .

^ Watson JD (2007).

Recombinant DNA: genes and genomes: a short course . San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.

ISBN 978-0-7167-2866-5 .

^ Alberts, B., Johnson, A., Lewis, J. Raff, M., Roberts, K., Walter, P. 2008. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 5th ed. Garland Science, Taylor & Francis Group, NY, pp 538–539.

^ Kevil, C. G., Walsh, L., Laroux, F. S., Kalogeris, T., Grisham, M. B., Alexander, J. S. (1997) An Improved, Rapid Northern Protocol.  Biochem. and Biophys. Research Comm. 238:277–279.

^ "Paper chromatography | chemistry" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 2021-11-06 . Retrieved 2018-06-01 .

^ Nowotny, Dr Thomas; Levi, Dr Rafael (2014). "Voltage-Clamp Technique". In Jaeger, Dieter; Jung, Ranu (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Computational Neuroscience . Springer New York. pp.

1– 5.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4614-7320-6_137-2 .

ISBN 9781461473206 .

^ "Mark-Recapture" .

Archived from the original on 2021-09-23 . Retrieved 2021-07-21 .

^ Kimura, Motoo (1969-04-01).

"The Number of Heterozygous Nucleotide Sites Maintained in a Finite Population Due to Steady Flux of Mutations" .

Genetics .

61 (4): 893– 903.

doi : 10.1093/genetics/61.4.893 .

ISSN 0016-6731 .

PMC 1212250 .

PMID 5364968 .

^ Renshaw, Eric (1991).

Modeling Biological Populations in Space and Time . Cambridge University Press. pp.

6– 9.

External links [ edit ] v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry v t e Biology Introduction ( Genetics , Evolution ) Outline History Timeline Index Biology Overview Science Life Properties ( Adaptation , Energy processing , Growth , Order , Regulation , Reproduction ( Self-replication ), Response to environment ) Hierarchy of life ( Atom > Molecule > Organelle > Cell > Tissue > Organ > Organ system > Organism > Population > Community > Ecosystem > Biosphere ) Reductionistic Emergent property Mechanistic Scientific method Taxonomic rank Theory Law Peer review Biology journals Common name Chemical basis Atoms Amino acids Carbohydrates Chemical bond Chemical element Lipids Matter Quantum Molecules Monomer Nucleic acids Organic compounds pH Polymer Proteins Water Cells ATP Cell cycle Cell theory Cell signaling Cellular respiration Energy transformation Enzyme Eukaryote Fermentation Metabolism Meiosis Mitosis Photosynthesis Prokaryote Genetics DNA Epigenetics Evolutionary developmental biology Gene expression Gene regulation Genomes Mendelian inheritance Post-transcriptional modification Evolution Adaptation Earliest known life forms Function Genetic drift Gene flow History of life Macroevolution Microevolution Mutation Natural selection Phylogenetics Speciation Taxonomy Diversity Archaea Bacteria Eukaryote Alga Animal Fungus Plant Protist Virus Plant form and function Epidermis (botany) Flower Ground tissue Leaf Phloem Plant stem Root Shoot Vascular plant Vascular tissue Xylem Animal form and function Breathing Circulatory system Endocrine system Digestive system Homeostasis Immune system Internal environment Muscular system Nervous system Reproductive system Respiratory system Ecology Biogeochemical cycle Biological interaction Biomass Biomes Biosphere Climate Climate change Community Conservation Ecosystem Habitat niche Microbiome Population dynamics Resources Research methods Laboratory techniques Genetic engineering Transformation Gel electrophoresis Chromatography Centrifugation Cell culture DNA sequencing DNA microarray Green fluorescent protein vector Enzyme assay Protein purification Western blot Northern blot Southern blot Restriction enzyme Polymerase chain reaction Two-hybrid screening in vivo in vitro in silico Field techniques Belt transect mark and recapture species discovery curve Branches Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology Glossaries Biology Botanical terms Ecological terms Plant morphology terms Biology portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_research_methods_in_biology&oldid=1300545734 " Categories : Outlines of sciences Outlines Biology-related lists Research-related lists Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2013 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Dynamic lists Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 00:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of research methods in biology 1 language Add topic

