Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Family and education 2 Early public career 3 US Senator Toggle US Senator subsection 3.1 Political positions 3.2 Opposition to World War II 3.3 1944 re-election 3.4 United Nations 3.5 Britain 3.6 Education 3.7 Condemnation of Nuremberg Trials 3.8 Health care 3.9 1947 Taft–Hartley Labor Act 3.10 Second term 3.10.1 Support of Israel 3.11 1950 re-election 4 Presidential ambitions Toggle Presidential ambitions subsection 4.1 Distrust by Old Right 4.2 1940 and 1944 4.3 1948 and 1952 5 Senate Majority Leader 6 Death and legacy Toggle Death and legacy subsection 6.1 Memorial 7 Electoral history 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 Primary sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Robert A. Taft 24 languages العربية تۆرکجه Български Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Simple English Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American politician (1889–1953) "Mr. Republican" redirects here. For the former lieutenant governor of Alaska, see Jack Coghill .

"Senator Taft" redirects here. For other uses, see Senator Taft (disambiguation) .

For other people named Robert Taft, see Robert Taft (disambiguation) .

Robert A. Taft Taft c. 1948 United States Senator from Ohio In office January 3, 1939 – July 31, 1953 Preceded by Robert J. Bulkley Succeeded by Thomas A. Burke Senate Majority Leader In office January 3, 1953 – July 31, 1953 Deputy Leverett Saltonstall Preceded by Ernest McFarland Succeeded by William Knowland Chair of the Senate Republican Policy Committee In office January 3, 1947 – January 3, 1953 Leader Wallace H. White Jr.

Kenneth S. Wherry Styles Bridges Preceded by Position established Succeeded by William Knowland Member of the Ohio Senate In office 1931–1933 Speaker of the Ohio House of Representatives In office January 15, 1926 – January 2, 1927 Preceded by Harry D. Silver Succeeded by O. C. Gray Member of the Ohio House of Representatives In office 1921–1931 Personal details Born Robert Alphonso Taft ( 1889-09-08 ) September 8, 1889 Cincinnati , Ohio, U.S.

Died July 31, 1953 (1953-07-31) (aged 63) New York City, U.S.

Political party Republican Spouse Martha Wheaton Bowers ​ ​ ( m.

1914 ) ​ Children 4, including William and Robert Parent(s) William Howard Taft (father) Nellie Herron (mother) Relatives Taft family Education Yale University ( BA ) Harvard University ( LLB ) Signature Robert A. Taft's voice Taft introducing the National Vocarium Recorded June 14, 1939 Robert Alphonso Taft Sr.

(September 8, 1889 – July 31, 1953) was an American politician, lawyer, and scion of the Republican Party 's Taft family . Taft represented Ohio in the United States Senate , briefly served as Senate majority leader , and was a leader of the conservative coalition of Republicans and conservative Democrats who blocked expansion of the New Deal . Often referred to as " Mr. Republican ", he co-sponsored the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947, which banned closed shops , created the concept of right-to-work states, and regulated other labor practices.

The elder son of William Howard Taft , the 27th president of the United States and 10th chief justice of the United States , Robert Taft was born in Cincinnati , Ohio. He pursued a legal career in Cincinnati after graduating from Harvard Law School in 1913. With his brother Charles Phelps Taft II , he co-founded the law partnership of Taft Stettinius & Hollister . Taft served in the Ohio House of Representatives from 1921 to 1931 and in the Ohio Senate from 1931 to 1933. Though he lost re-election in 1932, he remained a powerful force in state and local politics.

After winning election to the Senate in 1938 over incumbent Democrat Robert J. Bulkley , Taft repeatedly sought the Republican presidential nomination, often battling for control of the party with the moderate faction of Republicans led by Thomas E. Dewey . He also emerged as a prominent non-interventionist and opposed U.S. involvement in World War II prior to the 1941 Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . Taft's non-interventionist stances damaged his 1940 candidacy, and the 1940 Republican National Convention nominated Wendell Willkie . Taft sought the presidency again in 1948, but he lost to Dewey at the 1948 Republican National Convention . He opposed the creation of NATO and criticized President Harry Truman 's handling of the Korean War .

Taft again sought the presidential nomination a third time in 1952, and was widely viewed as the front-runner. However, Dewey and other moderates convinced General Dwight D. Eisenhower to enter the race, and Eisenhower narrowly prevailed at the 1952 Republican National Convention and went on to win the 1952 presidential election . Taft was elected Senate majority leader in 1953 but died of a cerebral hemorrhage while being treated for pancreatic cancer later that year. A 1957 Senate committee named Taft as one of America's five greatest senators, along with Henry Clay , Daniel Webster , John C. Calhoun , and Robert M. La Follette Sr.

—portraits of the "famous five" are displayed in the Senate Reception Room .

[ 1 ] Family and education [ edit ] Taft was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, on September 8, 1889, a product of one of America's most prominent political families. He was a grandson of Attorney General and Secretary of War Alphonso Taft , and the elder son of President and Chief Justice William Howard Taft and Helen Louise "Nellie" Herron . His younger brother Charles Phelps Taft II served as the mayor of Cincinnati and was the unsuccessful Republican candidate for Ohio Governor in 1952. As a boy Taft spent four years in the Philippines , where his father was Governor-General . He was first in his class at the Taft School (run by his uncle), at Yale College (1910), and at Harvard Law School (1913). He was a member of Psi Upsilon , his father's fraternity [ 2 ] and Skull and Bones , [ 3 ] and edited the Harvard Law Review . In 1913, Taft scored the highest in the state on the Ohio bar exam. He then practiced for four years with the firm of Maxwell and Ramsey (now Graydon Head & Ritchey LLP) in Cincinnati, his family's ancestral city. After a two-year stint in Washington working for the Food and Drug Administration , he returned to Cincinnati and opened his own law office. In 1924, he and his brother Charles helped form the law partnership Taft Stettinius & Hollister , with which Taft continued to be associated until his death and continues to carry his name today.

[ citation needed ] President Taft and his family (1912) On October 17, 1914, he married Martha Wheaton Bowers (1889–1958), [ 4 ] daughter of Lloyd Wheaton Bowers and Louisa Bennett Wilson. Taft himself appeared taciturn and coldly intellectual, characteristics that were offset by his gregarious wife, who served the same role his mother had for his father, as a confidante and powerful asset to her husband's political career. In May 1950, Martha suffered a severe stroke that left her an invalid, leaving her confined to a wheelchair, unable to take care of herself, and reliant upon her husband, children, and nurses for support.

[ 5 ] A biographer called his wife's stroke "the deepest personal blow of [Taft's] life ... there was no denying that he suffered." [ 6 ] Following her stroke, Taft faithfully assisted his wife, called her every night when he was away on business, read stories to her at night when he was at home, "pushed her about in her wheelchair, lifted her in and out of cars ... tenderly did his best to make her feel comfortable and happy, and helped feed and take care of her at public functions" – facts which, his admirers noted, belied his public image as a cold and uncaring person.

[ 6 ] They had four sons: William Howard Taft III (1915–1991), who became ambassador to Ireland [ 7 ] Robert Alphonso Taft Jr.

(1917–1993), who was also elected to the U.S. Senate [ 8 ] Lloyd Bowers Taft (1923–1985), who worked as an investment banker in Cincinnati, [ 8 ] Horace Dwight Taft (1925–1983), who became a professor of physics and dean at Yale.

[ 9 ] Three of Robert and Martha's grandchildren are Robert Alphonso "Bob" Taft III (born 1942), Governor of Ohio from 1999 to 2007, William Howard Taft IV (born 1945), Deputy Secretary of Defense from 1984 to 1989, and Patricia Taft (born 1984), charter board member of the National First Ladies Day Commission and board member of the Society of Presidential Descendants .

In 1917, Taft and his wife bought a 46-acre (19-hectare) farm in Indian Hill , a well-to-do suburb of Cincinnati. Called Sky Farm, it would serve as Taft's primary residence for the rest of his life. The Tafts gradually made extensive renovations that turned the small farmhouse into a sixteen-room mansion. On the farm Taft enjoyed growing strawberries , asparagus , and potatoes for profit. During the summer, Taft often vacationed with his wife and children at the Taft family's summer home at Murray Bay , in Quebec , Canada.

[ 10 ] Although he was nominally a member of the Episcopal church, his biographer James Patterson noted that Taft's "religious inclinations were weak" and that he was a "Sunday morning golfer, not a church-going Episcopalian".

[ 11 ] When reporters asked his wife Martha what church he attended, she jokingly replied, "I'd have to say the Burning Tree ", an exclusive country club and golf course in suburban Washington.

[ 12 ] Early public career [ edit ] When the United States entered World War I in April 1917, Taft attempted to join the army but was rejected due to his poor eyesight. Instead, he joined the legal staff of the Food and Drug Administration where he met Herbert Hoover , who became his idol. In 1918 and 1919, he was in Paris as legal adviser for the American Relief Administration , Hoover's agency to distribute food to wartorn Europe. He came to distrust governmental bureaucracy as inefficient and detrimental to the rights of the individual, a principle he promoted throughout his career. He urged membership in the League of Nations [ 13 ] but generally distrusted European politicians. He endorsed the idea of a powerful world court to enforce international law, but no such idealized court ever existed during his lifetime. He returned to Cincinnati in late 1919, promoted Hoover for president in 1920, and opened a law firm with his brother, Charles Taft.

[ citation needed ] In 1920 he was elected to the Ohio House of Representatives , where he served as Republican floor leader and was Speaker of the House from January 1926 to January 1927. In 1930, he was elected to the Ohio Senate , but was defeated for re-election in 1932; it would be the only general election defeat of his career. He was an outspoken opponent of the Ku Klux Klan , and he did not support prohibition . In 1925, he voted against a bill, sponsored by Ohio state representatives who were members of the Ku Klux Klan, to outlaw dancing on Sundays, and he led the fight against a Klan-sponsored bill requiring all Ohio public school teachers to read at least ten verses of the Bible each day in class.

[ 14 ] In his speech opposing the bill, Taft stated that religion should be taught in churches, not public schools, and while the Bible was great literature, "in it religion overshadows all else." The bill passed the legislature over the opposition of Taft and his allies, but it was later vetoed by Ohio's governor.

[ 14 ] Taft's period of service in the Ohio state legislature was most notable for his efforts to reform and modernize the state's antiquated tax laws.

[ 15 ] Throughout the 1920s and 1930s, Taft was a powerful figure in local and state political and legal circles, and he was known as a loyal Republican who never threatened to bolt the party. He confessed in 1922 that "while I have no difficulty talking, I don't know how to do any of the eloquence business which makes for enthusiasm or applause." [ 16 ] A lackluster speaker who did not mix well or glad-hand supporters, Taft was still a tireless worker with a broad range of policy and political interests. His total grasp of the complex details of every issue impressed reporters and politicians. Democrats joked that "Taft has the best mind in Washington, until he makes it up." Taft's loyalty to the conservative politicians who controlled Ohio's Republican Party had a price, as it often caused conflict with his younger brother, Charles, who as a local politician in Cincinnati had gained a reputation as a party maverick and liberal; however, despite their occasional policy disagreements, Charles loyally supported all three of his brother's presidential bids.

[ citation needed ] US Senator [ edit ] Taft during his Senate tenure, from the US Senate Historical Office collection This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Taft was elected to the first of his three terms as US Senator in 1938 . He first defeated Ohio Supreme Court justice Arthur H. Day in the Republican primary, and then defeated the Democratic incumbent, Robert Bulkley , in the general election.

[ 17 ] Taft engaged Bulkley in several debates and was generally regarded as the winner.

[ 18 ] He struggled in the earlier debates but later came out on top through assistance from his wife, Martha, [ 18 ] who would be regarded as the most valuable asset in his campaign.

[ 19 ] As a result, Taft gained the upper hand against Bulkley, who had earlier been regarded as the frontrunner in the race, [ 18 ] and won the election by nearly 171,000 votes, or 53.6% of the total vote.

[ 20 ] During his first two years as a Senator, the Tafts rented a home in Washington, but in 1941 they purchased a brick Victorian home, built in the 1880s, in the city's Georgetown neighborhood.

[ 21 ] The home – despite lacking "the grace and amenities of Sky Farm", their home in Ohio – remained their Washington residence until Taft's death in 1953.

[ 21 ] Political positions [ edit ] Co-operating with Conservative Democrats , he led the conservative coalition that opposed the New Deal . The Republican gains in the 1938 elections, combined with the creation of the conservative coalition, had stopped the expansion of the New Deal. However, Taft saw his mission as not only stopping the growth of the New Deal but also eliminating many of its government programs.

During his first term in the Senate, Taft criticized what he believed was the inefficiency and waste of many New Deal programs and of the need to let private enterprise and businesses restore the nation's economy instead of relying upon government programs to end the Great Depression . He condemned the New Deal as socialist and attacked deficit spending, high farm subsidies, governmental bureaucracy, the National Labor Relations Board, and nationalized health insurance. However, he did not always follow the ideology of the conservative coalition, supporting Social Security , subsidized loans for farmers and homeowners, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, public works projects, public housing, workers' right to strike and federal aid to public education, having sponsored the Housing Act of 1949 . As noted by Ralph Nader , Taft was also willing to revise the Taft-Hartley Act in order to make it more balanced and more favorable towards labor unions.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Whereas some fellow liberals thought of Taft as a stooge for big business, Burton K. Wheeler described Taft as an "honest conservative", believing that he "would not be pushed around by Wall Street or the unintelligent reactionaries", and endorsed his 1948 presidential campaign.

[ 26 ] Taft set forward a conservative domestic program that promoted limited government spending, a balanced federal budget, low taxes, pro-business policies to spur economic growth, a limited number of social welfare programs (such as Social Security , a minimum wage, public housing and federal aid to public education), and an adequate national defense focused on strengthening the Navy and Air Force .

[ 27 ] In foreign policy, he advocated noninvolvement in European wars and military alliances.

[ 28 ] He also strongly opposed the military draft on the principle that it limited a young man's freedom of choice.

[ 29 ] Various historians have described Taft, in terms of political philosophy, as a libertarian ; he opposed nearly all forms of governmental interference in both the national economy and in the private lives of citizens.

[ 30 ] Republican Party historian Geoffrey Kabaservice has described Taft as a politician who opposed bigness in labor, business and government.

[ 31 ] President Eisenhower found Taft "extraordinarily leftish" in some domestic positions.

[ 32 ] [ failed verification ] On Independence Day 1945, Taft announced his intention to combat the Bretton Woods monetary agreement on the Senate floor, adding that his battle consisted of trying to add amendments to the bill through the Senate committee and that he wanted the agreement postponed until conditions had stabilized.

[ 33 ] In January 1946, after President Truman delivered a radio address calling for Americans to pressure their representatives in Congress for legislation the president called "vital", Taft asserted that Truman had chosen to follow the economic views of the CIO-PAC and left the Democratic Party split and his legislative recommendations stalled despite the Democratic majority in Congress.

[ 34 ] Opposition to World War II [ edit ] Taft's greatest prominence during his first term came not from his fight against the New Deal but rather from his vigorous opposition to US involvement in the Second World War . A staunch non-interventionist , Taft believed that America should avoid any involvement in European or Asian wars and concentrate instead on solving its domestic problems. He believed that a strong military, combined with the natural geographic protection of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, would be adequate to protect America even if Germany overran all of Europe. Between the outbreak of war in September 1939, and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Taft opposed nearly all attempts to aid countries fighting Germany. That brought him strong criticism from many liberal Republicans, such as 1940 presidential nominee Wendell Willkie , who felt that America could best protect itself by supporting the British and their allies. Although Taft fully supported the American war effort after Pearl Harbor, he continued to harbor a deep suspicion of American involvement in postwar military alliances, including the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Taft was the only representative to speak in opposition to Japanese-American internment .

[ 35 ] 1944 re-election [ edit ] In 1944 Taft was nearly defeated in his bid for a second term in the Senate. His Democratic opponent, former Ohio Lt. Governor William G. Pickrel , received major support from Ohio's labor unions and internationalists , and lost by fewer than 18,000 votes out of nearly three million cast, or a margin of less than one percent.

[ 36 ] Taft lost Cleveland, the state's largest city, by 96,000 votes, and he trailed in most of Ohio's largest urban areas, but he ran strong in the state's rural regions and small towns, carried 71 of Ohio's 88 counties, and so avoided defeat.

[ 36 ] His near-defeat in 1944 "was ever to confound Taft's insistence that he was a potent vote getter", and played a role in his failure to win the Republican presidential nomination in 1948.

[ 37 ] Following his re-election, Taft became chairman of the Senate Republican Conference in 1944.

United Nations [ edit ] In 1945, Taft was among the seven senators who opposed full United States entry into the United Nations.

[ 38 ] Britain [ edit ] In March 1946, after the Truman administration pushed for granting Britain a loan of $3.75 billion, Taft advocated for Britain receiving an "outright gift" in place of the loan and said it "would cause irritation" between the latter country and the United States for the next 50 years during his questioning of Undersecretary of State Dean Acheson as part of the Senate Banking committee.

[ 39 ] Taft asserted that the State Department had acted with "complete secrecy" in negotiating the loan, as no member of Congress had been consulted, and that the proposal would face opposition in Congress for this reason.

[ 39 ] Taft proposed that Britain could receive the funds it would have had from the loan by adding the US gift of $1 billion with an advance from the International Bank and the International Fund.

[ 39 ] Education [ edit ] In March 1946, Taft joined Senators Lister Hill and Elbert Thomas in introducing a version of the Hill-Thomas Federal Aid to Education bill.

[ 40 ] In 1948, Taft sponsored an education aid bill providing the poorest states with the most money. Despite Senate approval, the bill was rejected in the House.

[ 41 ] Condemnation of Nuremberg Trials [ edit ] Taft condemned the postwar Nuremberg Trials as victor's justice under ex post facto laws , in which the people who won the war were the prosecutors, the judges, and the alleged victims, all at the same time. Taft condemned the trials as a violation of the most basic principles of American justice and internationally accepted standards in favor of a politicized version of justice in which court proceedings became an excuse for vengeance against the defeated.

[ 42 ] I question whether the hanging of those, who, however despicable, were the leaders of the German people, will ever discourage the making of aggressive war, for no one makes aggressive war unless he expects to win. About this whole judgment there is the spirit of vengeance, and vengeance is seldom justice. The hanging of the eleven men convicted will be a blot on the American record, which we shall long regret.

[ 43 ] His opposition to the trials was criticized by Republicans and Democrats alike, [ citation needed ] and it is sometimes given as a reason for his failure to secure the Republican nomination for president.

[ citation needed ] Other observers, such as Senator John F. Kennedy (in Profiles in Courage ), applauded Taft's principled stand even in the face of great bipartisan criticism.

[ 44 ] Health care [ edit ] Despite opposing President Harry Truman 's proposal for a comprehensive, national health insurance plan, Taft expressed support for medical aid for poor and low-income people, and in 1947, he proposed a program in which states would receive federal aid from the government in order to provide health care for poor and low-income people. A similar program in Medicaid would eventually be signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1965.

[ 45 ] In his support of means-tested public health insurance programs, Taft said in 1949: "It has always been assumed in this country that those able to pay for medical care would buy their own medical service, just as under any system, except a socialistic system, they buy their own food, their own housing, their own clothing, and their own automobiles... Undoubtedly, in that system there are gaps... and we have a very definite interest in trying to fill the gaps." [ 46 ] 1947 Taft–Hartley Labor Act [ edit ] When the Republicans took control of Congress in 1947, he focused on labor-management relations as Chair of the Senate Labor Committee. Decrying the effect of the Wagner Act in tilting the balance toward labor unions, he wrote the 1947 Taft–Hartley Act , which remains the basic labor law. It bans "unfair" union practices, outlaws closed shops , and authorizes the President to seek federal court injunctions to impose an 80-day cooling-off period if a strike threatened the national interest. Taft displayed all of his parliamentary skills in getting the bill through Congress. When President Harry Truman vetoed it, Taft then convinced both houses of Congress to override the veto.

By early 1949, Elbert Thomas sponsored legislation sent to Congress by the Truman administration that would repeal the Taft–Hartley Act. Taft predicted that a majority of the Taft–Hartley Act would remain in law and began a week-long period of "one hard-pounding argument after another" defending the legislation.

[ 47 ] Later that month, Senators Wayne Morse and Irving Ives indicated interest in offering a new labor bill that would remove the section of the Taft–Hartley Act allowing the government to have 80-day injunctions to halt critical strikes, the two publicly stating their hope that Taft would back the legislation.

[ 48 ] In May, amid the Truman administration's attempts to repeal the Taft–Hartley Act through its own legislation, Taft joined fellow Republicans Howard Alexander Smith and Forrest C. Donnell in introducing legislation that Taft promoted as retaining "the best features of the Taft–Hartley law".

[ 49 ] In June, ahead of the Senate opening debate on labor legislation, Taft stated there would be a battle fought between his amended Taft–Hartley Act and President Truman's proposal for a repeal and confirmed to reporters he was "not contemplating any new concessions".

[ 50 ] When the Senate resumed debate on June 8, Taft responded to Elbert D. Thomas in a speech charging Democratic members of the Senate Labor Committee with playing partisan politics in their handling of the Truman administration's bill to repeal the Taft–Hartley Act.

[ 51 ] Second term [ edit ] From 1947 to 1949, when the Republicans controlled the Senate for the first time since 1931, Taft was his party's leading voice in domestic policy .

[ 52 ] He was reluctant to support farm subsidies , a position that hurt the GOP in rural areas (especially in the Midwest ) in the 1948 elections . Taft engineered the passage of the Housing Act of 1949 , which funded slum clearance and the construction of 810,000 units of low-income housing over a period of six years. It was one of the few Fair Deal proposals of Truman that he liked.

[ 53 ] In March 1947, Taft charged Senate Democrats with deliberately stalling legislation and threatened to continually request sessions for the purpose of forwarding the Republican legislative program.

[ 54 ] In January 1948, Taft delivered a speech responding to President Truman's State of the Union address in which he charged the legislative proposals of the Truman administration with leading the United States to bankruptcy and totalitarianism while pledging the Republican-controlled Congress would not allow them to pass, saying they followed the principle of the New Deal in "promising the people something for nothing." Taft added that the Republicans intended to introduce their own program to reduce expenses and cut both taxes and the tax burden.

[ 55 ] In turn, Truman Democrats labelled the GOP-controlled 80th congress the "Do Nothing Congress", and accused Taft and Republicans legislators of engaging in obstructionism for purely political purposes.

[ 56 ] In February 1949, after losing control of the senate to Democrats in the 1948 election , Taft announced the Republican Party policy committee had agreed to support a motion by California Senator William Knowland aimed at changing the rules of curbing filibusters.

[ 57 ] In March 1949, the Senate Labor Committee approved the Truman administration's labor bill without changing a comma and while overriding Republican protests; Taft responded that the act was "the most heavy-handed procedure" he had seen since being in the Senate.

[ 58 ] That year, Taft supported a health program calling for federal outlays of $1.25 billion during the period of the next five years and stated no major health legislation would be passed during the current congressional session.

[ 59 ] In July 1950, as Senate tax writers gathered in Washington for the first time to discuss the tax reduction voted on by the House, Taft publicly admitted his lack of enthusiasm with a provision calling for the payment of corporate taxes to be sped up within the next five years.

[ 60 ] Taft stated that Republicans would support a general tax increase during the fall.

[ 61 ] The same month, during an effort by Republicans to suppress the report by Senate Democrats attacking the charges of Senator Joseph McCarthy , Taft joined Kenneth S. Wherry in predicting an effort to send the majority report back to the committee with an order calling for a bipartisan investigation of the loyalty program of the federal government.

[ 62 ] In foreign policy, he was non-interventionist and did not see Stalin's Soviet Union as a major threat. However, he called David Lilienthal "soft on the subject of Communism".

[ 63 ] The true danger, he believed, was big government and runaway spending. He supported the Truman Doctrine and reluctantly approved the Marshall Plan but opposed NATO , as unnecessary and provocative to the Soviets. Consequently, in July 1949, Taft was one of thirteen senators to vote against the ratification of the NATO pact. However, Taft objected not to the treaty's objectives, but to its form and especially to its rearmament aspects. Taft was strongly for the principle of guaranteeing the integrity of Western Europe.

[ 64 ] He took the lead among Republicans in condemning Truman's handling of the Korean War and questioning the constitutionality of the war itself: "My conclusion, therefore, is that in the case of Korea, where a war was already under way, we had no right to send troops to a nation, with whom we had no treaty, to defend it against attack by another nation, no matter how unprincipled that aggression might be, unless the whole matter was submitted to Congress and a declaration of war or some other direct authority obtained." [ 65 ] In April 1949, during a debate on renewal of the Marshall Plan bill, Taft stated the US could see either a tax increase or budget deficit in the event that foreign aid and other government spending were not reduced.

[ 66 ] Later that month, a compromise European Recovery Program passed both the House and Senate, within minutes of each other. Taft stated he was hopeful the Appropriations Committees would reduce the cash total by ten percent and led an unsuccessful attempt to trim the bill by the aforementioned amount.

[ 67 ] In June 1949, Taft indicated his support for reducing funding for the European Recovery Program, saying the Economic Corporation Administration could stand a 10 percent cut in the funding approved by the House.

[ 68 ] In August 1950, Taft stated the United States had invited the attack in Korea, adding that the real problem was whether the United States was going to "outfit the armed forces" or build up American forces in anticipation of a war against Russia in the following two years, and an all-out rearming of the US would lead to World War III .

[ 69 ] Support of Israel [ edit ] Taft was a leading supporter of the new state of Israel, called for an end to the arms embargo to the Middle East, and supported arms shipments and other military aid to the new country.

[ 70 ] According to historian  Brian Kennedy: Taft's actions towards Palestine seemed to violate many of his foremost principles. Despite being one of the foremost isolationists in the nation, Taft proposed the United States serve as the primary arbiter in the Middle East. Although publicly stating that the United States had no right to dictate policy towards Great Britain in regards to India, he consistently sought to influence British policy in Palestine. Meanwhile, even as he criticized the efforts to grant foreign aid to allied nations in Europe, Taft proposed $150 million in aid be given to Israel. Moreover, at a time when he was running against Truman for the presidency, and while he engaged in extremely contentious and partisan political struggles with the President, Taft surprisingly seemed to agree with the President on the issue of Israel.

[ 71 ] 1950 re-election [ edit ] Main article: 1950 United States Senate election in Ohio In 1950 , Taft ran a more effective campaign for re-election to the Senate. Wooing factory workers, he visited 334 industrial plants and gave 873 speeches.

[ 72 ] He won a third term by 431,184 votes, the second largest victory margin in Ohio Senate election history until then.

[ 73 ] He benefited from a weak Democratic opponent – one observer reportedly said of "Jumping Joe" Ferguson, the State Auditor , "If the Democrats want to win, they should send Ferguson on a mission abroad" – but more importantly, Ohio's unions failed to effectively use the Taft–Hartley Act, which they denounced as a "slave labor law", against him. Additionally, Democratic Governor Frank Lausche did not endorse Ferguson and, according to journalist Samuel Lubell , almost openly supported Taft. In a post-election survey of voters, Lubell found that the overly aggressive, labor-backed anti-Taft campaign angered some Democrats. Even many union members reportedly voted Republican to express their opposition to local union leaders, to support Taft–Hartley's ban on the closed shop, or to prevent, as one told Lubell, "the Socialists from taking over the Democratic party." [ 74 ] By the start of his third Senate term, Taft had been given the nickname "Mr. Republican." [ 65 ] He was the chief congressional ideologue and spokesman for the conservatism of the Republican Party and the acknowledged national leader of its conservative faction.

[ 75 ] In a January 6, 1951 speech on the Senate floor, Taft criticized the Truman administration for plans to defend Western Europe with the U.S. Army. Taft said the NATO treaty did not commit the U.S. to send an American Army to Europe and wanted no American troops there at this time, being in favor instead of reliance on long-distance air and sea superiority to deter the Russians.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Taft supported Congress reducing the number of American soldiers that could be dispatched to assist with the defenses of Western Europe, [ 78 ] and accused the Truman administration of concealing the number of American troops and soldiers from other nations that would be furnished in the International Defense Army from Congress as well as the American people and advocated for the United States to supply a single division for every nine put up by European nations.

[ 79 ] In January 1953, Taft stated that the Truman administration's handling of foreign policy had left the incoming Eisenhower "with the most dangerous foreign problem this country has ever faced." [ 80 ] In August 1951, after President Truman delivered an address criticizing those "trying to create fear and suspicion among us by the use of slander, unproved accusations, and just plain lies", [ 81 ] Taft told a reporter that he considered Truman hysterical and called for him to refer to a specific remark that was both false and alleged of him.

[ 82 ] That month, Taft announced his support for an Air Force increase but opposition to similar boosts for either the Army or Navy, telling a reporter of his concerns that military leaders would ask Congress for appropriations later in the year and that additional increases for other branches would retain deficits he did not believe the US could stand.

[ 83 ] In December, Taft delivered an address to the American Medical Association, asserting the federal government as attempting to take over all welfare programs through a scheme and stated that doctors were justified in their opposition as Socialists made moves to enact a federal system of socialized medicine.

[ 84 ] On January 31, 1953, Taft indicated the Eisenhower administration would allow the death of price controls on April 30 and voiced his opposition to the "legal recognition to the principle of controls".

[ 85 ] Presidential ambitions [ edit ] Distrust by Old Right [ edit ] Further information: Old Right (United States) While outsiders thought Taft was the epitome of conservative Republicanism, inside the party, he was repeatedly criticized by hardliners alarmed by his sponsorship of New Deal -like programs, especially federal housing for the poor. The real estate lobby was especially fearful about public housing.  Senator Kenneth S. Wherry discerned a "touch of socialism" in Taft, and his Ohio colleague, Senator John Bricker , speculated that perhaps the "socialists have gotten to Bob Taft." The distrust on the right hurt Taft's 1948 presidential ambitions.

[ 86 ] 1940 and 1944 [ edit ] Taft first sought the Republican presidential nomination in 1940 but lost to Wendell Willkie . Taft was regarded as a strong contender, but his outspoken support of a non-interventionist foreign policy, and his opposition to the New Deal in domestic policy led many liberal Republicans to reject his candidacy. At the 1940 Republican Convention, Willkie, once a Democrat, and a corporate executive who had never run for political office, came from behind to beat Taft and several other candidates for the nomination. That year, Taft first clashed with Thomas E. Dewey , then a New York District Attorney , who had become nationally famous for successfully prosecuting several prominent organized-crime figures, especially New York mob boss "Lucky" Luciano . Taft felt that Dewey was not conservative or consistent enough in his principles for the Republican Party: "Tom Dewey has no real courage to stand up against the crowd that wants to smear any Republican who takes a forthright position against the New Deal ... there is only one way to beat the New Deal, and that is head on. You can't outdeal them." [ 87 ] In other letters, Taft described Dewey as "very arrogant and bossy" and worried that "advisers will talk Dewey into too much internationalism ... he comes from New York and sees the group opinions there as a lot more important than they are." [ 88 ] In the 1944 presidential campaign Taft was not a candidate. He supported Governor John W. Bricker of Ohio, a fellow conservative, for the nomination. However, Bricker was defeated by Dewey, who had become the Governor of New York in 1943. Dewey named Bricker as his running mate; the ticket would go on to lose to Roosevelt in the general election.

1948 and 1952 [ edit ] See also: Black-and-tan faction and Lily-white movement In 1948 , Taft made a second try for the nomination but again was defeated by his archrival, Dewey, who led the GOP's moderate/liberal wing. In the 1948 United States presidential election , Dewey was defeated by the Democratic presidential candidate, Harry S. Truman .

In August 1951, during a news conference, President Truman said Taft was his choice for the Republican nomination in the following year's presidential election, Taft responding by saying that he would let others comment on the remark.

[ 89 ] In January 1952, Taft stated those seeking the drafting of General Dwight Eisenhower had made the argument he could not win the general election and that he did not understand this perspective as the same argument was being made of Eisenhower's candidacy by his manager David S. Ingalls.

[ 90 ] On March 20, Taft announced his withdrawal from the New Jersey Republican primary, citing the endorsement of Eisenhower by Governor of New Jersey Alfred Driscoll and insisting the endorsement was part of a move by Driscoll to corrupt the primary's intent.

[ 91 ] Taft sought to reach out to southern Democratic voters in his 1952 campaign. It was his third and final try for the nomination; it also proved to be his strongest effort. At the Republican State Convention in Little Rock , he declared: I believe a Republican could carry a number of southern states if he conducts the right kind of campaign. ... Whether we win or lose in the South, we cannot afford to ignore public opinion in the southern states, because it influences national public opinion, and that opinion finally decides the election. ... It is said that southern Democrats will not vote for a Republican candidate. They have frequently done so. They did so in Little Rock last November [1951] when they elected Pratt Remmel mayor. I refuse to admit that if the issues are clearly presented, the southern voters will not vote on the basis of principle. ...

[ 92 ] Taft had the solid backing of the party's conservative wing. Former US Representative Howard Buffett of Nebraska (father of billionaire Warren Buffett ) served as one of his campaign managers.

[ 93 ] With Dewey no longer an active candidate, many political pundits regarded Taft as the frontrunner. However, the race changed when Dewey and other moderates were able to convince Dwight D. Eisenhower , the most popular general of World War II , to run for the nomination. Eisenhower ran because of his fear that Taft's non-interventionist views in foreign policy,  especially his opposition to NATO , might benefit the Soviet Union in the Cold War .

[ 94 ] The fight between Taft and Eisenhower for the nomination was one of the closest and most bitter in American political history. When the Republican Convention opened in Chicago in July 1952, Taft and Eisenhower were neck-and-neck in delegate votes. On the convention's first day, Eisenhower's managers complained that Taft's forces had unfairly denied Eisenhower supporters delegate slots in several Southern states, including Texas, where the state chairman, Orville Bullington , was committed to Taft. The Eisenhower partisans proposed to remove pro-Taft delegates in these states and replace them with pro-Eisenhower delegates; they called their proposal "Fair Play." Although Taft angrily denied having stolen any delegate votes, the convention voted to support Fair Play 658 to 548, and the Texans voted 33–5 for Eisenhower as a result. In addition, several uncommitted state delegations, such as Michigan and Pennsylvania, agreed to support Eisenhower.

The addition of the uncommitted state delegations, combined with Taft's loss of many Southern delegates by the Fair Play proposal, decided the nomination in Eisenhower's favor. Despite his bitterness at his narrow defeat and his belief that he had been unfairly ambushed by the Eisenhower forces (including Dewey), Taft issued a brief statement after the convention conveying his congratulations and support to Eisenhower. Thereafter, however, he brooded in silence at his summer home in Quebec , complaining, "Every Republican candidate for President since 1936 has been nominated by the Chase National Bank ." [ 95 ] As the weeks passed, Eisenhower's aides worried that Taft and his supporters would sit on their hands during the campaign and that as a result Eisenhower might lose the election. In September 1952, Taft finally agreed to meet with Eisenhower, at Morningside Heights in New York City. There, to gain Taft's support, Eisenhower promised that he would take no reprisals against Taft partisans, would cut federal spending, and would fight "creeping socialism in every domestic field." In fact, Eisenhower and Taft agreed on most domestic issues; their disagreements were primarily in foreign policy.

Eisenhower firmly believed in NATO and was committed to the US support of anticommunism in the Cold War .

Senate Majority Leader [ edit ] Following Eisenhower's election and the Republican takeover of Congress, Taft served as Senate Majority Leader in 1953, and he strongly supported Eisenhower's domestic proposals. He worked hard to assist the inexperienced new officials of the administration. He even tried, with little success, to curb the excesses of red-baiting US Senator Joseph McCarthy . By April, Eisenhower and Taft were friends and golfing companions, and Taft was praising his former adversary. Defeat in 1952, it seemed, had softened Taft. No longer burdened by presidential ambitions, he had become less partisan, less abrasive, and more conciliatory; he was now widely regarded as the most powerful man in Congress.

On May 26, 1953, Taft delivered his final speech, in which he presciently warned of the dangers of America's emerging Cold War foreign policy, specifically against US military involvement in Southeast Asia, which would later become the Vietnam War : I have never felt that we should send American soldiers to the Continent of Asia, which, of course, included China proper and Indo-China , simply because we are so outnumbered in fighting a land war on the Continent of Asia that it would bring about complete exhaustion even if we were able to win. ... So today, as since 1947 in Europe and 1950 in Asia, we are really trying to arm the world against Communist Russia , or at least furnish all the assistance which can be of use to them in opposing Communism .
Is this policy of uniting the free world against Communism in time of peace going to be a practical long-term policy? I have always been a skeptic on the subject of the military practicability of NATO. ... I have always felt that we should not attempt to fight Russia on the ground on the Continent of Europe any more than we should attempt to fight China on the Continent of Asia.

[ 96 ] Death and legacy [ edit ] Rudolf Anton Bernatschke's portrait of Taft standing in front of what would later become the Frances Perkins Department of Labor Building on Constitution Avenue .

In April 1953, Taft checked into Walter Reed Army Medical Center . He had been suffering from pain in his hips for some time and had recently played a round of golf with President Eisenhower, which he was barely able to finish. Doctors there put the Senator through a battery of tests, but they were not conclusive; it was suspected that Taft may have been suffering from arthritis or perhaps had a tumor somewhere in his lower extremities.

[ 97 ] On May 26, Taft returned to Cincinnati where he underwent another round of medical testing at Holmes Hospital.

[ 98 ] Biopsies were done on several nodules on his head and abdomen, which came back as malignant.

[ 99 ] On June 7, he entered New York Hospital for more tests and treatment; to keep the news that he might have cancer a secret he registered under the assumed name "Howard Roberts, Jr.".

[ 100 ] While it was agreed that Taft in fact had cancer, the physicians treating him were not in agreement on how to treat him, especially considering that none of them were aware where the primary tumor was (a postmortem examination discovered the tumor originated in the senator's pancreas ). Some thought that surgery to remove the tumors would be the best option for Taft, while others felt the cancer had spread too far and thus palliative care, specifically X-ray therapy, was preferable.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] On June 10, 1953, Taft held a press conference in which he announced his illness and transferred his duties as Senate Majority Leader to Senator William F. Knowland of California. He did not resign his Senate seat and told reporters that he expected to recover and return to work.

[ 101 ] However, Taft's condition continued to deteriorate and with the Senate in recess, he returned to New York Hospital for surgery on July 4. The surgery "did not take long, for the doctors discovered cancer everywhere ... there was no longer any doubt" that his condition was terminal.

[ 103 ] On July 31, Taft's wife paid him a visit in his hospital room. Several hours after she left, Taft suffered a brain hemorrhage and was pronounced dead shortly thereafter.

[ 102 ] [ 104 ] His body lay in state at the United States Capitol rotunda , [ 105 ] where thousands of mourners offered their respects at his coffin.

[ 106 ] On August 3, 1953, a memorial service was held in the rotunda; in addition to his family the service was attended by Eisenhower, Vice President Nixon , the cabinet, members of the Supreme Court, and Taft's congressional colleagues. Following the service his body was flown to Cincinnati , where he was buried in a private ceremony at Indian Hill Episcopal Church Cemetery.

[ 106 ] In 1957, a committee led by Senator John F. Kennedy selected Taft as one of five great senators whose portraits would adorn the President's Room off the Senate floor. Kennedy would feature him in Profiles in Courage , and Taft continues to be regarded by historians as one of the most powerful senators of the 20th century.

[ 107 ] Memorial [ edit ] Main article: Robert A. Taft Memorial The Robert A. Taft Memorial, featuring a 10-foot (3.0 m) statue by the sculptor Wheeler Williams and a bell tower, is located north of the Capitol on Constitution Avenue. The inscription on the tower face behind him reads: This Memorial to Robert A. Taft, presented by the people to the Congress of the United States, stands as a tribute to the honesty, indomitable courage, and high principles of free government symbolized by his life.

[ 108 ] Electoral history [ edit ] Main article: Electoral history of Robert Taft See also [ edit ] List of members of the United States Congress who died in office (1950–1999) References [ edit ] ^ "The "Famous Five" " . Retrieved August 17, 2017 .

^ General Catalogue of the Psi Upsilon Fraternity, 12th edition, May 1917, p. 194.

^ "Taft's son elected to Skull and Bones".

The New York Times . May 28, 1909.

^ "Myrootsplace" .

myrootsplace.com . Archived from the original on June 15, 2013.

^ Patterson, p. 450 ^ a b Patterson, p. 451 ^ "W.H. Taft 3d, 75, Ex-Envoy to Ireland And Son of Senator" .

The New York Times . February 26, 1991 . Retrieved March 9, 2024 .

(subscription required) ^ a b "Lloyd B. Taft Obituary" .

The New York Times . October 23, 1985 . Retrieved April 25, 2012 .

(subscription required) ^ Adair, Robert K.

; Sandweiss, Jack; Pless, Irwin A. (August 1983).

"Obituary: Horace Dwight Taft" .

Physics Today .

36 (8): 77.

doi : 10.1063/1.2915814 .

^ Patterson, pp. 112–116 ^ Patterson, p. 399 ^ Patterson, p. 332 ^ Taft, Foreign Policy for Americans , p. 37 ^ a b Patterson, pp. 100–101 ^ Patterson, p. 103 ^ Taft Papers 1:271 ^ Patterson, pp. 160–179 ^ a b c "Campaigns: 39760" .

Time . November 7, 1938. Archived from the original on August 26, 2010 . Retrieved August 17, 2017 .

^ Wunderlin, Clarence (2005).

Robert A. Taft: ideas, tradition, and party in U.S. foreign policy .

Rowman & Littlefield . p. 29.

ISBN 978-0742544901 .

^ Patterson, p. 178 ^ a b Patterson, pp. 253–254 ^ "Taft's Torch" .

The Washington Post .

^ Unstoppable: The Emerging Left-Right Alliance to Dismantle the Corporate State; Ralph Nader, 2014 ^ Frum, David (2000).

How We Got Here: The '70s . New York, New York: Basic Books. p.

7 .

ISBN 0465041957 .

^ Wunderlin, Clarence E. (2005).

Robert A. Taft: Ideas, Tradition, and Party in U.S. Foreign Policy . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

116– 117.

ISBN 978-0742544901 .

^ Doeneck, Justus D. (1979).

Not to the Swift - The Old Isolationists in the Cold War Era . Doubleday. p. 125.

^ Patterson, pp. 315–334 ^ Patterson, pp. 285–298 ^ Patterson, pp. 392–393 ^ Patterson, pp. 332–333 ^ Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of the Republican Party, From Eisenhower to the Tea Party; Geoffrey Kabaservice, 2012 ^ Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1963).

Mandate for Change, 1953–1956: The White House Years . Doubleday.

^ "Taft To Continue Bretton Woods Fight" . Eugene Register-Guard. July 4, 1945.

^ "Taft Counters Truman Appeal" . Spokane Daily Chronicle. January 5, 1946.

^ Foner, Eric (1999).

The Story of American Freedom . W.W. Norton. p. 241.

ISBN 978-0393319620 .

^ a b Patterson, p. 278 ^ Patterson, p. 280 ^ "UNO Bill Approved By Senate, 65 to 7, With One Change" .

The New York Times . December 4, 1945 . Retrieved December 27, 2016 .

^ a b c "Taft Proposes Gift to England" .

Reading Eagle . March 13, 1946. p. 1 . Retrieved November 23, 2022 – via Google News.

^ "Federal Aid To Education Seen On Way" .

Times Daily . April 2, 1946.

^ From Obstruction to Moderation: The Transformation of Senate Conservatism, 1938–1952 ; John William Malsberger [ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Ruch, Walter (October 6, 1946).

"Taft Condemns Hanging for Nazis as Unjust Verdict" .

The New York Times . p. 1 . Retrieved January 30, 2008 .

^ "Robert Taft on the Nuremberg Trials" .

Jfklibrary.org . Retrieved March 14, 2015 .

^ Edwards, Lee (October 29, 2020).

"The Political Thought of Robert A. Taft" .

The Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on November 14, 2020 . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ Stevens, 1971 ^ Taft, 1949 ^ "Clashes Mark Senate Labor Bill Hearing" .

Toledo Blade .

^ Injunctions Opposed In Labor Issues (February 12, 1949) ^ "New Labor Bill Battle Lines Form" .

Reading Eagle . May 5, 1949. p. 1 . Retrieved November 23, 2022 – via Google News.

^ "Taft Rejects Proposals" .

Reading Eagle . June 6, 1949. p. 1 . Retrieved November 23, 2022 – via Google News.

^ "Taft Scores Democrats" .

Reading Eagle . June 8, 1949. p. 1 . Retrieved November 23, 2022 – via Google News.

^ Alsop, Joseph; Alsop, Stewart (October 7, 1946).

"Taft and Vandenberg" .

Life . New York, NY: Time Inc. pp.

102– 103 – via Google Books .

^ Charles C. Brown, "Robert A. Taft, Champion of Public Housing and National Aid to Schools", Cincinnati Historical Society Bulletin , 1968, Vol. 26 Issue 3, pp. 219–253.

^ "Stalling Tactics Laid to Demos By Senator Taft" . Eugene Register-Guard. March 8, 1947.

^ "Taft Hits At Speech" .

The Southeast Missourian . January 9, 1948. p. 1 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ Byrne, Bradley (October 6, 2020).

"A Do Nothing Congress" . Archived from the original on November 23, 2020 . Retrieved December 10, 2020 .

^ "GOP to Seek Ban On Filibusters" .

Reading Eagle . February 7, 1949. p. 1 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ "Labor Bill Gets Senate Unit OK" .

Toledo Blade . p. 1 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ "Senator Admits National Health Bill Is Blocked" .

Toledo Blade . April 18, 1949. p. 2 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ "Group In Senate Called To Study Excise Cut Bill" .

Toledo Blade . July 3, 1950. p. 2 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ "Demands Heard In Congress For Wars Profits Tax" .

Toledo Blade . July 27, 1950. p. 2 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ "Senate Approval Is Expected Of McCarthy Blast" .

Toledo Blade . July 20, 1950. p. 3 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ Truman by David McCullough ^ "Three Efforts to Soften NATO Text by Restrictions Decisively Beaten" .

The New York Times . July 22, 1949 . Retrieved November 2, 2021 .

^ a b Woods, Thomas (July 7, 2005) Presidential War Powers , LewRockwell.com ^ "Tax Increase Seen By Taft" .

Toledo Blade . April 8, 1949. p. 2 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ "Foreign Aid Bill Passed" .

Reading Eagle . April 14, 1949. p. 1 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ "Cut in ECA Fund Sought By Senators" .

Reading Eagle . June 11, 1949. p. 1 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ "America Invited Attack In Korea, Taft Tells 5,000" .

Toledo Blade . August 8, 1950. p. 3 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

^ "Taft calls for Military Aid to protect New Israel State" .

Milwaukee Sentinel . May 17, 1948. p. 2 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 – via Google News.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Brian Kennedy,. "The surprising Zionist: Senator Robert A. Taft and the creation of Israel." The Historian 73#4 (2011), p. 747+.

^ Patterson, p. 465 ^ Patterson, p. 469 ^ Lubell, Samuel (1956).

The Future of American Politics (2nd ed.). Anchor Press. pp.

201– 206.

OL 6193934M .

^ Patterson, p. 335.

^ Clarence E. Wunderlin,  Jr., ed.

The Papers Of Robert A. Taft: Volume 4: 1949–1953 (2006) pp. 230–252.

^ See CQ, "Troops To Europe" CQ Almanac 1951 online ^ "Eisenhower Is Opposed To Limit Number U.S. Troops" .

Times Daily . February 2, 1951.

^ "McMahon Says Taft's Plan "Unworkable, Impractical" " .

Times Daily . February 9, 1951.

^ "HST Warns Stalin On A Bomb War" . Sarasota Herald-Tribune. January 8, 1953.

^ Truman, Harry S.

(August 14, 1951).

"191 – Address at the Dedication of the New Washington Headquarters of the American Legion" . American Presidency Project.

These people have attacked our basic principle of fair play that underlies our Constitution. They are trying to create fear and suspicion among us by the use of slander, unproved accusations, and just plain lies.

^ "Truman Blasts "Hate Mongers" " . Sarasota Herald-Tribune. August 15, 1951.

^ "Taft Supports Big Air Force" . Sarasota Herald-Tribune. August 13, 1951.

^ "Welfare Peril Alarm Taft" . Sarasota Herald-Tribune. December 6, 1951.

^ "Taft Hints Controls To Die April 30" . Sarasota Herald-Tribune. February 1, 1953.

^ David W. Reinhard, The Republican Right since 1945 , (University Press of Kentucky, 1983) pp. 28, 39–40 ^ Patterson, p. 269 ^ Patterson, p. 271 ^ "Ike's Candidacy Rests On European Situation" . Sarasota Herald-Tribune. August 10, 1951.

^ "Senators Doubt Taft's Strength In GOP; Douglas Suggests Non-Vote Membership" .

Times Daily . January 21, 1952.

^ "Taft Pulls Out In New Jersey" . Sarasota Herald-Tribune. March 20, 1952.

^ Osro Cobb , Osro Cobb of Arkansas: Memoirs of Historical Significance , Carol Griffee, ed. ( Little Rock, Arkansas : Rose Publishing Company, 1989), p. 106 ^ Dionne, E.J.

, Why Americans Hate Politics , p. 265.

^ Ambrose, p. 498 ^ Nichols, John (December 21, 2011) Why Do GOP Bosses Fear Ron Paul?

, The Nation ^ Rothbard, Murray .

Swan Song of the Old Right , LewRockwell.com ^ Patterson, p. 601 ^ Patterson, pp. 601–604 ^ Patterson, p. 604 ^ Patterson, p. 605 ^ a b Patterson, p. 606 ^ a b Wead, Doug (2004).

All the Presidents' Children: Triumph and Tragedy in the Lives of America's First Families . Simon and Schuster. p. 209.

ISBN 978-0743446334 .

^ Patterson, p. 611 ^ "Taft's Cancer Originated in Pancreas, Doctor says" .

Chicago Tribune . October 3, 1953. p. 7.

^ "Lying in State or in Honor" . US Architect of the Capitol (AOC) . Retrieved September 1, 2018 .

^ a b Patterson, p. 612 ^ Patterson, p. 617 ^ "The Robert A. Taft Memorial and Carillon" . Retrieved October 13, 2007 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ambrose, Stephen E.

Eisenhower: Soldier, General of the Army, President-Elect (1983).

Armstrong John P. "The Enigma of Senator Taft and American Foreign Policy." Review of Politics 17:2 (1955): 206–231.

in JSTOR Berger Henry W. ""Bipartisanship, Senator Taft, and the Truman Administration," Political Science Quarterly (1975) 90:221–237 Berger Henry. "A Conservative Critique of Containment: Senator Taft on the Early Cold War Program." In David Horowitz, ed., Containment and Revolution.

(1967), pp. 132–139.

Berger, Henry. "Senator Robert A. Taft Dissents from Military Escalation." In Thomas G. Paterson, ed., Cold War Critics: Alternatives to American Foreign Policy in the Truman Years.

(1971).

Bowen, Michael.

The Roots of Modern Conservatism: Dewey, Taft, and the Battle for the Soul of the Republican Party (2011) Doenecke, Justus D.

Not to the Swift: The Old Isolationists in the Cold War Era (1979), by a conservative historian Farber, David.

The Rise and Fall of Modern American Conservatism: A Short History (2010) pp. 9–38 Hayes, Michael T. "The Republican road not taken: the foreign-policy vision of Robert A. Taft." The Independent Review 8.4 (2004): 509–525.

online Kennedy, Brian. "The surprising Zionist: Senator Robert A. Taft and the creation of Israel", Historian 73#4 (2011) pp. 747–767 online Kirk, Russell, and James McClellan.

The Political Principles of Robert A. Taft (1967), by a leading conservative [ ISBN missing ] Liggio, Leonard (2008). "Taft, Robert A. (1889–1953)". In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage / Cato Institute . p. 499.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n305 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Malsberger, John W.

From Obstruction to Moderation: The Transformation of Senate Conservatism, 1938–1952 (2000) [ ISBN missing ] Matthews, Geoffrey. "Robert A. Taft, the Constitution, and American Foreign Policy, 1939–53", Journal of Contemporary History (1982), 17:507–522 online Moore, John Robert. "The Conservative Coalition in the United States Senate, 1942–45", Journal of Southern History 1967 33(3): 369–376. uses roll calls in JSTOR Moser, John E. "Principles Without Program: Senator Robert A. Taft and American Foreign Policy", Ohio History (1999) 108#2 pp. 177–192 online edition , by a conservative historian Patterson, James T. "A Conservative Coalition Forms in Congress, 1933–1939", The Journal of American History , Vol. 52, No. 4. (March 1966), pp. 757–772.

in JSTOR Patterson, James T.

Congressional Conservatism and the New Deal: The Growth of the Conservative Coalition in Congress, 1933–39 (1967).

Patterson, James T. "Robert Alphonso Taft".

Dictionary of American Biography, Supplement 5: 1951–1955 (American Council of Learned Societies, 1977).

Patterson, James T.

Mr. Republican: A Biography of Robert A. Taft (1972), standard scholarly biography.

Pickett, William B.

(2000).

Eisenhower Decides to Run: Presidential Politics and Cold War Strategy . Chicago: Ivan R. Dee.

ISBN 1566637872 .

OCLC 43953970 .

Radosh. Ronald.

Prophets on the right: Profiles of conservative critics of American globalism (1978) Reinhard, David W.

The Republican Right Since 1945 (1983) online edition Rosen, Elliot A.

The Republican Party in the Age of Roosevelt: Sources of Anti-Government Conservatism in the United States . Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press, 2014.

Van Dyke, Vernon, and Edward Lane Davis. "Senator Taft and American Security", Journal of Politics 14 (1952): 177–202.

in JSTOR White; William S.

The Taft Story (1954). Pulitzer prize online edition Wunderlin, Clarence E.

Robert A Taft: Ideas, Tradition, And Party In U.S. Foreign Policy (2005).

ISBN 978-0742544901 .

Primary sources [ edit ] Kirk, Russell and James McClellan, eds.

The Political Principles of Robert A. Taft (1967).

Taft, Robert A.

A Foreign Policy for Americans Finding Aid for Robert A. Taft papers , Archives and Rare Books Library, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio Wunderlin, Clarence E. Jr., et al. eds.

The Papers of Robert A. Taft vol. 1, 1889–1939 (1998); vol. 2, 1940–1944 (2001); vol. 3, 1945–1948 (2003); vol. 4, 1949–1953 (2006).

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Robert A. Taft .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Robert Taft .

United States Congress.

"Robert A. Taft (id: T000009)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

Robert Alphonso Taft, Sr at Find a Grave Newspaper clippings about Robert A. Taft in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Offices and distinctions Party political offices Preceded by Gilbert Bettman Republican nominee for U.S. Senator from Ohio ( Class 3 ) 1938 , 1944 , 1950 Succeeded by George H. Bender New office Chair of the Senate Republican Policy Committee 1944–1953 Succeeded by William F. Knowland Preceded by Styles Bridges Senate Republican Leader 1953 U.S. Senate Preceded by Robert J. Bulkley U.S. Senator (Class 3) from Ohio 1939–1953 Served alongside: A. Victor Donahey , Harold H. Burton , James W. Huffman , Kingsley A. Taft , John W. Bricker Succeeded by Thomas A. Burke New office Chair of the Joint Economic Report Committee 1946–1949 Succeeded by Joseph C. O'Mahoney Preceded by James E. Murray Chair of the Senate Labor Committee 1947–1949 Succeeded by Elbert D. Thomas Preceded by Ernest McFarland Senate Minority Leader 1953 Succeeded by William F. Knowland Honorary titles Preceded by John J. Pershing Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1953 Succeeded by Unknown Soldiers of World War II and the Korean War Articles and topics related to Robert Taft v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e United States senators from Ohio Class 1 Smith Meigs Worthington Kerr Ruggles Morris Tappan Corwin Ewing Wade Thurman Sherman Hanna Dick Pomerene Fess Donahey H. Burton Huffman K. Taft Bricker Young R. Taft Jr.

Metzenbaum DeWine S. Brown Moreno Class 3 Worthington Tiffin Griswold Campbell Morrow Trimble E. Brown Harrison Burnet Ewing Allen Chase Pugh Chase Sherman Matthews Pendleton Payne Brice Foraker T. Burton Harding Willis Locher T. Burton McCulloch Bulkley R. Taft Sr.

Burke Bender Lausche Saxbe Metzenbaum Glenn Voinovich Portman Vance Husted v t e United States Senate majority leaders Lodge Curtis Watson Robinson Barkley White Lucas McFarland Taft Knowland Johnson Mansfield Byrd Baker Stevens (acting) Baker Dole Byrd Mitchell Dole Lott Daschle Lott Daschle Frist Reid McConnell Schumer Thune v t e Republican Party leaders in the United States Senate Lodge Curtis Watson McNary Austin McNary White Wherry Bridges Taft Knowland Dirksen Scott Baker Stevens (acting) Baker Dole Lott Frist McConnell Thune v t e Chairs of the United States Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Education/Education and Labor (1869–1947) Harlan Drake Sawyer Flanagan Ferry Patterson Burnside Bailey Blair Carey Kyle Shoup Kyle McComas Penrose Dolliver Borah H. Smith Kenyon Borah Phipps Couzens Metcalf Walsh Black Thomas Murray Labor and Public Welfare (1947–1977) Taft Thomas Murray A. Smith Hill Yarborough Williams Labor and Human Resources (1977–1999) Williams Hatch Kennedy Kassebaum Jeffords Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (1999–present) Jeffords Kennedy Jeffords Kennedy Gregg Enzi Kennedy Harkin Alexander Murray Sanders Cassidy v t e ( ← 1936 ) 1940 United States presidential election ( → 1944 ) Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Franklin D. Roosevelt (incumbent) Vice President: Henry A. Wallace Other candidates James Farley John Nance Garner Cordell Hull Millard Tydings Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Wendell Willkie Vice President: Charles L. McNary Other candidates Styles Bridges Thomas Dewey Frank Gannett Arthur James Robert Taft Arthur Vandenberg Third-party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee: Roger Babson Socialist Party Nominee: Norman Thomas VP nominee: Maynard C. Krueger Socialist Labor Party Nominee: John W. Aiken VP nominee: Aaron M. Orange Independents Gracie Allen Other 1940 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1940 ) 1944 United States presidential election ( → 1948 ) Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Franklin D. Roosevelt (incumbent) Vice President: Harry Truman Other candidates Harry F. Byrd James Farley Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Thomas E. Dewey Vice President: John W. Bricker Other candidates Riley A. Bender Everett Dirksen Douglas MacArthur Harold Stassen Robert A. Taft Wendell Willkie Third-party and independent candidates America First Party Nominee: Gerald L. K. Smith Prohibition Party Nominee: Claude A. Watson Socialist Party Nominee: Norman Thomas VP nominee: Darlington Hoopes Other 1944 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1944 ) 1948 United States presidential election ( → 1952 ) Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Incumbent nominee: Harry S. Truman campaign VP nominee: Alben W. Barkley Other candidates: Harley M. Kilgore Richard Russell Jr.

Henry A. Wallace Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Thomas E. Dewey VP nominee: Earl Warren Other candidates: Riley A. Bender Herbert E. Hitchcock Douglas MacArthur Joseph W. Martin Jr.

Edward Martin Leverett Saltonstall Harold Stassen Arthur Vandenberg Robert A. Taft States' Rights Democratic Party Convention Candidates Nominee: Strom Thurmond VP nominee: Fielding L. Wright Other third-party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee: Claude A. Watson VP nominee: Dale H. Learn Progressive Party Nominee: Henry A. Wallace Nominee: Glen H. Taylor Socialist Party Nominee: Norman Thomas VP nominee: Tucker P. Smith Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Farrell Dobbs VP nominee: Grace Carlson Independents and other candidates Gerald L. K. Smith Other 1948 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1948 ) 1952 United States presidential election ( → 1956 ) Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower VP nominee: Richard Nixon Other candidates: Riley A. Bender George T. Mickelson Harold Stassen Robert Taft Earl Warren Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II VP nominee: John Sparkman Other candidates: Alben W. Barkley Paul A. Dever W. Averell Harriman Hubert Humphrey Estes Kefauver Robert S. Kerr Richard Russell Jr.

Third-party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee: Stuart Hamblen VP nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick Progressive Party Convention Nominee: Vincent Hallinan VP nominee: Charlotta Bass Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Eric Hass Socialist Party Nominee: Darlington Hoopes VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Farrell Dobbs VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates Edward Longstreet Bodin Henry B. Krajewski Homer Aubrey Tomlinson Other 1952 elections : House Senate v t e William Howard Taft 10th Chief Justice of the United States (1921–1930) 27th President of the United States (1909–1913) 3rd Provisional Governor of Cuba (1904) 42nd United States Secretary of War (1904–1908) Governor-General of the Philippines (1901–1904) 6th Solicitor General of the United States (1890–1892) Presidency ( timeline) 1909 inauguration Dollar diplomacy Income Tax amendment Payne–Aldrich Tariff Act Weeks Act Federal Corrupt Practices Act Wireless Ship Act of 1910 Apportionment Act of 1911 North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911 Mann–Elkins Act Radio Act of 1912 Defense Secrets Act of 1911 Pinchot–Ballinger controversy Commission on Economy and Efficiency U.S. occupation of Nicaragua United States Chamber of Commerce Ceremonial first pitch State of the Union Address 1912 Cabinet Judicial appointments Supreme Court First Oval Office Wilson transition Chief Justice, Supreme Court Supreme Court career Judiciary Act of 1925 Creation of the Supreme Court Building Taft Court cases Other actions Taft Commission Insular Government of the Philippine Islands Philippines Civil Governor, 1901–1904 Taft–Katsura agreement 1906–1909 Occupation of Cuba League to Enforce Peace National War Labor Board Life and legacy Early life Birthplace, home, and historic site Malacañang Palace Woodbury Point Taft Bridge Bibliography U.S. Postage stamps SS President Taft Taft, Montana High school (New York City Chicago Los Angeles San Antonio) Elections 1908 Republican National Convention 1908 U.S. presidential election 1912 Republican National Convention 1912 U.S. presidential election Family Helen Herron Taft (wife) Robert Alphonso Taft (son) Helen Taft Manning (daughter) Charles Phelps Taft II (son) William Howard Taft III (grandson) Robert Alphonso Taft Jr.

(grandson) Seth Taft (grandson) Alphonso Taft (father) Louise Taft (mother) Charles Phelps Taft (brother) Henry Waters Taft (brother) Horace Dutton Taft (brother) Peter Rawson Taft (paternal grandfather) Related Billy Possum Progressive Era Pauline Wayne (cow) Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries) Theodore Roosevelt (2022 miniseries) ← Theodore Roosevelt Woodrow Wilson → Category v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Individuals lain in state , in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay (1852) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) Stevens (1868) Sumner (1874) Wilson (1875) Garfield (1881) Logan (1886) McKinley (1901) L'Enfant (1909) Dewey (1917) Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921) Harding (1923) W. H. Taft (1930) Pershing (1948) R. A. Taft (1953) Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) MacArthur (1964) H. Hoover (1964) Eisenhower (1969) Dirksen (1969) J. E. Hoover (1972) Johnson (1973) Humphrey (1978) Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984) Pepper (1989) Reagan (2004, funeral ) Ford (2006–07, funeral ) Inouye (2012) McCain (2018) Bush (2018, funeral ) Lewis (2020) Dole (2021) Reid (2022) Carter (2024–25, funeral ) National Statuary Hall Cummings (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) Young (2022) House Chamber Hooper (1875) Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown (1996) Old Senate Chamber Chase (1873) Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson (1998) Parks (2005) Graham (2018) Sicknick (2021) Evans (2021) Williams (2022) Lain in repose East Room Harrison (1841) Taylor (1850) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) McKinley (1901) Harding (1923) Roosevelt (1945) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren (1974) Marshall (1993) Burger (1995) Brennan (1997) Blackmun (1999) Rehnquist (2005) Scalia (2016) Stevens (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) O'Connor (2023) Senate Chamber Byrd (2010) Lautenberg (2013) Bold : Presidents and chief justices Portals : Conservatism Libertarianism Politics United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Belgium People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_A._Taft&oldid=1305529983 " Categories : 1889 births 1953 deaths 20th-century American Episcopalians Candidates in the 1940 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1948 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1952 United States presidential election American anti-communists American Christian Zionists American people of English descent American people of Scotch-Irish descent American anti–World War II activists Children of presidents of the United States Deaths from pancreatic cancer in New York (state) Harvard Law School alumni Ohio Republicans People from Georgetown (Washington, D.C.) Politicians from Cincinnati Psi Upsilon Republican Party members of the Ohio House of Representatives Republican Party Ohio state senators Republican Party United States senators from Ohio Taft family Taft School alumni Yale College alumni Members of Skull and Bones Old Right (United States) 20th-century United States senators 20th-century members of the Ohio General Assembly Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2025 CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2018 Articles with hAudio microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from May 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata S-aft: 'after' parameter includes the word 'unknown' Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 15:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert A. Taft 24 languages Add topic

