Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Quranic foundation 2 Rules Toggle Rules subsection 2.1 Permissible food (Halal) 2.1.1 Seafood 2.1.2 People of the Book 2.2 Ritual slaughter 2.3 Forbidden foods (Haram) 2.3.1 Intoxicants 2.3.2 Carrion 2.3.3 Blood 2.3.4 Pork 2.3.5 Animals dedicated to other than God 2.3.6 Horses, mules and donkeys 2.3.7 Animals with fangs 2.3.8 Birds of prey 2.3.9 Other prohibited animals 2.4 Mushbooh 3 Islamic dietary laws during Ramadan 4 Food certification 5 Availability of halal food in non-Islamic regions Toggle Availability of halal food in non-Islamic regions subsection 5.1 Europe and Asia 6 Effects on meat 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Islamic dietary laws 16 languages العربية বাংলা Башҡортса Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Islamic food code Further information: Islamic hygienical jurisprudence This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( October 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Islamic dietary laws" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Islamic jurisprudence ( fiqh ) Ritual Shahada Salah Raka'ah Qibla Turbah Sunnah prayer ( Tarawih Tahajjud ) Witr Nafl prayer Sawm Zakat Hajj Ihram ( clothing Mut'ah ) Tawaf Umrah ( and Hajj ) Political Islamic leadership Caliphate Majlis-ash-Shura Imamate Wilayat al-faqih Bay'ah Dhimmi Aman Family Marriage Contract Mahr Misyar Halala Urfi Mut‘ah Polygyny Divorce Khula Zihar Iddah Kafa'ah Adoption Breastfeeding Sexual Awrah Abortion Baligh Haya Hygiene Rape Zina Masturbation Criminal Hudud Blasphemy Maisir (gambling) Zina (illicit sex) Hirabah (unlawful warfare and banditry) Fasad ("mischief") Mofsed-e-filarz ("spreading corruption") Fitna ("sedition") Rajm (stoning) Tazir (discretionary) Qisas (retaliation) Diya (compensation) Etiquette Adab Gender segregation ( Purdah ) Mahram Honorifics Toilet Economic History Zakat Jizya Nisab Khums Sadaqah ( Waqf ) Bayt al-mal Banking Riba Murabaha Takaful Sukuk Inheritance Hygiene Sexual Toilet Taharah Ihram Wudu Masah Ghusl Tayammum Miswak Najis Istinja Dietary Dhabihah Alcohol Pork Comparison with kashrut Military Jihad Ghanimah Hudna Istijarah (asylum) Prisoners of war Social Haqq al-Nas ( The right(s) of the people ) Islamic studies v t e Islamic dietary laws are laws that Muslims follow in their diet.

Islamic jurisprudence specifies which foods are halal ( Arabic : حَلَال , romanized : ḥalāl , lit.

'lawful') and which are haram ( Arabic : حَرَام , romanized : ḥarām , lit.

'unlawful'). The dietary laws are found in the Quran , the holy book of Islam , as well as in collections of traditions attributed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad .

Herbivores, cud-chewing animals like cattle, deer, sheep, goats, and antelope are some examples of animals that are halal only if they are treated like sentient beings and slaughtered painlessly while reciting the basmala and takbir . If the animal is treated poorly or tortured while being slaughtered, the meat is haram. Forbidden food substances include alcohol, pork, frog, carrion, the meat of carnivores, and animals that died due to illness, injury, stunning, poisoning, or slaughtering not in the name of God.

[ 1 ] Quranic foundation [ edit ] The Quran explicitly states foods that are prohibited and permissible. Foods including dead meat, blood, pork, and anything sacrificed to other than Allah are prohibited.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Tayyib, food that is permissible and wholesome, is emphasized in the Quran (verse 2:168). Food, in the time of necessity ( darūrah ) allows for forbidden items when a person is facing starvation.

[ 2 ] Rules [ edit ] Based on Islamic scriptural injuctions, Islamic dietary laws are classified as halāl (permissible), harām (forbidden), and mashbūh (dubious).

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] Permissible food (Halal) [ edit ] Livestock or cattle, i.e., grazing beasts, are lawful except those that are explicitly prohibited. Hunting is prohibited during " the pilgrimage ".

[ 5 ] This means that most herbivores or cud-chewing animals like cattle, deer, sheep, goats, and antelope are considered halal to consume.

[ 1 ] Animals hunted by other animals (such as trained birds) are also permitted.

[ 6 ] Seafood [ edit ] See also: List of halal and kosher fish Seafood is generally permitted in most of the schools of Islam, based on their interpretation of the Quran 5:96 ; the Hanafi school of Islamic jurisprudence forbids consumption of seafood other than true "fish", and considers other sea creatures, such as crustaceans , to be makruh .

[ 7 ] Fishing is permitted during pilgrimage.

Some Hanafi scholars are in disagreement over whether or not prawns and shrimp constitute as true "fish"; comparatively, many scholars do agree that crocodile , crab , lobster , or any mollusk is not.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] In Shia hadith, there is a prohibition on the consumption of eels . Any fish without scales are haram (forbidden) but fish that do have scales are permissible. (see List of halal and kosher fish - Wikipedia ) [ 11 ] According to the Maliki school, all types of seafood including seahorses, lobsters and crabs are permitted.

According to Shafi school, every type of fish that is not poisonous (i.e.

puffer fish , rock fish etc.) is permitted and crustaceans that do not live on land such as soft-shell crabs and lobsters are permitted, while hermit-crabs , crocodiles and sea-snakes are haram .

Sea Creature Category Hanafi Shafi‘i Maliki Hanbali Ja‘fari (Shia) True Fish (with scales) Halal, provided the animal is recognized as "fish" (i.e. it has scales and fins).

[ 12 ] Halal [ 12 ] Halal [ 12 ] Halal [ 12 ] Halal (only if it has scales) [ 12 ] Shellfish/Crustaceans (e.g. shrimp, crab, lobster) Generally not considered "true fish" and thus impermissible or at best makruh; nonetheless, there is a minority view among some Hanafi scholars that permits shrimp based on traditional usage.

Halal – all sea creatures are included under "sea game".

[ 12 ] Halal – a broad permissibility is maintained.

[ 12 ] Halal – similar to the Shafi‘i and Maliki view.

[ 12 ] Generally impermissible since only fish with scales are allowed (with some debate on shrimp in limited cases).

[ 12 ] Mollusks (e.g. octopus, squid, clams, mussels) Impermissible (not classified as "fish").

[ 12 ] Halal [ 12 ] Halal [ 12 ] Halal [ 12 ] Impermissible (only true fish with scales are accepted).

[ 12 ] Marine Mammals (e.g. whales, dolphins) Generally avoided or deemed non-permissible since they do not fit the traditional definition of "fish".

[ 12 ] Halal – the general ruling "what comes from the sea is lawful" applies.

[ 12 ] Halal [ 12 ] Halal [ 12 ] Impermissible – as they are not classified as fish with scales.

[ 12 ] Amphibious Creatures (e.g. frogs) Haram (explicitly forbidden in hadith).

[ 13 ] Haram [ 13 ] Haram [ 13 ] Haram [ 13 ] Haram [ 13 ] Reptiles (e.g. sea turtles, sea snakes, crocodiles) Haram – not considered part of the "sea game".

[ 12 ] Haram [ 12 ] Haram [ 12 ] Haram [ 12 ] Haram [ 12 ] People of the Book [ edit ] Food of Jews and Christians (other than those explicitly forbidden) is lawful for Sunni Muslims .

This day are (all) good things made lawful for you. The food of those who have received the Scripture is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them. And so are the virtuous women of the believers and the virtuous women of those who received the Scripture before you (lawful for you) when you give them their marriage portions and live with them in honour, not in fornication, nor taking them as secret concubines. Whoever denies the faith, his work is vain and he will be among the losers in the Hereafter. ( Quran 5:5 ) [ 14 ] Ritual slaughter [ edit ] Main article: Dhabīḥah Halal butcher shop in Shanghai , China In Islamic law , dhabīḥah ( Arabic : ذَبِيحَة ) is the prescribed method of slaughter for halal animals. It consists of a swift, deep incision to the throat with a very sharp knife, cutting the wind pipe , jugular veins and carotid arteries on both sides but leaving the spinal cord intact.

[ 15 ] The carcass should be hung upside down for long enough to be free of blood.

[ 16 ] Slaughtered animals must be acknowledged as sentient beings and slaughtered painlessly while reciting the Basmala and Takbir .

[ 1 ] The butcher is required to call upon the name of Allah ( Bismillah ) individually for each animal.

[ 15 ] If the animal is treated poorly, or tortured while being slaughtered, the meat is haram.

[ 1 ] Conversely, animals slaughtered for food may not be killed by being boiled or electrocuted.

[ 16 ] Animals strangled or beaten to death, or that died by falling or due to a wild animal are also expressly forbidden.

[ 17 ] Forbidden foods (Haram) [ edit ] A variety of substances are also considered unlawful ( haram ) for humans to consume and therefore, the consumption of them is forbidden by the Sharia (Islamic law).

Certain animals are considered haram, including land animals without blood, including all insects except locusts . Most reptiles are also considered haram, as well as most pests ( hasharat al-Ardh ) such as mice and rats.

Differences of opinion exist as to whether the consumption of horses , mules , and donkeys is permitted. In the Quran, one finds this verse: "And (He has created) horses, mules, and donkeys, for you to ride and use for show; and He has created (other) things of which you have no knowledge".

[ 18 ] Some scholars have interpreted this as limiting the named animals for riding and show only, prohibiting their consumption.

[ 19 ] Predatory animals, such as lions , tigers , falcons and hawks are forbidden as well.

However, a person would not be considered guilty of sin in a situation where the lack of any alternative creates an undesired necessity to consume that which is otherwise unlawful, such as a famine .

[ 20 ] Intoxicants [ edit ] Sign on a refrigerator in a convenience store in Malaysia notifying that sales of beer are for non-Muslim customers only Main article: Khamr Alcoholic drinks are generally prohibited under Islamic thought, [ 21 ] with the Quran including several verses that admonish the consumption of khamr , an Arabic term meaning "wine" that is interpreted to include most forms of alcohol and psychoactive drugs : They question you about intoxicants and games of chance. Say: In both is great sin, and (some) utility for men; but the sin of them is greater than their usefulness. And they ask you what they should to spend. Say: that which is superfluous. Thus God makes plain to you (His) revelations, that you may reflect. (Al-Quran 2:219) O you who believe! Draw not near unto prayer when you are drunken, till you know that which you say, nor when you are polluted, save when journeying upon the road, till you have bathed. And if you are ill, or on a journey, or you have touched women, and you cannot find water, then go to clean soil and rub your faces and your hands (therewith). Indeed, Allah is ever Pardoning, Forgiving. ( Quran 4:43 ) O you who believe! Intoxicants and games of chance and idols and divining arrows are but defilement from the work of Satan, so avoid it that you may be successful. (Al-Quran 5:90) There is some debate about whether the prohibition extends to dishes in which the alcohol would be cooked off, or if it would be practically impossible to consume enough of the food to become intoxicated, but it is generally accepted that the inclusion of any alcohol should be avoided and alternatives used.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Substances that contain intoxicants but are not consumed are not prohibited as such. For example, alcohol can be used as a disinfectant or for cleaning.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] The Alevi Muslims of Turkey permit alcohol, unlike many other denominations.

[ 26 ] The Zaidi and Mutazili sects believe that the use of alcohol has always been forbidden and refer to the Qur'an Ayah (4:43) as feeling of sleepiness and not to be awake.

[ citation needed ] Carrion [ edit ] An animal that dies by itself, i.e., carrion , is forbidden in Islam: Forbidden to you is that which dies of itself, and blood, and flesh of swine, and that on which any other name than that of Allah has been invoked, and the strangled (animal) and that beaten to death, and that killed by a fall and that killed by being smitten with the horn, and that which wild beasts have eaten, except what you slaughter, and what is sacrificed on stones set up (for idols) and that you divide by the arrows; that is a transgression.

— Quran 5:3 [ 20 ] Blood [ edit ] The consumption of blood and its by-products as food is forbidden in Islam, in the Quran, surah 5, al-Maʼidah , verse 3: Forbidden to you is that which dies of itself, and blood, and flesh of swine, and that on which any other name than that of Allah has been invoked, and the strangled (animal) and that beaten to death, and that killed by a fall and that killed by being smitten with the horn, and that which wild beasts have eaten, except what you slaughter, and what is sacrificed on stones set up (for idols) and that you divide by the arrows; that is a transgression.

— Quran 5:3 [ 20 ] Pork [ edit ] See also: Religious restrictions on the consumption of pork The consumption of pork and products made from pork are strictly forbidden in Islam. The origin of this prohibition is in Surat al- Baqarah : He has only forbidden you what dies of itself, and blood, and flesh of swine, and that over which any other (name) than (that of) Allah has been invoked; but whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring, nor exceeding the limit, no sin shall be upon him; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

— Quran 2:173 [ 27 ] Animals dedicated to other than God [ edit ] Animal dedicated to or slaughtered in the name of a human being or saint is prohibited.

He has only forbidden you what dies of itself, and blood, and flesh of swine, and that over which any other (name) than (that of) God has been invoked; but whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring, nor exceeding the limit, no sin shall be upon him; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

— Quran 2:173 [ 27 ] Horses, mules and donkeys [ edit ] In both Sunni and Shia hadith the meat of mules is prohibited but horse meat is allowed in Sunni sources.

Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:
"On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) forbade the eating of donkey meat and allowed the eating of horse meat." [ 28 ] Horse meat is especially popular among the Muslims of Central Asia , due in part to their nomadic heritage.

[ 29 ] According to Shia hadith, the use of horses for food is prohibited.

[ 30 ] Donkey meat is prohibited according to one hadith.

[ 31 ] Animals with fangs [ edit ] Predator animals possessing fangs are prohibited (e.g. cats, dogs, bears, lions, wolves).

Narrated Abu Tha`laba:
Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) forbade the eating of the meat of beasts having fangs (canine teeth).

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Birds of prey [ edit ] Birds having talons are prohibited (e.g. owls, eagles, hawks).

Ibn 'Abbas reported that Islamic Prophet prohibited the eating of all fanged beasts of prey, and all the birds having talons (claws).

[ 34 ] Other prohibited animals [ edit ] Lizard is prohibited, except for the dabb lizard according to most scholars.

Narrated Abdur Rahman ibn Shibl: The Messenger of God (ﷺ) forbade to eat the flesh of lizard.

[ 35 ] It was narrated that Ibn ‘Umar said: "Who eats crows? The Messenger of God (ﷺ) called them vermin, By Allah, they are not from among the good and permissible things." [ 36 ] From Khalid ibn al-Walid, that he went with the Messenger of God to the house of Maymuna, who was his and Ibn Abbas's aunt. He found with her a roasted dabb lizard which her sister Hufayda bint al-Harith brought from Najd. Maymuna presented the dabb lizard to the Messenger of God who rarely started eating food before it was described and named for him. The Messenger of God stretched his hand towards the dabb lizard whereupon a lady among those who were present said, "You should inform the Messenger of God of what you have presented to him. O Messenger of God! It is the meat of a dabb lizard." The Messenger of God withdrew his hand from the meat of the dabb lizard. Khalid asked, "O Messenger of God! Is this unlawful to eat?" The Messenger of God replied, "No, but it is not found in the land of my people, so I do not like it." Khalid said, "I then took the dabb lizard toward me and ate it while the Messenger of God was looking at me.

[ 37 ] Likewise snakes , scorpion , and mice are prohibited. There are also no rodents that are considered halal to eat in Islam.

It was narrated from ‘Aishah that the Islamic Prophet said: "Snakes are vermin, scorpions are vermin, mice are vermin and crows are vermin." [ 38 ] Eating monkeys is prohibited in Islam.

[ 39 ] According to Shia hadith, metamorphosed animals to which a disobedient, irreverent, or arrogant pre-Islamic nation was converted as a punishment (such as apes and monkeys ) are prohibited.

[ 40 ] Mushbooh [ edit ] Foods whose halal status is uncertain or debated may be classified as mushbooh ( Arabic : مشبوه ; 'doubtful'). This includes foods that are seemingly halal but of an unknown source and ingredients for which the halal status is subject to differing interpretation, such as extract from brewer's yeast, which is nonalcoholic but derived from the production of alcohol.

[ 41 ] Islamic dietary laws during Ramadan [ edit ] Ramadan , the ninth month on the Muslim calendar, is considered the holy month of fasting. Ramadan begins and ends with the appearance of the new moon. During Ramadan God is said to have delivered the Quran to Muhammad as guidance for the people. During Ramadan, Muslims take time for introspection, prayer, and reading of the Quran. For those who observe Ramadan with fasting, prayer, and faithful intention; God forgives their past sins. During this period, Muslims focus on self restraint or sawm (Arabic: to refrain), which is one of the five pillars of Islam . Ramadan emphasizes sawm , when worshippers have to abstain from food, drink, sexual activity, and immoral behavior between dawn and dusk. After dusk, Muslims break their fast during a meal called iftar with family and friends.

Sawm can be negated by breaking fast, however, the lost can be made up with one extra day of fasting. The end of the Ramadan fast is the celebration of Eid-al-Fitr (Feast of Fast-Breaking), one of the two major religious holidays on the Muslim calendar.

[ 42 ] Food certification [ edit ] Halal restaurant in Almaty , Kazakhstan. Yurta (potatoes with meat) and kumis are made of ingredients considered halal.

Halal food products in an Oriental shop Since the turn of the 21st century, there have been efforts to create organizations that certify food products as halal for Muslim consumers in the US.

[ 43 ] Since 1991, some mainstream manufacturers of soups, grains, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, prepared foods, and other products, as well as hotels, restaurants, airlines, hospitals, and other service providers have pursued the halal market. These companies purchase halal-certified products. This can allow companies to export products to most Middle Eastern countries and Southeast Asian countries. The oldest and most well-known halal certifier in the United States is called the Islamic Services of America .

[ 44 ] In Europe, several organizations have been created in order to certify the halal products. A 2009 survey published by a French association of Muslim Consumers (ASIDCOM [ 45 ] ) shows that the market of halal products has been developed in a chaotic way in Europe.

[ 46 ] The European certification organizations do not have a common definition of "halal" nor agreed upon control procedures and traceability. The controls implemented by individual agencies are all very different: they can go from an annual audit of the slaughterhouse, to checking each production with permanent controls in place and on-going independent monitoring.

[ citation needed ] In South Africa , most chicken products have a halal stamp. The South African National Halal Authority (SANHA) issues certificates and products bearing this logo range from water, snacks, and even meat-free products (which may contain non-halal ingredients). The South African National Halal Authority also licenses the usage of the Halal logo in restaurants where the food is halal, in addition to no alcohol or pork products being served.

[ 47 ] In Singapore, halal certification is managed by Majlis Ugama Islam Singapura (MUIS), also known as the Islamic Religious Council of Singapore. They are the sole custodian of Halal Certification in Singapore.

[ 48 ] In Malaysia, the Department of Islamic Development Malaysia (JAKIM) is the agency responsible for halal certification in Malaysia.

[ 49 ] Availability of halal food in non-Islamic regions [ edit ] In 2013, the halal market was estimated to be 26% of world food trade.

[ 50 ] The Global Halal Institute has a list of Halal certifiers that are approved by most Muslim countries with dietary import restrictions for companies.

[ 51 ] Europe and Asia [ edit ] In the United Kingdom , China , Indonesia , Malaysia , or Singapore , halal fried chicken restaurants having thousands of outlets, some but not all of which, serve halal foods such as the Nando's , Brown's Chicken , and Crown Fried Chicken companies.

[ citation needed ] [ citation needed ] Effects on meat [ edit ] Research claims the method of quickly severing windpipe, jugular vein and carotid artery in one quick move without giving the animal time to panic does have an effect on quality of meat. When animals face trauma or stress, the glycogen in their body is converted to lactic acid. This affects the pH level of the meat, lower pH resulting in lighter colored meat and higher pH resulting in darker meat. This makes the meat tougher and also hard to chew. The halal way of slaughtering ensures the method is believed to be less traumatic for the animal.

[ 52 ] See also [ edit ] Islamic vegetarianism Comparison of Islamic and Jewish dietary laws Christian dietary laws Dhabihah Dietary laws Halal Hechsher Kashrut Kosher foods List of diets Makruh Muslim Consumer Group (MCG) Religious restrictions on the consumption of pork Ritual slaughter Taboo food and drink Word of Wisdom References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Şentürk, Lütfi.

"Diyanet İşleri Başkanlığı İslam İlmihali: İslam'da hayvan hakları ve hayvanlara eziyetin cezası" .

www.yeniakit.com.tr (in Turkish) . Retrieved 2021-10-29 .

^ a b c "Halal and Haram: The Islamic Dietary Laws" .

Learn Religions . Retrieved 2025-08-16 .

^ Fadzlillah, Nurrulhidayah (2011).

"Halal food issues from Islamic and modern science perspectives" .

2nd International Conference on Humanities, Historical and Social Sciences : 159– 163.

^ Gul, Maria; Begum, Farida (2024-12-20).

"Halal and Haram in Islam: Interpretations, Prohibitions, and Dietary Considerations" .

Journal of Islamic and Religious Studies .

9 (2): 13– 30.

doi : 10.36476/JIRS.9:2.12.2024.06 .

ISSN 2519-7118 .

^ "Surah Al-Ma'idah - 1" .

Quran.com . Retrieved 2023-11-10 .

^ "Surah Al-Ma'idah - 4" .

Quran.com . Retrieved 2023-11-10 .

^ * Muhammad ibn Adam.

"Sea Food in the Four Madhahib" . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

Muhammad ibn Adam.

"Is Catfish Halal?" . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

Muhammad ibn Adam.

"Is Shark Meat Halal?" . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

^ al-Fatawa al-Hindiyya, 5/289–291 ^ Bada’i al-Sana’i, 5/35–39 ^ Radd al-Muhtar, 304–308.

^ Al-Kafi 2:11116:1 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x Shaykh Muhammad Abu Bakr Badhib, "Is Seafood Permissible to Eat?", SeekersGuidance, June 15, 2024.

^ a b c d e Office of His Eminence Al-Sayyid Ali Al-Husseini Al-Sistani, "Eating & Drinking – General Rules", Sistani.org.

^ "Surah Al-Ma'idah - 5:1" .

quran.com .

^ a b [Mufti Muhammad Taqi Usmani, "The Islamic Laws of Animal Slaughter", White Thread Publishers, CA, USA] ^ a b "What exactly does the halal method of animal slaughter involve?" .

The Guardian . May 8, 2014.

^ "Surah Al-Ma'idah - 3" .

Quran.com . Retrieved 2023-11-10 .

^ "Surah An-Nahl - 8" .

Quran.com . Retrieved 2023-11-10 .

^ "Sunan Abi Dawud 3790 - Foods (Kitab Al-At'imah) - كتاب الأطعمة - Sunnah.com - Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (صلى الله عليه و سلم)" .

sunnah.com . Retrieved 2023-11-10 .

^ a b c Quran 5:3 ^ a b Tillier, Mathieu; Vanthieghem, Naïm (2022-09-02).

"Des amphores rouges et des jarres vertes: Considérations sur la production et la consommation de boissons fermentées aux deux premiers siècles de l'hégire" .

Islamic Law and Society .

30 ( 1– 2): 1– 64.

doi : 10.1163/15685195-bja10025 .

ISSN 0928-9380 .

S2CID 252084558 .

^ Granleese, Bob (2019-05-31).

"As a Muslim, I can't cook with alcohol – what can I use instead?" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2023-05-04 .

^ "Alcohol in Cooking | ISA Halal" .

Islamic Services of America . Retrieved 2023-05-04 .

^ "UK NHS National Patient Safety Agency: Alcohol handrub" . Archived from the original on 2017-05-06 . Retrieved 2013-05-22 .

^ "World Health Organization Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care" (PDF) .

^ Turkey's Alevi Muslims look to EU for protection from intolerance .

^ a b Quran 2:173 ^ Sahih Bukhari 4219 ^ Horse meat dishes in Kazakhstan . Retrieved 13 January 2009. (archived from the original on 2008-06-10) ^ Al-Kafi 2:11128:13 ^ Sahih Bukhari 7:67:431 ^ Sahih Bukhari 7:67:438 ^ Al-Kafi 2:11117:2 ^ Sahih Muslim 21:4752 ^ Sunah Abi Dawood 3796 ^ Sunao ibn Majah 4:28:3248 ^ Al-Bukhari .

Sahih al-Bukhari 5391 .

^ sunah ibn majah 4:28:3249 ^ "Muslims and food: What can be eaten safely and what should be avoided as per Islamic law" .

Firstpost . 2018-02-05 . Retrieved 2022-06-21 .

^ Al-Kafi 3:11132:1 ^ "Meaning of Halal, Haram & Mushbooh" .

Halal Yummies . 1 August 2013 . Retrieved 8 September 2023 .

^ "Ramadan | Fasting & Traditions" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2019-11-01 .

^ "Welcome halaladvocates.org - blueHost.com" . halaladvocates.org . Retrieved 2012-07-17 .

^ "?" . Islamic Services of America.

^ "ASIDCOM" .

ASIDCOM .

^ "Survey on the Halal certification agencies (December 2009)" . ASIDCOM. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18 . Retrieved 2010-09-11 .

^ "HHO: Recognized Halal Certification Bodies" . Halal-hub.org. Archived from the original on 2012-06-20 . Retrieved 2012-07-17 .

^ "Muis: Halal" .

www.muis.gov.sg . Retrieved 2021-07-19 .

^ "Halal Malaysian Portal" .

www.halal.gov.my . Retrieved 2021-07-19 .

^ "Global Halal Trade Opportunities" .

Halal Australia . Archived from the original on 23 September 2017 . Retrieved 23 September 2017 .

^ "List of Halal Certification Bodies | Global Halal Institute" . April 16, 2013. Archived from the original on 2013-04-16.

^ Grandin, Temple (1980-01-01).

"The Effect of Stress on Livestock and Meat Quality Prior to and During Slaughter" .

Agribusiness Collection .

External links [ edit ] Portals : Islam Food v t e Alcohol Alcohol use Alcohol-related crimes Drunk driving Alcohol-related traffic crashes in the United States Drunk driving in the United States Moonshine Bathtub gin Prison alcohol Pájaro verde Pruno Public intoxication Rum-running Sly-grog shop Wine fraud Alcoholism Alcohol and Native Americans Alcoholism in adolescence Alcoholism in family systems Alcoholism in rural Australia Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism Disease theory of alcoholism High-functioning alcoholic (HFA) Seeing pink elephants Chemistry Beverage-specific Beer chemistry Wine chemistry Comparison of psychoactive alcohols in alcoholic drinks Congener Alcohol congener analysis Ethanol Blood alcohol content Fusel alcohol Effects Short-term effects of alcohol consumption Long-term effects of alcohol Pharmacology of ethanol Subjective response to alcohol Adverse effects Anxiety Aging Brain Cancer breast cancer Cortisol Memory Sleep Tolerance / intolerance Weight Beverage-specific Beer: Potomania Wine: Red wine headache Health issues Cirrhosis Fetal alcohol syndrome Social issues Adulterated alcohol Adulterated moonshine Denatured alcohol ( List of methanol poisoning incidents ) Surrogate alcohol Alcohol abuse Alcohol advertising on college campuses Sex Beer goggles Alcohol myopia Alcohol in association football Alcohol use among college students Binge drinking Austrian syndrome Alcohol intoxication Epidemiology of binge drinking Holiday heart syndrome Problematic alcoholic products Alcohol powder Alcopop Borg Low-cost alcohol Flavored fortified wine Polysubstance alcoholic drinks Caffeinated alcoholic drink Coca wine Nicotini Zapoy Blackout Blackout Wednesday Drinking game list Pregaming Drinking in public Drunk walking Drunkorexia Dry drunk Dutch courage Flaming drink Hair of the dog Hurtful communication Drunk dialing In vino veritas Nightcap Pantsdrunk Passive drinking Binge drinking devices Beer bong Yard of ale Routes of administration Alcohol enema Alcohol inhalation Vodka eyeballing Sconcing History Andrew Johnson alcoholism debate Dionysian Mysteries Dipsomania Gilbert Paul Jordan Gin Craze List of deaths through alcohol Rum ration Rum Rebellion Shebeen Six o'clock swill Illegal drinking establishments Nip joint Speakeasy Whiskey Rebellion General Alcoholic beverage Beer Beer mile International Beer Day International Women's Collaboration Brew Day Women in brewing Drinking culture Apéritif and digestif Hangover remedies Health effects of wine Wine and food pairing Drunken monkey hypothesis Ladies' night List of countries by alcohol consumption per capita Alcohol consumption by youth in the United States Ritual use of alcohol Whiskey International whisk(e)y day Alcohol control Alcohol law Administrative License Suspension (ALS) Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Act 2012 Alcohol exclusion laws Alcohol monopoly Alcoholic beverage control state Alcohol packaging warning messages Ban on caffeinated alcoholic drinks in the United States Drunk driving law by country DWI court Field sobriety testing Hip flask defence Ignition interlock device Dry county List of dry communities by U.S. state Last call Legal drinking age Legal drinking age in the United States Shoulder tap List of alcohol laws of US Alcohol prohibition List of countries with alcohol prohibition Neo-prohibitionism Temperance movement Sobriety Alcohol detoxification Alcohol-free zone Dry campus Open-container law Brief intervention Designated driver Alcohol rehabilitation Drunk tank Managed alcohol program Non-alcoholic drink List of cocktails List of mixed drinks Spritzer Malt drinks Teetotalism Temperance bar Temperance and Good Citizenship Day Twelve-step groups Al-Anon/Alateen Alcoholics Anonymous (AA): Adult Children of Alcoholics (ACA) Sober companion Sober curious Sober living house Sobering center Sobrietol Quit lit Alcohol limitation 0-0-1-3 Alcohol consumption recommendations Alcohol education Alcohol server training Monitoring Breathalyzer Sweat alcohol content monitor FRAMES Foundation for Advancing Alcohol Responsibility Campaigns Dry January Dry July Get Your Sexy Back Ocsober Liquor license Low-alcohol drinks Fermented tea Low-alcohol beer Low-alcoholic malt drinks Small beer Measurement Alcoholic spirits measure Standard drink Addiction medicine Benzodiazepines Chlordiazepoxide Disulfiram-like drugs Disulfiram Calcium carbimide Cyanamide General anaesthetics Nitrous oxide Sulfonic acids Acamprosate Homotaurine Religion and alcohol Catholic Christian views on alcohol Alcohol in the Bible Islam and alcohol Words of Wisdom (LDS) History Beer Street and Gin Lane Bratt System Dry state Gin Act 1751 Medicinal Liquor Prescriptions Act of 1933 Related Index of alcohol-related articles Alcohol and spaceflight Gateway drug effect Mood disorder Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease Self-medication Spins Town drunk French paradox Category v t e Human nutrition and healthy diets Main articles Diet Dieting Cuisine Dietitian Hunger Leptin Meal Nutrition Obesity Staple food Dieting Basic types Omnivore Plant-based Regional diets Western Mediterranean Atlantic Sustainable diets Low carbon Planetary health Religious diets Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Rastafari Sikh Vegetarianism and veganism Fruitarianism Meat analogue Milk substitute Raw vegan Tofu Semi-vegetarianism Ovo-lacto vegetarianism Pescetarian Pollotarian Supplement diets Bodybuilding supplements Meal replacement Therapeutic food Non-solid diets Liquid diets Very-low-calorie diet Specific restrictions Calorie restriction Cardiac diet Diabetic diet Elimination diet Fluid restriction diet Gluten-free Gluten-free and casein-free Intermittent fasting Low-sodium Low-FODMAP Low-carbohydrate Low-fat Low-fiber/low-residue diet Low-protein Monotrophic diet NPO Renal diet Soft diet Specific carbohydrate Other diets Entomophagy Cotton ball Pica DASH Inuit MIND Time Restricted Eating Liquid diet Ninja diet Raw foodism U.S. military Fad diets Cambridge Macrobiotic Master Cleanse Junk food Superfood Slow-Carb List of diets Diet food Nutrition Amino acids Alanine Arginine Asparagine Aspartic acid Cysteine Glutamic acid Glutamine Glycine Histidine Isoleucine Leucine Lysine Methionine Phenylalanine Proline Selenocysteine Serine Threonine Tryptophan Tyrosine Valine Vitamins Vitamin A Vitamin B 1 Vitamin B 2 Vitamin B 3 Vitamin B 5 Vitamin B 6 Vitamin B 7 Vitamin B 9 Vitamin B 12 Vitamin C Vitamin D Vitamin E Vitamin K Minerals Calcium Chlorine Chromium Cobalt Copper Iodine Iron Magnesium Manganese Molybdenum Nickel Phosphorus Potassium Selenium Sodium Vanadium Zinc Nutritional advice 5 A Day Dairy Council of California Food pyramid Fruits & Veggies – More Matters Healthy eating pyramid Latin American Diet Pyramid French paradox Mediterranean Diet Pyramid MyPlate MyPyramid Vegetarian Diet Pyramid Weight Watchers Category Commons Cookbook Food portal, Health and fitness portal v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category v t e Alcohol prohibition By country Bangladesh Canada Finland Iceland India Iran Russia / Soviet Union United States By topic Eighteenth Amendment (U.S. Constitution) Twenty-first Amendment (U.S. Constitution) Australian prohibition referendums Western Australian, 1925 New South Wales, 1928 Western Australian, 1950 American Mafia American Temperance Society Anti-Saloon League Association Against the Prohibition Amendment Bathtub gin Blaine Act Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives Bureau of Prohibition Cullen–Harrison Act Dry county Dry state List of dry communities by U.S. state Islam Jazz Age Local option Medicinal Liquor Prescriptions Act of 1933 Molly Pitcher Club Moonshine Neo-prohibitionism Nip joint Roaring Twenties Rum-running Rum Patrol Rum row Sly-grog shop Speakeasy Swedish prohibition referendum, 1922 Teetotalism Temperance movement Temperance (Scotland) Act 1913 United Kingdom Alliance Volstead Act Voluntary Committee of Lawyers Webb–Kenyon Act Wickersham Commission Willis–Campbell Act Woman's Christian Temperance Union People Martha Meir Allen Harry J. Anslinger Thomas Holliday Barker Lyman Beecher Al Capone Mickey Duffy Waxey Gordon Texas Guinan Frank Hamer William Harvey J. Edgar Hoover Clinton N. Howard Bumpy Johnson Enoch L. Johnson Norman Kerr Meyer Lansky Frederic Richard Lees Lucky Luciano Sam Maceo Owney Madden Joseph Malins William McCoy J. Howard Moore Bugs Moran Carrie Nation Eliot Ness Roy Olmstead The LaMontages brothers Lanzetta Brothers The Purple Gang George Remus Arnold Rothstein Howard Hyde Russell Dutch Schultz Thomas Bywater Smithies Eliza Thompson William Harvey Thompson Andrew Volstead Wayne Wheeler Frances Willard Izzy Einstein and Moe Smith Political parties National Prohibition Party (UK) Prohibition Party (USA) Scottish Prohibition Party Related Prohibition (2011 documentary miniseries) Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Islamic_dietary_laws&oldid=1306226001 " Categories : Diets Food law Halal food Religion-based diets Sharia Hidden categories: CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from October 2015 All articles that may contain original research Articles lacking reliable references from November 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2022 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Islamic dietary laws 16 languages Add topic

