Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 1.1 Fighting for Agunot 1.2 Interaction with the Torah 1.3 Participation in Zimmunim 1.4 Use of the Tallit 1.5 Use of Tefillin 2 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 2.1 Communal leadership 2.2 Spiritual leadership 3 See also 4 Bibliography 5 Notes and references 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Orthodox Jewish feminism 2 languages Deutsch Norsk nynorsk Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Movement in Orthodox Judaism Part of a series of articles on Jewish feminism Advocates List of Jewish feminists Groups Bat Shalom Center for Women's Justice Mizrahi feminism National Council of Jewish Women Orthodox feminism Shira Hadasha Women of the Wall Orthodox Jewish feminism JOFA Kolech Partnership minyan Chochmat Nashim Political activism Lo Nivcharot, Lo Bocharot U'Bizchutan Issues Abortion Birth control Feminism In Israel In Judaism Marriage and Divorce Niddah ( menstruation ) Mikveh ( ritual immersion ) Adultery Get ( divorce document ) Agunah ( "chained" marriages ) Minyan ( synagogue services ) Partnership minyan Mitzvah Ordination Yoatzot ( Advisors of Jewish Law ) Sexuality Tzniut ( modesty ) Negiah ( physical contact ) Yichud ( isolation ) Lesbian v t e Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Orthodox Jewish feminism (also known as Orthodox feminism amongst Jews) is a movement in Orthodox Judaism which seeks to further the cause of a more egalitarian approach to Jewish practice [ 1 ] within the bounds of Jewish Law . The major organizations of this movement is the Jewish Orthodox Feminist Alliance (JOFA) in North America, and Women of the Wall (WOW) and its affiliates in Israel and internationally, known as The International Committee for Women of the Wall (ICWOW). In Israel , the leading Orthodox feminist organization is Kolech , founded by Dr. Chana Kehat. In Australia, there is one Orthodox partnership minyan , Shira Hadasha , in Melbourne .

The movement relies on liberal interpretations of Jewish Law, by both modern and classical rabbinic scholars, taking advantage of the lack of universal consensus on legal interpretations amongst rabbis in different eras.

In 2016, Lila Kagedan officially became the first female Orthodox rabbi, while serving in Melbourne, Australia.

[ 2 ] Later in 2016, Rabbi Kagedan was hired as rabbi at Modern Orthodox Mount Freedom Jewish Center in Randolph, New Jersey, becoming the first orthodox female rabbi in the United States.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Rabbi Kagedan is currently working at Walnut Street Synagogue in Massachusetts.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In 2021, Shira Marili Mirvis was appointed to be the spiritual leader of the Shirat HaTamar synagogue in Efrat, Israel.

[ 7 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Orthodox feminists, using historical precedents and the aforementioned liberal legal interpretations, allow the practice of ritual in manners that more traditional or conservative interpretations consider as befitting only to men. Many of the practices of Orthodox feminists are held to be controversial because of their different approach to the everyday routine of most Orthodox Jews.

[ 8 ] Several specific rituals and practices are of particular concern: Fighting for Agunot [ edit ] Agunot are women who have asked for a divorce, or who have been left by their husband, and the husband refuses to grant a get .

A get is a Jewish certificate of divorce required for the woman to be able to remarry.  Recalcitrant husbands are pressured by society to grant the get to the wife, who is stuck in limbo, without a husband and unable to remarry.

Orthodox feminists make a priority of fighting on the behalf of agunot, and the "agunah crisis".

[ 9 ] Many fight in organizations specifically for this purpose, and some work independently.

Interaction with the Torah [ edit ] Kissing the Torah scroll with a siddur (prayer book), hand, or directly with the lips, during Shabbath , Yom Tob , services is a convention found in many Modern Orthodox congregations as well as non-Orthodox ones.  While many may take it for granted as an integral part of worship services, it is not practiced in Haredi and Chassidic congregations. Dancing with the Torah and having hakafoth (processional circuits) around the sanctuary on Simhath Torath is another way in which many Orthodox Jews interact with the Torah which is an especially important ritual in feminist circles. These are some reasons why this act has special meaning in Orthodox feminist circles.

[ 10 ] Participation in Zimmunim [ edit ] One of the most prevalent, and perhaps least controversial practices of Orthodox feminists, even done by some women outside of the movement, is the participation in a women's zimmun .  The women's zimmun takes place when less than three men have eaten together, but where three or more women have eaten together.  A zimmun is a formal call to prayer said before the communal recitation of Birkath Hamazon . One formula for the women's zimmun is exactly the same formula as the zimmun of men, but substituting chaverot (Hebrew: friends (f.)) for the word rabotai (Hebrew: gentlemen) in the beginning of the invitation, thus feminizing the call.

Use of the Tallit [ edit ] In Orthodox feminism, the donning of a tallit (prayer shawl) is not seen as the wearing of a man's garment, neither is it seen as an affront to the community. These reasons make the wearing of prayer shawls by women common in Orthodox feminist circles.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Use of Tefillin [ edit ] A member of the Women of the Wall prays while wearing tallit and tefillin Citing Talmudic and later sources, Orthodox feminists allow the laying of tefillin by women.

[ citation needed ] Traditionally in Orthodox Judaism women are considered to be exempt from all positive time-bound mitzvot, such as wrapping tefillin . The medieval halachic work Orach Chayyim precludes women who wish to wear tefillin from doing so. In ancient times, this was not the case. There are several instances of women who allegedly wore tefillin . According to Talmud Yerushalmi Berachot 2:3:9 "Michal the daughter of the Cushite [Saul] wore tefillin and the sages did not protest" [ 13 ] — although in the same tractate Rabbi Hezekiah concludes that the sages indeed did prohibit the wearing of phylacteries from Michal. 
The Mishnah tractate entitled Nashim ( "women" or "wives" ), which mainly deals with matters relating to domestic life and marriage is one of the most comprehensive dealing with the legal aspects of the role of women in Judaism.  
Medieval Ashkenazi communities represented a high point in women’s voluntary participation in Judaism, even in aspects supposedly forbidden to them by Talmudic law. Women of Northern France were known to put on tefillin to pray.

[ citation needed ] In addition to tefillin , women were documented as being counted in prayer quorums, and serving as a sandeka'it at circumcision feasts.

[ citation needed ] However, the political and economic situation of European Jewry gradually worsened beginning in the 13th century. In response, communities reverted to more traditional practices, and most of the gains Jewish women had achieved were put to a stop.

Activities [ edit ] Orthodox Jewish feminists participate in a number of organized and informal activities which both demonstrate their commitment to their values as both feminists and as Orthodox Jews.

Holding conferences [ 14 ] of various kinds is a major activity that Orthodox Jewish feminists use to educate, show recognition, and strengthen the movement.

JOFA organizes conferences for its members and the public drawing crowds from both North America, and internationally.  As well, some Orthodox feminists participate in partnership minyanim and other independent minyanim [ 15 ] where they feel comfortable and are permitted to practice Judaism in their unique way. This phenomenon was the topic of discussion of Mechhon Hadar, a conference about independent minyanim.

[ 16 ] Communal leadership [ edit ] A new office in some synagogues, particularly of the Open Orthodox movement is allowing women to serve as synagogue or congregational interns, a position traditionally held by men only.

[ 17 ] Spiritual leadership [ edit ] Blu Greenberg advocates for women to ascend to the Orthodox rabbinate.

[ 18 ] Mimi Feigelson was an Orthodox student of Shlomo Carlebach who was ordained after his death, but she doesn't use the term 'rabbi' in reference to herself out of respect for Orthodox social structure.

[ 19 ] Haviva Ner-David has the equivalent of Orthodox ordination, but teaches at a Conservative yeshiva.

Sara Hurwitz is the maharat of the Hebrew Institute of Riverdale . She has the full training of an Orthodox rabbi.  Her title is an acronym for Manhiga Hilchatit Ruchanit Toranit: A halakhic spiritual and torah leader.  According to Rabbi Avi Weiss , she is a full member of the clergy.  A MaHaRaT has functions as spiritual leader, gives pastoral care, and leads life cycle events, as well as having authority to teach Torah. She has the authority to answer questions of Jewish Law.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In some communities, a spiritual leadership position other than rabbi is held by a woman.

[ 22 ] Dina Najman is ראש קהילה Rosh Kehila (Hebrew: Head of Community) of Kehilat Orach Eliezer (KOE) on Manhattan's Upper West Side.

Sharona Margolin Halickman is a Madricha Ruchanit or Spiritual Mentor of the Hebrew Institute of Riverdale.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Maharat Rachel Kohl Finegold is the Director of Education & Spiritual Enrichment at Congregation Shaar Hashomayim in Montreal and is involved with JOFA.

[ 25 ] Lynn Kaye is the equivalent of an associate rabbi at Shearith Israel in Manhattan.

[ 26 ] Maharat Ruth Balinsky Friedman is the maharat at The National Synagogue in Washington DC.

[ 27 ] Rori Picker Neiss serves as the Director of Programming, Education and Community Engagement at Bais Abraham Congregation in St. Louis, MO.

[ 28 ] In 2015 Jennie Rosenfeld became the first female Orthodox spiritual advisor in Israel (specifically, she became the spiritual advisor, also called manhiga ruchanit , for the community of Efrat .) [ 29 ] And same year Miriam Gonczarska of Poland, has received maharat smicha as first European.

Australia's Shira Hadasha invited Maharat Melanie Landau to be its spiritual head; however, she declined the role. The community remains lay-led and service leadership and leyning are performed by congregants such as Mandi Katz and Alex Fein .

[ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Partnership minyan Women rabbis Bibliography [ edit ] Hartman, Tova, Feminism Encounters Traditional Judaism: Resistance and Accommodation . Brandeis, Lebanon, New Hampshire, 2008 Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Beliefnet Orthodox, Feminist, and Proud of It Judaism's Orthodox feminist movement has succeeded in opening doors for women committed both to Jewish law and gender equality ^ Desk, Jewish Press News (21 March 2016).

"Rabbi Lila Kagedan, First Female Rabbi at Orthodox Shul in Melbourne" . Retrieved 2019-05-05 .

{{ cite web }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) ^ "NJ Orthodox shul announces hire of woman using 'rabbi' title" .

Jewish Telegraphic Agency . 2016-01-11 . Retrieved 2019-05-05 .

^ "First Woman Orthodox 'Rabbi' Is Hired by Synagogue" .

The Forward . 4 January 2016 . Retrieved 2019-05-05 .

^ admin-walnut.

"Clergy" .

Walnut . Archived from the original on 2016-12-18 . Retrieved 2019-05-05 .

^ "Chelsea's historic Walnut Street Shul preserves a future" .

Jewish Journal . 2017-06-15 . Retrieved 2019-05-05 .

^ "Orthodox, Female and Running Their Own Shuls – Just Don't Call Them Rabbis" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 2021-11-25 .

^ Edah: The Courage to be modern and Orthodox 'Womens Zimmun and Whether Men [Who Are Present] Must Leave' ^ "Orthodox feminists make little progress on agunot" .

^ My Jewish Learning : Orthodox Feminism For The 21st Century - A founder of the Orthodox feminist movement discusses issues confronting the movement now and in the future
By Blu Greenberg.

^ See Wikipedia: Tallit 5.2 Women ^ JOFA [ permanent dead link ] Links on the wearing of prayer shawls by women.

^ "Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 2:3:9 on Sefaria" .

^ HighBeam Research Gen Xers Take Orthodox Feminist Reins: Modesty, mikveh and sex; New generation makes its own experience the focus at conference ^ ZEEK DIY Judaism: A Roundtable on the Independent Minyan Phenomenon ^ "Mechon Hadar" . Archived from the original on 2008-09-15 . Retrieved 2009-05-16 .

^ Unusual but Not Unorthodox; 2 Synagogues Hire Women to assis Rabbis - A NY Times Article about female congregational interns.

^ Jerusalem Post [ permanent dead link ] article on the ordination of women rabbis of all denomination.

^ Jewish Virtual Library : A History of Women's Ordination as Rabbis ^ Hebrew Institute of Riverdale Archived 2009-04-28 at the Wayback Machine - About Us.

^ The Jewish Week Archived 2009-05-04 at the Wayback Machine Article about Mahara"t Sarah Hurwitz ^ An Orthodox Jewish Woman, and Soon, a Spiritual Leader NY Times article about a woman Rosh Kehila ^ Who is the Madricha Ruchanit ?

Archived 2009-02-08 at the Wayback Machine The Hebrew Institute of Riverdale's (HIR) website explains the role of a Madricha Ruchanit.

^ "HIR page on Sharona Margolin Halickman" . Archived from the original on 2009-07-20 . Retrieved 2009-05-16 .

^ "Congregation Shaar Hashomayim" . Archived from the original on 2014-04-07 . Retrieved 2014-04-04 .

^ "A Jew finds himself at a neo-Nazi forum - Part 9412" .

www.jewishreview.org .

^ "Ohev Sholom - the National Synagogue - Maharat Ruth Balinsky Friedman" . Archived from the original on 2014-04-07 . Retrieved 2014-04-04 .

^ "Bais Abe hires director of programming, education and community engagement" . Archived from the original on 2014-05-14 . Retrieved 2014-04-04 .

^ "With female spiritual advisor, Efrat spotlights women's empowerment in Israel" .

JNS.org . Archived from the original on 2015-02-07 . Retrieved 2015-02-07 .

^ "Home - Macroscope" .

macroscope.com.au . Archived from the original on 2021-04-14 . Retrieved 2021-08-16 .

External links [ edit ] JOFA - The Jewish Orthodox Feminist Alliance Women of the Wall - Jewish Virtual Library My Jewish Learning :Orthodox Feminism For The 21st Century KOE - Kehilat Orach Eliezer The Bayit The Hebrew Institute of Riverdale.

v t e Women in Judaism General topics Women in Judaism In the Bible Early modern period In the Holocaust In Israel Gender and Jewish studies Matrilineality in Judaism Bat-Kohen Bat Levi History Jewish Women's Congress (1893) 1902 kosher meat boycott 1904 New York City rent strike 1906 Tonsil Riots 1907 New York City rent strike 1909 shirtwaist strike First World Congress of Jewish Women (1923, 1929) Women's Torah Project (2003–2010) Women's Siyum HaShas (2020) Feminism Jewish feminism Orthodox Israeli Mizrahi Life cycle events Zeved habat / Simchat bat Bar and bat mitzvah For adults Girls' Day ( Chag habanot ) Marriage Marriage Matchmaking Marriage contract Marital harmony Head covering Homemaker Ritual purity Ritual immersion Divorce Agunah Practices and concepts Gender separation Tzniut Negiah Yichud Abortion In Israel Birth control Sexuality Homosexuality Prayer and study Tkhine Tseno Ureno Partnership minyan Tefillin Barbie Midrasha Mechitza Court of the Women Religious roles Rebbetzin Rabbis and Torah scholars Timeline Yoetzet halacha Toanot Rabniyot Scribe Cantor Timeline Firzogerin Organizations Aminadav Bat Kol B'not Esh CWJ Chochmat Nashim Eshel Hadassah Hadran Haifa Women's Coalition Israel Women's Network JOFA JWA Women Artists' Circle JWCEO JWCIF JWI Kohenet Institute Kolech League of Jewish Women Maharat Ma'yan N'shei Chabad Na'amat NCJW Nivcharot Philomath Club Pi Alpha Tau Union of Jewish Women Cantors Network Women of Reform Judaism WoW W4W WIZO WLCJ WLI Women's Rabbinic Network Women's Spirit Vocolot Historic / defunct Clara de Hirsch Home Di Vilde Chayes League of Jewish Women (Germany) Jewish League for Woman Suffrage (UK) Women's Orchestra of Auschwitz Publications Binah Hadassah Magazine Lilith The American Jewess Schools Orthodox Jewish schools for women Places Rachel's Tomb Tomb of the Matriarchs Judaism portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Orthodox_Jewish_feminism&oldid=1288841534 " Categories : Orthodox Jewish feminism Jewish feminism Orthodox Judaism Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2020 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 01:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Orthodox Jewish feminism 2 languages Add topic

