Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Philosophy of artificial intelligence 2.2 Consciousness 2.2.1 Overflow argument 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ned Block 18 languages Afrikaans العربية Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית مصرى 日本語 Português Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher Ned Block Born 1942 Chicago Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Notable students Daniel Stoljar [ 1 ] Main interests Philosophy of mind Notable ideas Blockhead China brain Ned Joel Block (born 1942) is an American philosopher working in philosophy of mind who has made important contributions to the understanding of consciousness and the philosophy of cognitive science . He has been professor of philosophy and psychology at New York University since 1996, and a Silver Professor since 2005.

[ 2 ] Education and career [ edit ] Block obtained his PhD from Harvard University in 1971 under the direction of Hilary Putnam . He joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) as an assistant professor of philosophy (1971–1977), and then served as associate professor of philosophy (1977–1983), professor of philosophy (1983–1996) and as chair of the philosophy section (1989–1995). He has, since 1996, been a professor in the departments of philosophy and psychology at New York University (NYU).

Block received the Jean Nicod Prize in 2013, and has given the William James Lectures at Harvard University in 2012 and the John Locke Lectures at Oxford University in 2013, [ 3 ] among many others.

Block is Past President of the Society for Philosophy and Psychology and was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences in 2004.

[ 4 ] He is married to the developmental psychologist Susan Carey . Block is ethnically Jewish.

[ 5 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Philosophy of artificial intelligence [ edit ] Block is noted for presenting the Blockhead argument against the Turing test as a test of intelligence in a paper titled "Psychologism and Behaviorism" (1981). He is also known for his criticism of functionalism , arguing that a system with the same functional states as a human is not necessarily conscious.

[ 6 ] : 174 Block has been a judge at the Loebner Prize contest, a contest in the tradition of the Turing Test to determine whether a conversant is a computer or a human.

[ 7 ] : 14–15 Consciousness [ edit ] In his more recent work on consciousness , he has made a distinction between phenomenal consciousness and access consciousness , where phenomenal consciousness consists of subjective experience and feelings and access consciousness consists of that information globally available in the cognitive system for the purposes of reasoning, speech and high-level action control. He has argued that access consciousness and phenomenal consciousness might not always coincide in human beings.

Overflow argument [ edit ] Ned Block has mounted the overflow argument, which argues against the view that phenomenal consciousness and access consciousness are identical. Instead, Ned Block argues that phenomenal consciousness overflows conscious access, meaning that one can consciously experience something that they do not have conscious access to. Empirically, this means that a subject can have some content included in their conscious experience, but lack the cognitive recognition of the content that is necessary to report that the content was in fact experienced.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers New York University Department of Philosophy Philosophy of artificial intelligence References [ edit ] ^ "Tree – David Chalmers" . Retrieved 2020-07-22 .

^ "The Silver Professors" .

as.nyu.edu . Retrieved 2025-02-26 .

^ "The John Locke Lectures - Faculty of Philosophy" .

www.philosophy.ox.ac.uk .

^ "Press Releases - American Academy of Arts & Sciences" .

www.amacad.org .

^ "Jewish Philosophers" .

^ Ritchie, S. L., Divine Action and the Human Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019), p. 174.

^ van de Gevel, Ad J. W., & Noussair, C. N., The Nexus between Artificial Intelligence and Economics ( Berlin / Heidelberg : Springer , 2013), pp. 14–15 .

^ Block, Ned (2011).

"Perceptual consciousness overflows cognitive access" .

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

15 (12): 567– 575.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2011.11.001 .

PMID 22078929 .

External links [ edit ] NYU Department of Philosophy home page Discussion of Block in a Wikibook about consciousness Minds and Machines course by Ned Block Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ned_Block&oldid=1302400606 " Categories : 1942 births Living people 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Jewish philosophers Harvard University alumni American consciousness researchers and theorists New York University faculty American philosophers of mind Philosophers from New York (state) Fellows of the Cognitive Science Society Silver professors Jewish American academics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 05:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ned Block 18 languages Add topic

