Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable people 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Egyptian Australians 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australians of Egyptian descent Ethnic group Egyptian Australians Total population 100,000+ (Membership, 2017) [ 1 ] 36,532 (by country of birth, 2011) [ 2 ] Regions with significant populations Sydney , Melbourne , Perth , Canberra , Adelaide , Newcastle , Brisbane Languages Australian English , Egyptian Arabic , Coptic , Nobiin , Sa'idi Arabic Religion Christianity (Majority) Islam , Baháʼí , Judaism (Minority).

Related ethnic groups Egyptians , Copts , Coptic Australians Egyptian diaspora , Arab Australians , Egyptian Americans , Egyptian Canadians People born in Egypt as a percentage of the population in Sydney divided geographically by postal area, as of the 2011 census.

Egyptian Australians ( Arabic : مصريون أستراليون ) are Australian citizens and Australian permanent residents of Egyptian descent. According to the Australian 2011 Census, 36,532 Australian citizens and permanent residents declared that they were born in Egypt , [ 2 ] while based on the 2006 Census, at least an additional 31,786 declared that they were of full or partial Egyptian ancestry and born in a country other than Egypt (including most numerously Australian-born persons of full or partial Egyptian ancestry).

[ 3 ] The 2021 Census shows that the majority of Egypt-born Australians are located in Sydney (19,680) and Melbourne (13,312).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The majority of Egyptian Australians are Christians , which is in contrast to the religious affiliation to Islam of the majority of the population of ethnic Egyptians within modern Egypt. Some 19,928 Australian citizens and residents declared membership of the Coptic Orthodox Church at the 2006 Census.

[ 6 ] Most Egyptian Christians, however, may simply have declared themselves "Christian" without specifying the Coptic denomination, while other Egyptian Christians may belong to various other denominations, either born into or converted. In 2003, however, it was claimed in the New South Wales Parliament that there were in fact 70,000 Copts in New South Wales alone.

[ 7 ] An additional 1,890 persons in the 2006 Census reported themselves as being of " Coptic " ancestry. The term Coptic ordinarily refers to adherents of Coptic Christianity, but when used as a term referring to ethnicity means "Egyptian" (almost always in the context of Coptic Christian Egyptians). The 1,890 persons who described their ancestry as "Coptic" are thus most likely Egyptian Australians.

[ 3 ] Copt as an ethnonym is etymologically derived from the Greek "Aiguptious," literally meaning "Egyptian," from the Late Egyptian word "Gyptios", via the Classical Arabic "Qubt", into the English "Copt". The word ordinarily refers to Coptic Christian Egyptians, though there have been instances of Muslim Egyptians referring to themselves as "Copts" to emphasise the non-Arabian ancestral origin of Egyptians in general.

History [ edit ] First history of short term Egyptians migrants in Australia dates back to 1860s to 1900 period when small groups of mainly Muslim cameleers were shipped in and out of Australia at three-year intervals, to service South Australia 's inland pastoral industry by carting goods and transporting wool bales by camel trains , who were commonly referred to as "Afghans" or "Ghans", despite their origin often being mainly from British India , and some even from Afghanistan and Egypt and Turkey .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] : 88 Permanent emigration from Egypt began in the late 1940s and 1950s, disproportionately so for non-ethnic Egyptian minorities escaping the growing Arab nationalist movement in Egypt which saw the overthrow of the Egyptian monarchy and the subsequent Suez Crisis .

[ 10 ] In total numbers, Egyptian Christians were the largest contingent of emigrants to leave Egypt for other countries, including to Australia. Christians were the second largest in terms of proportion to their original community size in Egypt.

Egyptian Jews , as a proportion of their original community size in Egypt, were the largest emigrant community to leave Egypt (they were the second largest in total numbers). The number of Jews in Egypt numbered around 75,000 in 1948; following the establishment of the State of Israel that same year, most of the population left, starting the Jewish exodus from Arab lands , and settling largely in Israel, USA, Europe, Latin America, with around 2,000 settling in Australia.

[ 11 ] The Egyptian Jewish population in Australia is concentrated particularly in Adelaide , South Australia .

[ 12 ] Officially, only 6 Jews remain in Egypt today.

[ 13 ] Notable people [ edit ] Aziza Abdel-Halim Anne Aly Waleed Aly Bishop Angaelos Albert Bensimon Jonah Bolden Taj El-Din Hilaly Robert Kabbas Nick Kaldas Naguib Kanawati Peter Khalil Henry Ninio Ahmed Saad Theodore Saidden Akmal Saleh Sam Soliman Joseph Tawadros See also [ edit ] Australia portal Egypt portal Australia–Egypt relations Egyptian diaspora in Australia related topics Arab Australians Coptic Orthodoxy in Australia Persecution of Copts in Egypt Persecution of Jews in Egypt Egyptian diaspora elsewhere Egyptian Americans Egyptian Canadians Egyptians in the United Kingdom References [ edit ] ^ "Our Churches" .

www.ncca.org.au . Archived from the original on 15 April 2018.

Total responses: 25,451,383 for total count of persons: 19,855,288.

^ a b "2011 QuickStats Country of Birth (Egypt)" .

Censusdata.abs.gov.au . Archived from the original on 2017-08-29 . Retrieved 2013-05-22 .

^ a b "20680-Ancestry (full classification list) by Sex - Australia" .

2006 Census .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Archived from the original (Microsoft Excel download) on 2019-01-06 . Retrieved 2008-06-02 .

Total responses: 25,451,383 for total count of persons: 19,855,288.

^ "2021 People in Greater Melbourne who were born in Egypt, Census Country of birth QuickStats | Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

www.abs.gov.au .

^ "2021 People in Greater Sydney who were born in Egypt, Census Country of birth QuickStats | Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

www.abs.gov.au .

^ "Redirect to Census data page" .

Censusdata.abs.gov.au . Archived from the original on 21 October 2020 . Retrieved 28 August 2017 .

^ "Coptic Orthodox Church (NSW) Property Trust Amendment Bill" .

Parliament of New South Wales, Hansard . 12 November 2003. Archived from the original on 4 March 2015.

^ "Afghan cameleers in Australia" .

Stories of Australia . Archived from the original on 5 August 2016.

^ Parkes, Rebecca (2009).

"Traces of the cameleers: Landscape archaeology and landscape perception" (PDF) .

Australasian Historical Archaeology .

27 : 88– 98.

^ "Origins: History of immigration from Egypt - Immigration Museum, Melbourne Australia" .

Museumvictoria.com.au . Archived from the original on July 30, 2008 . Retrieved 28 August 2017 .

^ "The Migration Experience of the Jews of Egypt to Australia 1948 – 1967, Rachel Marlene Barda" (PDF) .

Ses.library.usyd.edu.au . Retrieved 28 August 2017 .

^ Network, Jewish Australia Online.

"Jewish Australia" .

Jewishaustralia.com . Retrieved 28 August 2017 .

^ "Egypt's Jewish community diminished to 6 women after death of Lucy Saul - Egypt Independent" .

Egyptindependent.com . 30 July 2016 . Retrieved 28 August 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Coptic Orthodox Electronic Publishing Australia Coptic Orthodox Diocese of Melbourne Coptic Theological College of Sydney Australia Paul Ashton and Stephanie Ho - University of Technology, Sydney (2008).

"Egyptians" .

Dictionary of Sydney . Retrieved 4 October 2015 .

(Egyptians in Sydney) v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e North African and Middle Eastern Australians Arab Algerian Egyptian Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Palestinian Saudi Arabian Syrian Emirati Jewish Israeli Peoples of the Sudan South Sudanese Sudanese Other Coptic Iranian Kurdish Turkish Assyrian Mandaean Topics Antisemitism Anti-Arabism Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment Islamophobia Organized crime North African diaspora West Asian diaspora v t e Egyptian diaspora Australia Brazil Canada Chile Italy Netherlands New Zealand United Kingdom United States Israel Egypt portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Egyptian_Australians&oldid=1290401206 " Categories : African diaspora in Australia Australian people of Egyptian descent Egyptian diaspora in Australia Muslim communities of Australia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 15:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Egyptian Australians 2 languages Add topic

