Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 References 4 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Luigi Taparelli 14 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian Jesuit (1793–1862) Monsignor Luigi Taparelli SJ Born ( 1793-11-24 ) 24 November 1793 Turin , Piedmont-Sardinia (present-day Italy ) Died 21 September 1862 (1862-09-21) (aged 68) Rome , Papal States (present-day Italy) Education Alma mater University of Turin Philosophical work Era 19th century Region Western philosophy Italian philosophy School Thomism Traditionalism Institutions Oblates of the Virgin Mary Society of Jesus Main interests Religion , sociology Notable ideas Social justice , subsidiarity Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e Luigi Taparelli SJ (born Prospero Taparelli d'Azeglio ; 24 November 1793 – 2 September 1862) was an Italian scholar of the Society of Jesus and counter-revolutionary who coined the term social justice and elaborated the principles of subsidiarity as part of his natural law theory of just social order.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] He was the brother of the Italian statesman Massimo d'Azeglio .

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] His father, Cesare Taparelli , was at one time ambassador of Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia to the Holy See , and his brother, Massimo , was one of the Italian ministers of State. Cesare was a member of the associations Amicizia cristiana and Amicizia cattolica, and a main contributor to L'Ape , the first Catholic journal in Italy.

[ 5 ] Luigi was educated under the Piarists at Siena and in the Atheneo of Turin . He attended the military School of St Cyr at Paris for some months, but he was not destined to be a soldier. He entered the Society of Jesus at Rome, 12 Nov. 1814. He was the first rector of the Roman College after its restoration to the Jesuits by Leo XII . He taught philosophy for sixteen years at Palermo .

Taparelli cofounded the journal Civiltà Cattolica in 1850 and wrote for it for twelve years. He was particularly concerned with the problems arising from the Industrial Revolution . He was a proponent of reviving the philosophical school of Thomism , and his social teachings influenced Pope Leo XIII 's 1891 encyclical , Rerum novarum (On the Condition of the Working Classes).

[ 6 ] In 1825, he became convinced that the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas needed to be revived, thinking that the subjective philosophy of René Descartes leads to dramatic errors in morality and politics. He reasoned that whereas different opinions on the natural sciences have no effect on nature, unclear metaphysical ideas about humanity and society can lead to social chaos.

The Catholic Church had not yet developed a clear philosophical view regarding the great social changes that were appearing in the early nineteenth century in Europe , which led to much confusion among the ecclesiastical hierarchy and laity. In response to this problem, Taparelli applied the methods of Thomism to these social problems in a coherent manner.

[ 7 ] [ 3 ] After the social revolutions of 1848 , the church decided to enter the conflict raging between the laissez-faire liberal capitalists and the socialists . Up until then, the church relied primarily on evangelical charitable activities. In 1850, Taparelli, until then a liberal and revolutionary, was granted permission by Pope Pius IX to co-found Civiltà Cattolica with Carlo Maria Curci . In particular, he attacked the tendency to separate morality from positive law , and also the "heterodox spirit" of unconstrained freedom of conscience which destroyed the unity of society.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] His major ideas include social justice and subsidiarity . He viewed society as not a monolithic group of individuals, but of various levels of sub-societies, with individuals being members of these. Each level of society has both rights and duties which should be recognized and supported. All levels of society should cooperate rationally and not resort to competition and conflict.

Works [ edit ] His chief work, "Saggio teoretico di diritto naturale appogiato sul fatto", i. e. "A Theoretical Essay on Natural Right from an Historical Standpoint" (2 vols., 7th ed., Rome, 1883), was in a way the beginning of modern sociology . It was translated into German (Ratisbon, 1845) and twice into French (Tournai, 1851; Paris, 1896). Herein was developed the position, at once widely accepted in conservative circles on the Continent, that the normal origin of civil government was by extension of paternal power through the patriarchal head of a group of families. This essay was later abridged into "An Elementary Course in Natural Right" (6th ed., Naples, 1860; also in French, Tournai, 1864; and in Spanish , Paris, 1875), which was in use as a text-book in the University of Modena . Next in importance is his "Esame critico degli ordini rappresentativi nella società moderna", i. e. "Critical Examination of Representative Government in Modern Society" (2 vols., Rome, 1854; in Spanish, Madrid, 1867). Besides his striking monographs on "Nationality" (Rome, 1847), "Sovereignty of the People" (Palermo, 1848; Florence, 1849), and "The Grounds of War" (Genoa, 1847) he left a long list of articles in the Civiltà Cattolica chiefly on subjects in political economy and social rights, as well as an equally long list of book reviews on kindred topics, which were acute and penetrating essays.

References [ edit ] ^ Herbermann 1913 .

^ Behr, Thomas. "Luigi Taparelli D'Azeglio, SJ and the Revival of Scholastic Natural Law," The Journal of Markets and Morality , Spring 2003.

^ a b Behr, Thomas.

Social Justice and Subsidiarity: Luigi Taparelli and the Origins of Modern Catholic Social Thought (Washington DC: Catholic University of American Press, December 2019).

^ Sulas 2019 .

^ Millar, Eileen Anne (2002).

"D'Azeglio, Cesare Taparelli" .

The Oxford Companion to Italian Literature . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-818332-7 . Retrieved 31 July 2024 .

^ Behr, Thomas. "Catholic Social Teaching" in The Development of Catholic Social Teaching: A Volume of Scholarly Essays . G. Bradley; E. Brugger (eds.). (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019).

^ Behr, Thomas. "Taparelli on Cult, Culture and Authentic Progress," Fellowship of Catholic Scholars Quarterly , Summer 2020.

^ Taparelli, Luigi. "Critical Analysis of the First Principles of Political Economy," Thomas Behr, ed., trans.

Journal of Markets & Morality , Fall 2011.

^ Behr, Thomas. "Luigi Taparelli's Natural Law Approach to Social Economics," Journal des Économistes et des Études Humaines , Summer 2002.

Bibliography [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Aloysius Taparelli ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Connolly, Michael (1947). "A Pioneer Catholic Sociologist: Luigi Taparelli S. I., 1793–1862".

Irish Jesuit Directory and Year Book .

20 : 167– 176.

Mastromatteo, Giuseppe; Solari, Stefano (2014). "Jesuits and the Italian unification: the form and the economic role of the State in the writings of Taparelli".

Pensiero Economico Italiano .

XXII (1): 11– 24.

doi : 10.1400/229527 .

Tarantino, Maria Lucia (2015). "L'organizzazione della società in Taparelli D'Azeglio: riflessioni per uno studio".

Filosofia e politica: studi in memoria di Laura Lippolis . Trento: Tangram edizioni scientifiche. pp.

427– 461.

doi : 10.1400/253680 .

ISBN 978-88-6458-128-6 .

Malusa, Luciano (2018). "Bertrando Spaventa e padre Luigi Taparelli d'Azeglio".

Bertrando Spaventa : tra unificazione nazionale e filosofia europea . Rome: Viella. pp.

43– 76.

doi : 10.23744/2826 .

ISBN 978-88-3313-349-2 .

Behr, Thomas, Luigi Taparelli and the 19th-Century Neo-Thomistic "Revolution" in Natural Law and Catholic Social Sciences , Doctoral Thesis, State University of New York at Buffalo, 2000.

Behr, Thomas (2005). "Luigi Taparelli and Social Justice. Rediscovering the Origins of a "Hollowed" Concept".

Social Justice in Context .

1 : 3– 16.

doi : 10.13140/2.1.4710.2085 .

Sulas, Cinzia (2019).

"Taparelli d'Azeglio, Prospero" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 94: Stampa–Tarantelli (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Luigi Taparelli .

Fulco, W. J. (2003).

"Taparelli D'Azeglio, Luigi" .

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 13: Seq–The (2 ed.). Detroit: Thomson Gale . p. 756.

Behr, Thomas (2005). "Luigi Taparelli D'Azeglio, S.J. (1793-1862) and the Development of Scholastic Natural-Law Thought as a Science of Society and Politics".

Journal of Markets & Morality .

6 (1).

SSRN 914562 .

Vian, Giovanni (2013).

"Taparelli d'Azeglio, Luigi" .

Il Contributo italiano alla storia del Pensiero – Storia e Politica .

Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Jesuits History Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Magis Regimini militantis Ecclesiae Exposcit debitum Ratio Studiorum Suppression of the Society of Jesus List of Jesuits Saints José de Anchieta Modeste Andlauer Edmund Arrowsmith Inácio de Azevedo Robert Bellarmine John Berchmans Jacques Berthieu Andrew Bobola Francis Borgia Jean de Brébeuf Alexander Briant John de Britto Edmund Campion Peter Canisius Juan del Castillo Noël Chabanel Peter Claver Claude de la Colombière Antoine Daniel Paul Denn Philip Evans Peter Faber Thomas Garnet Charles Garnier Aloysius Gonzaga Roque González de Santa Cruz John Soan de Goto René Goupil Melchior Grodziecki Alberto Hurtado Rémy Isoré Ignatius of Loyola Francis de Geronimo Isaac Jogues James Kisai Stanislaus Kostka Jean de Lalande Gabriel Lalemant David Lewis Lèon-Ignance Mangin Paul Miki Henry Morse John Ogilvie Nicholas Owen Joseph Pignatelli Stephen Pongracz Bernardino Realino John Francis Regis Alphonsus Rodriguez José María Rubio Robert Southwell André de Soveral Henry Walpole Francis Xavier Alfonso Rodríguez Olmedo Popes Francis Theology Diego Laynez Luis de Molina Francisco Suárez Jean Daniélou Karl Rahner Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Henri de Lubac John Courtney Murray Joseph Fitzmyer Alonso Rodriguez List of Jesuit theologians General Bollandist La Civiltà Cattolica General Congregation Superior General of the Society of Jesus Pontifical Gregorian University Pontifical Biblical Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Jesuit China missions Jesuit missions in North America List of Jesuit educational institutions International Association of Jesuit Universities Ignatian Pedagogical Paradigm Related Church of the Gesù Madonna Della Strada Saint-Pierre de Montmartre Claudio Acquaviva Category Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Spain Portugal Netherlands Greece Poland Vatican 2 Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Italian People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Luigi_Taparelli&oldid=1302040224 " Categories : 1793 births 1862 deaths 19th-century Italian Jesuits 19th-century Italian male writers 19th-century Italian philosophers Catholic philosophers Italian counter-revolutionaries Italian male non-fiction writers Italian monarchists Italian Roman Catholic writers Jesuit philosophers People from Turin Reactionary Thomists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from November 2017 Use dmy dates from May 2024 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Commons category link from Wikidata CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 01:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Luigi Taparelli 14 languages Add topic

