Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In fungi 2 In plants 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Haustorium 23 languages বাংলা Català Deutsch Eesti Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands Polski Português Simple English Slovenčina Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biological root-like structure that extracts nutrients from another organism This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Haustorium" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Hyaloperonospora parasitica : hyphae and haustoria Haustoria of creeping mistletoe in a scribbly gum A coconut sprout , the edible haustorium of germinating coconut seeds In botany and mycology , a haustorium (plural haustoria ) is a rootlike structure that grows into or around another structure to absorb water or nutrients. For example, in mistletoe or members of the broomrape family , the structure penetrates the host's tissue and draws nutrients from it. In mycology , it refers to the appendage or portion of a parasitic fungus (the hyphal tip), which performs a similar function.  Microscopic haustoria penetrate the host plant's cell wall and siphon nutrients from the space between the cell wall and plasma membrane but do not penetrate the membrane itself.

[ 1 ] Larger (usually botanical, not fungal) haustoria do this at the tissue level.

The etymology of the name corresponds to the Latin word haustor meaning the one who draws, drains or drinks , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and refers to the action performed by the outgrowth.

In fungi [ edit ] Fungi in all major divisions form haustoria. Haustoria take several forms. Generally, on penetration, the fungus increases the surface area in contact with host plasma membrane releasing enzymes that break up the cell walls, enabling greater potential movement of organic carbon from host to fungus.  Thus, an insect hosting a parasitic fungus such as Cordyceps may look as though it is being "eaten from the inside out" as the haustoria expand inside of it.

[ citation needed ] The simplest forms of haustoria are small spheres. The largest are complex formations adding significant mass to a cell, expanding between the cell wall and cell membrane. In the Chytridiomycota , the entire fungus may become enclosed in the cell, and it is arguable whether this should be considered analogous to a haustorium.

[ citation needed ] Haustoria arise from intercellular hyphae, appressoria , or external hyphae. The hypha narrows as it passes through the cell wall and then expands on invaginating the cell. A thickened, electron -dense collar of material is deposited around the hypha at the point of invagination. Further, the host cell wall becomes highly modified in the invaginated zone. Inclusions normally present in plasma membrane are absent, and the outer layer contains more polysaccharide. The wall of both partners is severely reduced.

[ citation needed ] Functional exchange takes place within the haustorial complex.  The host supplies organic carbon to the fungus, and the metabolic activity within the complex is considerably greater than outside.  Carbon from the host is absorbed by the fungus, and transported to the rest of the thallus .  The host plant appears to be functioning according to signals from the fungus and the complex appears to be under the control of the invader.

[ 4 ] The haustorium may be mycelium or root-shaped.

[ citation needed ] In plants [ edit ] Mistletoes (including Loranthaceae and Viscaceae ) attach to their hosts via a haustorium. The haustoria attacks the host's xylem and/or phloem and attaches itself to the host.

[ 5 ] This structure both anchors the mistletoe, and taps into the host plant. Mistletoes use passive mechanisms to draw water from their hosts. They keep their leaf stomata open night and day which sets up a moisture gradient between mistletoe and host.

[ 6 ] A second meaning of 'haustorium' in botany is to describe tissues in a developing plant embryo that transfer nutrients from the seed's endosperm to the embryo. These tissues are found widely in the seeds of flowering plants .

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Szabo, Les (July 3, 2001).

"Hidden robbers: The role of fungal haustoria in parasitism of plants" .

PNAS .

98 (14): 7654– 7655.

Bibcode : 2001PNAS...98.7654S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.151262398 .

PMC 35395 .

PMID 11438718 .

^ Gaffiot, Félix (1934).

Dictionnaire illustré Latin-Français (in French). Paris: Librairie Hachette. p. 737 . Retrieved 13 May 2020 .

^ haustor . Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short.

A Latin Dictionary on Perseus Project .

^ "Mycology – Structure and Function – Haustoria" . Archived from the original on 2011-02-21 . Retrieved 2010-10-17 .

^ Press, Malcolm C.; Phoenix, Gareth K. (June 2005).

"Impacts of parasitic plants on natural communities" .

New Phytologist .

166 (3): 737– 751.

Bibcode : 2005NewPh.166..737P .

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2005.01358.x .

ISSN 0028-646X .

PMID 15869638 .

^ Watson, D. M. (2011) Mistletoes of Southern Australia , CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, VIC ^ Bhatnagar, S.P. and Veena Sawhney. (1981) "Endosperm—Its Morphology, infrastructure, and Histochemistry", International Review of Cytology Bibliography [ edit ] P.M. Kirk; P.F. Cannon; D.W. Minter; J.A. Stalpers (30 November 2008).

Dictionary of the Fungi . CABI. p. 306.

ISBN 978-0-85199-826-8 . Retrieved 25 October 2012 .

Lersten, Nels R. (2004).

Flowering plant embryology with emphasis on economic species . Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Pub.

ISBN 9780470752678 .

ANBG: What is mistletoe Accessed 22 January 2018.

ANBG: Haustoria Accessed 22 January 2018.

v t e Microbiology : Fungus Outline of fungi · Outline of lichens Branch Ethnomycology Lichenology Marine fungi Medicinal fungi Mycology Mycosis Mycotoxicology Structure Reproduction/ spore teleomorph/sexual : Zygospore Ascospore / Ascus Basidiospore / Basidium / Teliospore anamorph/asexual : Sporangium Conidium Chlamydospore Oidium Pycniospore Other Hypha Haustorium Mycelium Cell wall Sporocarp Growth patterns Dimorphic fungi Mold Yeast Mushroom List Glossary of mycology List of fungal orders List of mycologists List of mycology journals Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haustorium&oldid=1291948613 " Categories : Fungal plant pathogens and diseases Plant morphology Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2007 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 10:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haustorium 23 languages Add topic

