Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Research collaborations 3 Recognition 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Kate Scholberg Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Kate Scholberg Education McGill University ( B.Sc.

), California Institute of Technology ( M.S.

, Ph.D ) Known for Supernova Neutrino Astronomy , Neutrino Oscillations Scientific career Fields Particle Physics, Astrophysics, Neutrinos Institutions Duke University Thesis "A Search for Neutrinos from Gravitational Collapse with the MACRO Experiment" Doctoral advisors Charles W. Peck and Barry Barish Website Official website Canadian American physicist Kate Scholberg is a Canadian and American neutrino physicist whose research has included experimental studies of neutrino oscillation , coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering and the detection of supernovae . She is currently the Arts & Sciences Distinguished Professor of Physics and Bass Fellow at Duke University .

[ 1 ] Education and career [ edit ] As a child in Canada, Scholberg was interested in astronomy from a young age, but as a teenager she became interested in chemistry and entered college planning to become a chemist. However, after a bad experience in an organic chemistry course, she changed her focus to physics.

[ 2 ] She graduated with a B.Sc. from McGill University in 1989, and completed her M.S. and Ph.D. at the California Institute of Technology in 1996 [ 1 ] , under the joint supervision of Charles W. Peck and Barry Barish .

[ 3 ] Her interest in neutrino physics developed out of her graduate work; thesis titled " A Search for Neutrinos from Gravitational Collapse with the MACRO Experiment ". The MACRO experiment was originally designed to search for magnetic monopoles , [ 2 ] at the Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso in Italy.

[ 4 ] After postdoctoral research at Boston University , and a junior faculty position at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , she moved to Duke University in 2004.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Before becoming Arts & Sciences Distinguished Professor of Physics at Duke, she was the Anne T. and Robert M. Bass Professor of Physics there.

[ 4 ] Research collaborations [ edit ] Scholberg is a researcher in the Super-Kamiokande and Tokai-to-Kamioka (T2K) collaborations, the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE), and the COHERENT detector at the Spallation Neutron Source of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] She has also been instrumental in the development and coordination of the SuperNova Early Warning System .

[ 2 ] Recognition [ edit ] In 2013 Scholberg was named a Fellow of the American Physical Society (APS), after a nomination by the APS Division of Particles and Fields, "for work with atmospheric and accelerator neutrinos that established the phenomenon of neutrino oscillation, and for leadership in the worldwide effort of the supernova neutrino detection".

[ 6 ] She was elected a member of the U.S.

National Academy of Sciences in May 2022.

[ 7 ] In 2023 Scholberg was awarded Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science .

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Kate Scholberg" , People , Duke Physics ^ a b c Mehta, Jatan (December 18, 2019), Interviewing neutrino-hunting particle physicist Kate Scholberg (PDF) , Tata Institute of Fundamental Research ; also online on Jatan's Space ^ a b "Kate Scholberg (Duke U.)" , Inspire , retrieved 2020-06-26 ^ a b c Kate Scholberg (PDF) , DOE/NSF Nuclear Science Advisory Committee , retrieved 2020-06-26 ^ "Kate Scholberg" , Faces of DUNE , Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment , retrieved 2020-06-26 ^ APS Fellows Nominated by DPF: 2013 , retrieved 2020-06-26 ^ News from the National Academy of Sciences: 2022 , retrieved 2022-05-23 ^ "2023 AAAS Fellows | American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)" .

www.aaas.org . Retrieved 2025-03-06 .

External links [ edit ] Home page Kate Scholberg publications indexed by Google Scholar Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF Academics ORCID Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kate_Scholberg&oldid=1293753832 " Categories : Living people American physicists American women physicists Canadian physicists Neutrino physicists Canadian women physicists McGill University alumni California Institute of Technology alumni Duke University faculty Fellows of the American Physical Society American women academics 21st-century American women Fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science Hidden categories: Official website not in Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2020 Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 13:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kate Scholberg Add languages Add topic

