Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Resource stewardship policies 1.1.1 1963: The Leopold Report 1.1.2 2012: Revisiting Leopold: Resource Stewardship in the National Parks 1.1.3 2021: Resist–Accept–Direct (RAD): A Framework for the 21st-century Natural Resource Manager 2 National Park System Toggle National Park System subsection 2.1 Holdings 2.2 Criteria 2.3 Nomenclature 2.4 Special designations 3 Visitation Toggle Visitation subsection 3.1 Entrance fees 3.2 Overnight stays 4 Budget Toggle Budget subsection 4.1 Discretionary spending 4.1.1 Resource stewardship 4.1.2 Visitor services 4.1.3 Park protection 4.1.4 Facility maintenance and operations 4.1.5 Park support 4.1.6 External administrative costs 4.2 Land and Water Conservation Fund 4.3 Historic Preservation Fund 4.4 Economic benefits 5 Concessions Toggle Concessions subsection 5.1 Litigation with Delaware North 6 Offices 7 Staff and volunteers Toggle Staff and volunteers subsection 7.1 Directors 7.2 Employees 7.3 Volunteers-In-Parks (VIP) 7.4 Artist-In-Residence 7.5 United States Park Rangers 7.6 United States Park Police 7.7 Youth programs 8 Special divisions Toggle Special divisions subsection 8.1 Centers 8.2 Preservation Programs 8.2.1 Historic American Buildings Survey 8.2.2 Historic American Engineering Record 8.2.3 Rivers, Trails and Conservation Assistance Program 8.2.4 Japanese American Confinement Sites 8.3 National Trails System 8.4 National Heritage Areas 9 Initiatives Toggle Initiatives subsection 9.1 Green Park Plan 9.1.1 Climate Friendly Parks Program 9.2 Cashless 10 Related acts 11 See also Toggle See also subsection 11.1 People 11.1.1 Individuals 11.1.2 Roles 11.2 Related organizations 11.3 Other links 12 Further reading 13 References 14 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 14.1 Other sources 15 External links Toggle the table of contents National Park Service 41 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 贛語 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°53′40″N 77°02′33″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8944°N 77.0426°W ﻿ / 38.8944; -77.0426 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia United States federal agency For the national agency in the Republic of China, see National Park Service (Taiwan) .

National Park Service National Park Service arrowhead insignia Guidon of the National Park Service Agency overview Formed August 25, 1916 ; 108 years ago ( 1916-08-25 ) Jurisdiction United States government Headquarters Main Interior Building 1849 C Street NW Washington, D.C.

20240, U.S.

Employees About 20,000 (2022) [ 1 ] (279,000 volunteers in 2019) [ 1 ] Annual budget $3.265 billion (FY2022) [ 2 ] Agency executive Jessica Bowron , Acting Director of the National Park Service Parent department Department of the Interior Website www .nps .gov /index .htm Map The National Park Service ( NPS ) is an agency of the United States federal government , within the U.S. Department of the Interior . The service manages all national parks ; most national monuments ; and other natural, historical, and recreational properties, with various title designations.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The United States Congress created the agency on August 25, 1916, through the National Park Service Organic Act .

[ 5 ] Its headquarters is in Washington, D.C.

, within the main headquarters of the Department of the Interior.

The NPS employs about 20,000 people in 433 units covering over 85 million acres (0.34 million km 2 ) in all 50 states , the District of Columbia, and U.S. territories .

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] [ 4 ] In 2019, the service had more than 279,000 volunteers.

[ 1 ] The agency is charged with preserving the ecological and historical integrity of the places entrusted to its management and with making them available for public use and enjoyment.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of the National Park Service See also: National Park Service Organic Act In 1916, a portfolio of nine major parks was published to generate interest. Printed on each brochure was a map showing the parks and principal railroad connections.

In 1934, a series of ten postage stamps was issued to commemorate the reorganization and expansion of the National Park Service.

NPS Preliminary Survey party, Great Smoky Mountains , 1931 Artist George Catlin , during an 1832 trip to the Dakotas, was perhaps the first to suggest the concept of a national park. Indian civilization, wildlife, and wilderness were all in danger, wrote Catlin, unless they could be preserved "by some great protecting policy of government ... in a magnificent park ... A nation's Park, containing man and beast, in all the wild[ness] and freshness of their nature's beauty!" [ 7 ] Yellowstone National Park was created as the first national park in the United States.

[ 8 ] In 1872, there was no state government to manage it (Wyoming was a U.S. territory at that time), so the federal government managed it directly through the army, including the famed African American Buffalo Soldier units.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The movement for an independent agency to oversee these federal lands was spearheaded by business magnate and conservationist Stephen Mather .

[ 10 ] With the help of journalist Robert Sterling Yard , Mather ran a publicity campaign for the Department of the Interior . They wrote numerous articles that praised the scenic and historic qualities of the parks and their possibilities for educational, inspirational, and recreational benefits.

[ 11 ] This campaign resulted in the creation of the NPS. On August 25, 1916, President Woodrow Wilson signed the National Park Service Organic Act that mandated the agency "to conserve the scenery and the natural and historic objects and wildlife therein, and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations".

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Mather became the first director of the newly formed NPS.

[ 14 ] On March 3, 1933, President Herbert Hoover signed the Reorganization Act of 1933. The act gave the president the authority to transfer national monuments from one governmental department to another.

[ 15 ] Later that summer, new president Franklin D. Roosevelt made use of this power after NPS Deputy Director Horace M. Albright suggested that the NPS, rather than the War Department , should manage historic American Civil War sites.

[ 15 ] President Roosevelt agreed and issued two executive orders to implement the reorganization. These two executive orders transferred to the NPS all of the War Department's historic sites as well as national monuments that the Department of Agriculture had managed and parks in and around Washington, D.C. that an independent federal office had previously operated.

[ 16 ] NPS staff sitting on the set for the 1972 Centennial for the creation of the first National Park (the Yellowstone NP ), in a NBC Today Show . Left to right: George Hartzog , William Everhart, Frank McGee and Jack K. Anderson.

The popularity of the parks after the end of the World War II left them overburdened with demands that the NPS could not meet. In 1951, Conrad Wirth became director of the NPS and began to bring park facilities up to the standards that the public was expecting.

[ 17 ] In 1952, with the support of President Dwight D. Eisenhower , Wirth began Mission 66 , a ten-year effort to upgrade and expand park facilities for the 50th anniversary of the Park Service. New parks were added to preserve unique resources and existing park facilities were upgraded and expanded.

[ 16 ] In 1966, as the Park Service turned 50 years old, emphasis began to turn from just saving great and wonderful scenery and unique natural features to making parks accessible to the public.

[ 18 ] Director George Hartzog began the process with the creation of the National Lakeshores and then National Recreation Areas .

Resource stewardship policies [ edit ] 1963: The Leopold Report [ edit ] A 1963 report titled "Wildlife Management in the National Parks" was prepared by a five-member advisory board on Wildlife Management, appointed by United States Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall .

[ 19 ] This report came to be referred to in later years by its chairman and principal author, A. Starker Leopold . The Leopold Report was just fourteen pages in length, but it set forth ecosystem management recommendations that would guide parks policy until it was revisited in 2012.

The Leopold Report was the first concrete plan for managing park visitors and ecosystems under unified principles.

[ 20 ] Park management issues and controversies addressed in this report included the difficulties of managing elk populations in Yellowstone National Park and how "overprotection from natural ground fires" in California's Sequoia National Park , Kings Canyon National Park , and Yosemite National Park had begun to threaten groves of Giant Sequoia with catastrophic wildfires. The report also established a historical baseline that read, "The goal of managing the national parks and monuments should be to preserve, or where necessary to recreate, the ecologic scene as viewed by the first European visitors." This baseline would guide ecological restoration in national parks until a climate change adaptation policy, "Resist-Adapt-Direct", was established in 2021.

2012: Revisiting Leopold: Resource Stewardship in the National Parks [ edit ] NPS publication, 2012 National Parks director Jonathan Jarvis charged the twelve-member NPS Advisory Board Science Committee to take a fresh look at the ecological issues and make recommendations for updating the original Leopold Report. The committee published their 23-page report in 2012, titled, "Revisiting Leopold: Resource Stewardship in the National Parks".

[ 21 ] The report recommended that parks leadership "manage for change while confronting uncertainty." "... New and emerging scientific disciplines — including conservation biology, global change science, and genomics — along with new technological tools like high-resolution remote sensing can provide significant information for constructing contemporary tactics for NPS stewardship. This knowledge is essential to a National Park Service that is science-informed at all organizational levels and able to respond with contemporary strategies for resource management and ultimately park stewardship." 2021: Resist–Accept–Direct (RAD): A Framework for the 21st-century Natural Resource Manager [ edit ] The "Revisiting Leopold" report mentioned climate change three times and "climate refugia" once, but it did not prescribe or offer any management tactics that could help park managers with the problems of climate change. Hence, the 2020 NPS-led report specific to the need for climate adaptation : "Resist–Accept–Direct (RAD): A Framework for the 21st-century Natural Resource Manager." [ 22 ] This "Natural Resource Report" has ten authors. Among them are four associated with the National Park Service, three with the US Fish and Wildlife Service , and two with the US Geological Survey — all of which are government agencies within the US Department of Interior.

The report's Executive Summary, points to "intensifying global change." "... The convention of using baseline conditions to define goals for today's resource management is increasingly untenable, presenting practical and philosophical challenges for managers. As formerly familiar ecological conditions continue to change, bringing novelty, surprise, and uncertainty, natural resource managers require a new, shared approach to make conservation decisions.... The RAD (Resist–Accept–Direct) decision framework has emerged over the past decade as a simple tool that captures the entire decision space for responding to ecosystems facing the potential for rapid, irreversible ecological change." [ 22 ] The three RAD options are: Resist the trajectory, by working to maintain or restore ecosystem composition, structure, processes, or function on the basis of historical or acceptable current conditions; Accept the trajectory, by allowing ecosystem composition, structure, processes, or function to change autonomously; or Direct the trajectory, by actively shaping ecosystem composition, structure, processes, or function toward preferred new conditions.

[ 23 ] The RAD framework emerged from efforts by the NPS and partners since 2015 to hone a tool that could integrate into standard resource-management planning processes and thereby foster strategic thinking and clear communication about how to steward transforming ecosystems. It built on the Resist–Accept–Guide framework first proposed in the 2012 book Beyond Naturalness: Rethinking Park and Wilderness Stewardship in an Era of Rapid Change.

[ 24 ] The NPS and partners in 2021 replaced the 2012 term "guide" with "direct." This explicitly recognized the potential for strong intervention at key points to foster preferred new conditions. Initially, the NPS experimented with the term "accommodate" in place of "accept." This early formulation appeared in a 2016 NPS publication: Coastal Adaptation Strategies Handbook .

[ 25 ] Another interagency publication in 2016 also used the term "accommodate": Resource Management and Operations in Central North Dakota: Climate change scenario planning workshop summary .

[ 26 ] In 2020, the "Resist-Accept-Direct" framework was used in a paper published in the journal Fisheries . Eighteen researchers from federal and state agencies and universities collaborated in this effort, which included short case studies of where and how this framework had already been applied.

[ 27 ] The interagency efforts to forge a climate-adaptive framework culminated in a January 2022 series of six articles in the journal BioScience . These were grouped in the "Special Section on the Resist–Accept–Direct Framework." [ 28 ] In 2024, the RAD Framework was included in an NPS policy memorandum titled "Managing National Parks in an Era of Climate Change." [ 29 ] That memorandum also links to the three previous statements pertaining to NPS climate change responses and adaptation (2012, 2014, and 2015).

National Park System [ edit ] See also: List of the United States National Park System official units and List of areas in the United States National Park System Further information: African-American Heritage Sites , Hispanic Heritage Sites , Native American Heritage Sites (National Park Service) , and Women's history sites (National Park Service) Grand Canyon National Park , south rim of canyon.

The National Park System includes all properties managed by the National Park Service, which have a wide variety of titles or designations. The system as a whole is considered to be a national treasure of the United States, and some of the more famous national parks and monuments are sometimes referred to as " crown jewels ".

[ 30 ] The system encompasses approximately 85.1 million acres (0.344 million km 2 ), of which 2.6 million acres (0.011 million km 2 ) remain in private ownership. The largest unit is Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve , Alaska. At 13,200,000 acres (53,000 km 2 ), it is over 16 percent of the entire system. The smallest unit in the system is Thaddeus Kosciuszko National Memorial , Pennsylvania , at 0.02 acres (80 m 2 ).

In addition to administering its units and other properties, the NPS also provides technical and financial assistance to several affiliated areas authorized by Congress. The largest affiliated area is New Jersey Pinelands National Reserve at 1,164,025 acres (4711 km 2 ). The smallest is Benjamin Franklin National Memorial at less than 0.01 acres (40 m 2 ).

While there are laws generally covering all units of the National Park System, they are subject to management policies of individual pieces of authorizing legislation or, in the case of national monuments created under the Antiquities Act , Executive Order . For example, because of provisions within their enabling legislation, Congaree National Park is almost entirely a wilderness area devoid of development, yet Yosemite allows unique developments such as the Badger Pass Ski Area and the O'Shaughnessy Dam within its boundaries. Such irregularities would not be found in other parks unless specifically provided for with exceptions by the legislation that created them.

Holdings [ edit ] Type Amount (2008) [ 31 ] Area of land 84,000,000 acres 340,000 km 2 Area of oceans, lakes, reservoirs 4,502,644 acres 18,222 km 2 Length of perennial rivers and streams 85,049 mi 136,873 km Archeological sites 68,561 Length of shoreline 43,162 mi 69,463 km Historic structures 27,000 Objects in museum collections 121,603,193 Buildings 21,000 Trails 12,250 mi 19,710 km Roads 8,500 mi 13,700 km Criteria [ edit ] Most NPS units have been established by an act of Congress, with the president confirming the action by signing the act into law. The exception, under the Antiquities Act , allows the president to designate and protect areas as national monuments by executive order. Regardless of the method used, all parks are to be of national importance.

[ 32 ] A potential park should meet all four of the following standards: [ 33 ] It is an outstanding example of a particular type of resource.

It possesses exceptional value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the natural or cultural themes of the nation's heritage.

It offers superlative opportunities for recreation, for public use and enjoyment, or for scientific study.

It retains a high degree of integrity as a true, accurate, and relatively unspoiled example of the resource.

Before creation of a new unit, Congress typically directs the NPS to conduct a special resource study of a site to determine its national significance and suitability to be part of the National Park System.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Nomenclature [ edit ] The NPS uses over 20 different titles for the park units it manages, including national park and national monument .

[ 36 ] Classifications (2023) [ 37 ] Number (2024) Area (2023) [ 38 ] Visitors (2023) [ 39 ] National Park 63 52,520,984.26 acres (212,545 km 2 ) 92,390,204 National Monument 87 1,993,636.12 acres (8,068 km 2 ) 13,786,614 National Lakeshore (3) and National Seashore (10) 13 810,799.10 acres (3,281 km 2 ) 25,763,241 National Memorial 31 10,499.77 acres (42 km 2 ) 41,152,084 National Preserve (19) and National Reserve (2) 21 24,617,971.50 acres (99,625 km 2 ) 5,168,136 National Recreation Area 18 3,710,771.17 acres (15,017 km 2 ) 51,443,904 National River (4) and National Wild and Scenic River (10) 14 696,717.08 acres (2,820 km 2 ) 5,570,302 National Parkway 4 183,952.75 acres (744 km 2 ) 32,316,093 National Historical Park (63), National Historic Site (76), and International Historic Site (1) 140 231,558.77 acres (937 km 2 ) 35,738,635 National Military Park (9), National Battlefield Park (4), National Battlefield Site (1), and National Battlefield (11) 25 85,009.53 acres (344 km 2 ) 8,568,423 National Scenic Trail 6 255,177.96 acres (1,033 km 2 ) Not available Other Designations 11 38,889.24 acres (157 km 2 ) 7,619,103 Totals 433 85,155,967.25 acres (344,614 km 2 ) 319,516,739 National parks preserve nationally and globally significant scenic areas and nature reserves.

v t e National parks of the United States List of national parks of the United States (by elevation ) Acadia American Samoa Arches Badlands Big Bend Biscayne Black Canyon of the Gunnison Bryce Canyon Canyonlands Capitol Reef Carlsbad Caverns Channel Islands Congaree Crater Lake Cuyahoga Valley Death Valley Denali Dry Tortugas Everglades Gates of the Arctic Gateway Arch Glacier Glacier Bay Grand Canyon Grand Teton Great Basin Great Sand Dunes Great Smoky Mountains Guadalupe Mountains Haleakalā Hawaiʻi Volcanoes Hot Springs Indiana Dunes Isle Royale Joshua Tree Katmai Kenai Fjords Kings Canyon Kobuk Valley Lake Clark Lassen Volcanic Mammoth Cave Mesa Verde Mount Rainier New River Gorge North Cascades Olympic Petrified Forest Pinnacles Redwood Rocky Mountain Saguaro Sequoia Shenandoah Theodore Roosevelt Virgin Islands Voyageurs White Sands Wind Cave Wrangell–St. Elias Yellowstone Yosemite Zion National monuments preserve a single unique cultural or natural feature.

Devils Tower National Monument was the first in 1906. While the National Park Service holds the most national monuments, a monument may be managed or co-managed by a different entity such as the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service .

v t e National monuments of the United States National Park Service African Burial Ground Agate Fossil Beds Alibates Flint Quarries Aniakchak Aztec Ruins Bandelier Belmont-Paul Women's Equality Birmingham Civil Rights Booker T. Washington Buck Island Reef Cabrillo Camp Nelson Canyon de Chelly Cape Krusenstern Capulin Volcano Carlisle Federal Indian Boarding School Casa Grande Ruins Castillo de San Marcos Castle Clinton Castle Mountains Cedar Breaks César E. Chávez Charles Young Buffalo Soldiers Chiricahua Colorado Craters of the Moon Devils Postpile Devils Tower Dinosaur Effigy Mounds El Malpais El Morro Emmett Till and Mamie Till-Mobley Florissant Fossil Beds Fort Frederica Fort Matanzas Fort McHenry Fort Monroe Fort Pulaski Fort Stanwix Fort Union Fossil Butte Frances Perkins Freedom Riders George Washington Birthplace George Washington Carver Gila Cliff Dwellings Governors Island Grand Portage Hagerman Fossil Beds Hohokam Pima Hovenweep Jewel Cave John Day Fossil Beds Katahdin Woods and Waters Lava Beds Little Bighorn Battlefield Medgar and Myrlie Evers Home Mill Springs Battlefield Montezuma Castle Muir Woods Natural Bridges Navajo Oregon Caves Organ Pipe Cactus Petroglyph Pipe Spring Pipestone Poverty Point Rainbow Bridge Russell Cave Salinas Pueblo Missions Scotts Bluff Springfield 1908 Race Riot Statue of Liberty Stonewall Sunset Crater Volcano Timpanogos Cave Tonto Tule Lake Tule Springs Fossil Beds Tuzigoot Virgin Islands Coral Reef Waco Mammoth Walnut Canyon Wupatki Yucca House US Forest Service Admiralty Island Baaj Nwaavjo I'tah Kukveni – Ancestral Footprints of the Grand Canyon Bears Ears Berryessa Snow Mountain Browns Canyon Camp Hale – Continental Divide Chimney Rock Giant Sequoia Gila Cliff Dwellings Misty Fjords Mount St. Helens Newberry Saint Francis Dam Disaster San Gabriel Mountains Sand to Snow Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains Sáttítla Highlands Bureau of Land Management Agua Fria Avi Kwa Ame Baaj Nwaavjo I'tah Kukveni – Ancestral Footprints of the Grand Canyon Basin and Range Bears Ears Berryessa Snow Mountain Browns Canyon California Coastal Canyons of the Ancients Carrizo Plain Cascade–Siskiyou Chuckwalla Craters of the Moon Fort Ord Gold Butte Grand Canyon–Parashant Grand Staircase–Escalante Ironwood Forest Jurassic Kasha-Katuwe Tent Rocks Mojave Trails Organ Mountains–Desert Peaks Pompeys Pillar Prehistoric Trackways Río Grande del Norte San Juan Islands Sand to Snow Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains Sonoran Desert Upper Missouri River Breaks Vermilion Cliffs Other ( FWS , DOE , AFRH , NOAA , USAF , Army ) Aleutian Islands World War II Carlisle Federal Indian Boarding School Castner Range Hanford Reach Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Marianas Trench Marine Military Working Dog Teams Northeast Canyons and Seamounts Pacific Islands Heritage Marine Papahānaumokuākea Marine President Lincoln's Cottage at the Soldiers' Home Rose Atoll Marine Tule Lake Full Detailed List National preserves are for the protection of certain resources and operate similar to many National Parks, but allow limited resource extraction. Activities like hunting, fishing, and some mining may be allowed depending on the site.

Big Cypress National Preserve and Big Thicket National Preserve were created in 1974 as the first national preserves.

National reserves are similar to national preserves, but the operational authority can be placed with a state or local government.

New Jersey Pinelands National Reserve was the first to be established in 1978.

[ 40 ] Customs House at the Salem Maritime National Historic Site in Salem, Massachusetts National historic sites protect a significant cultural resource that is not a complicated site.

National historical parks are larger areas with more complex subjects. Historic sites may also be protected in other unit types.

v t e National Historical Parks of the United States Abraham Lincoln Birthplace Adams Appomattox Court House Blackstone River Valley Boston Brown v. Board of Education Cane River Creole Cedar Creek and Belle Grove Chaco Culture Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Colonial Cumberland Gap Dayton Aviation Heritage First State Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie George Rogers Clark Golden Spike Harpers Ferry Harriet Tubman Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Homestead Hopewell Culture Independence Jean Lafitte Jimmy Carter Kalaupapa Kaloko-Honokōhau Keweenaw Klondike Gold Rush Lewis and Clark Lowell Lyndon B. Johnson Manhattan Project Marsh-Billings-Rockefeller Martin Luther King Jr.

Minute Man Morristown Natchez New Bedford Whaling New Orleans Jazz Nez Perce Ocmulgee Mounds Palo Alto Battlefield Paterson Great Falls Pecos Pullman Puʻuhonua o Hōnaunau Reconstruction Era Rosie the Riveter World War II Home Front Saint-Gaudens Salt River Bay San Antonio Missions San Francisco Maritime San Juan Island Saratoga Sitka Ste. Genevieve Thomas Edison Tumacácori Valley Forge War in the Pacific Weir Farm Women's Rights Full alphabetical list Winter at the Gettysburg Battlefield National military parks , battlefield parks , battlefield sites , and battlefields preserve areas associated with military history. The different designations reflect the complexity of the event and the site. Many of the sites preserve important Revolutionary War battles and Civil War battlefields.

Military parks are the sites of larger actions, such as Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park , Vicksburg National Military Park , Gettysburg National Military Park , and Shiloh National Military Park —the original four from 1890.

Examples of battlefield parks , battlefield sites , and national battlefields include Richmond National Battlefield Park , Brices Cross Roads National Battlefield Site , and Antietam National Battlefield .

National memorials are areas that officially memorialize a person or event, though unlike a National Historical Site, may or may not be placed at a specific historical location. Several national memorials are on the National Mall , such as the Washington Monument and Lincoln Memorial .

National seashores and national lakeshores offer preservation of the national coast line, while supporting water–based recreation.

Cape Hatteras National Seashore was created in 1937.

Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore and Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore , created in 1966, were the first national lakeshores.

National rivers and wild and scenic riverways protect free-flowing streams over their length. The riverways may not be altered with dams, channelization, or other changes. Recreational pursuits are encouraged along the waterways.

Ozark National Scenic Riverways was established in 1964.

v t e United States National Lakeshores, National Seashores , and National Rivers National Lakeshores Apostle Islands Pictured Rocks Sleeping Bear Dunes National Seashores Assateague Island Canaveral Cape Cod Cape Hatteras Cape Lookout Cumberland Island Fire Island Gulf Islands Padre Island Point Reyes National Rivers Alagnak WR Big South Fork Bluestone NSR Buffalo River Great Egg Harbor NSRR Middle Delaware NSR Mississippi River Missouri NRR Niobrara NSR Obed WSR Ozark Rio Grande WSR Saint Croix NSR Upper Delaware SRR National recreation areas originally were units surrounding reservoirs impounded by dams built by other federal agencies, the first being Lake Mead National Recreation Area . Some national recreation areas are in urban centers, such as Gateway National Recreation Area and Golden Gate National Recreation Area , which encompass significant cultural as well as natural resources.

v t e National recreation areas of the United States National Park Service Amistad Bighorn Canyon Boston Harbor Islands Chattahoochee River Chickasaw Curecanti Delaware Water Gap Gateway Gauley River Glen Canyon Golden Gate Lake Chelan Lake Mead Lake Meredith Lake Roosevelt Ross Lake Santa Monica Mountains Whiskeytown–Shasta–Trinity U.S. Forest Service Allegheny Arapaho Ed Jenkins Flaming Gorge Grand Island Hells Canyon Jemez Land Between The Lakes Moosalamoo Mount Baker Mount Hood Mount Rogers Oregon Dunes Pine Ridge Rattlesnake Robert T. Stafford White Rocks Sawtooth Smith River Spring Mountains Spruce Knob–Seneca Rocks Whiskeytown–Shasta–Trinity Winding Stair Mountain Bureau of Land Management White Mountains The National Trails System preserves long-distance routes across America. The system was created in 1968 and consists of two major components: National scenic trails are long-distance trails through some of the most scenic parts of the country. They received official protection in 1968. The Appalachian Trail is the best known.

National historic trails commemorate the routes of major historic events. Some of the best known are the Trail of Tears , the Mormon Trail , and the Santa Fe Trail . These trails are administered by several federal agencies.

v t e U.S. National Trails System National Historic Trails Scenic motor routes Butterfield Overland California Trail El Camino Real de los Tejas Trail El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro Juan Bautista de Anza Trail Mormon Trail Nez Perce Trail Old Spanish Trail Oregon Trail Pony Express Trail Santa Fe Trail Selma to Montgomery Trail Trail of Tears Washington–Rochambeau Revolutionary Route Natural surface trails Ala Kahakai Trail Chilkoot Trail Iditarod Trail Water trails Captain John Smith Chesapeake Trail Combination Lewis and Clark Trail (motor, land, and water) Overmountain Victory Trail (motor and land) Star-Spangled Banner Trail (motor and water) National Scenic Trails Appalachian Trail by state Arizona Trail Continental Divide Trail New England Trail Florida Trail Ice Age Trail Natchez Trace Trail North Country Trail by state Pacific Crest Trail Pacific Northwest Trail Potomac Heritage Trail National Geologic Trail Ice Age Floods Trail National Recreation Trails Category Related Triple Crown of Hiking Special designations [ edit ] Wilderness areas are part of the National Wilderness Preservation System , which consists of federally managed lands that are of a pristine condition, established by the Wilderness Act (Public Law 88-577) in 1964. The National Wilderness Preservation System originally created hundreds of wilderness zones within already protected federally administered property, consisting of over 9 million acres (36,000 km 2 ).

Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) began with Executive Order 13158 in May 2000, when official MPAs were established for the first time.

[ 41 ] The initial listing of U.S. areas was presented in 2010, consisting of areas already set aside under other legislation. The NPS has 19 park units designated as MPAs.

[ 41 ] Visitation [ edit ] The National Park System received over 325 million recreation visits in 2023.

[ 39 ] Park visitation grew 64 percent between 1979 and 2015.

[ 42 ] In 2024, NPS reported a record 331.9 million recreation visits.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] The 10 most-visited units of the National Park System handle around 30 percent of the overall visits. The top 10 percent of parks (43) handle over 64 percent of all visits, leaving the remaining more than 380 units to accommodate around 36 percent of visits.

[ 39 ] (Note that only 380 sites recorded visitors during 2021 due to COVID-19-related closures).

[ 42 ] Park Rank (2023) [ 39 ] Visits (2023) [ 39 ] Rank (2024) [ 43 ] Visits (2024) [ 43 ] Blue Ridge Parkway [ a ] 1 16,757,635 2 16,733,639 Golden Gate National Recreation Area 2 14,953,882 1 17,187,508 Great Smoky Mountains National Park [ b ] 3 13,297,647 3 12,191,834 Gateway National Recreation Area 4 8,705,329 4 8,929,035 Gulf Islands National Seashore 5 8,277,857 6 7,801,176 Lincoln Memorial 6 8,099,148 5 8,479,349 George Washington Memorial Parkway 7 7,391,260 8 6,782,717 Natchez Trace Parkway 8 6,784,853 7 7,364,833 Lake Mead National Recreation Area 9 5,798,541 9 6,412,854 Glen Canyon National Recreation Area 10 5,206,934 15 4,725,610 Vietnam Veterans Memorial 11 5,039,454 10 5,295,711 Notes : ^ When Hurricane Helene hit the area September 27–29, 2024, the Blue Ridge Parkway received major damage and was closed during peak tourist season.

[ 45 ] Repairs were ongoing in February 2025.

[ 46 ] ^ Parts of Great Smoky Mountains National Park closed after Hurricane Helene hit the area in September 2024 and remained closed as of January 2025.

[ 47 ] Entrance fees [ edit ] Main article: List of fee areas in the United States National Park System Most areas of the National Park System do not charge entrance fees and are completely supported by tax dollars, although some of the most popular areas do charge entrance fees. Fees vary site to site and are charged either on a per-vehicle or per-person basis, with most passes valid for 7 days. The America the Beautiful Pass series waives the per-vehicle fee or per-person fee for the holder and up to 3 other adults (children age 15 and younger are admitted for free at most sites). Annual passes for single areas are also available for those who visit the same site often.

Overnight stays [ edit ] Over 15 million visitors spent a night in one of the national park units during 2015. The largest number (3.68 million) were tent campers. The second largest group (3.38 million) stayed in one of the lodges, followed by miscellaneous stays (on boats, group sites—2.15 million). The last three groups of over-night visitors included RV campers (2.26 million), backcountry campers (2.02 million) and users of the concession-run campgrounds (1.42 million).

[ 48 ] Budget [ edit ] See also: United States federal budget and United States budget process In 2019, the NPS had an annual budget of $4.085 billion and an estimated $12 billion maintenance backlog.

[ 49 ] On August 4, 2020, the Great American Outdoors Act was signed into law reducing the $12 billion maintenance backlog by $9.5 billion over a 5-year period beginning in FY 2021.

[ 50 ] As of 2022, the NPS had the largest budget allocation of any Department of the Interior bureau or program.

[ 51 ] The NPS budget is divided into two primary areas, discretionary and mandatory spending. Within each of these areas, there are numerous specific purposes to which Congress directs the services activities.

[ 52 ] The NPS budget includes discretionary spending which is broken out into two portions: the direct operations of the National Parks and the special initiatives.

[ 53 ] Listed separately are the special initiatives of the service for the year specified in the legislation. During fiscal year 2010, the service was charged with five initiatives. They include: stewardship and education; professional excellence; youth programs; climate change impacts; and budget restructure and realignment.

[ 53 ] Discretionary spending [ edit ] NPS Operations of the National Parks budget from FY 2001-FY 2006 Discretionary spending includes the Operations of the National Parks (ONPS), from which all park operations are paid. The United States Park Police funds cover the high-profile law enforcement operations at some of the large parks, including Gateway National Recreation Area , Golden Gate National Recreation Area , and the National Mall . The National Recreation and Preservation Program and the Urban Park and Recreation Fund are outreach programs to support state and local outdoor recreational activities.

[ 52 ] The ONPS section of the budget is divided into six operational areas. These areas include: Resource stewardship [ edit ] These are funds and people directed towards the restoration, preservation, and maintenance of natural and cultural resources. The resource staff includes biologists, geologists, archeologists, museum curators, preservation specialists, and a variety of specialized employees to restore and preserve cultural buildings or natural features.

[ 53 ] Visitor services [ edit ] The NPS allocates funds obtained from its visitor services for use in public programs and for educational programs for the general public and school groups. Park rangers trained in providing walks, talks, and educational programs to the public frequently conduct such programs. Media specialists prepare exhibits along trails, roads and in visitor contact facilities, as well as written brochures and web-sites.

[ 53 ] Park protection [ edit ] This includes the staff responding to visitor emergencies (criminal, medical, search and rescue), and the protection of the park's natural and cultural resources from damage by those persons visiting the park. The staff includes law enforcement rangers , park police , lifeguards, criminal investigators, and communication center operators.

[ 53 ] In many instances they also work with state and territorial fish and wildlife management agency rangers .

Facility maintenance and operations [ edit ] This is the cost of maintaining the necessary infrastructure within each park that supports all the services provided. It includes the plows and heavy equipment for road clearing, repairs and construction. There are buildings, trails, roads, docks, boats, utility pipes and wires, and a variety of hidden systems that make a park accessible by the public. The staff includes equipment operators, custodians, trail crews, electricians, plumbers, engineers, architects, and other building trade specialists.

[ 53 ] Park support [ edit ] This is the staff that provides for the routine logistical needs of the parks. There are human resource specialists, contracting officers, property specialists, budget managers, accountants and information technology specialists.

[ 53 ] External administrative costs [ edit ] The NPS pays external administrative costs to outside organizations that provide the logistical support that the NPS needs to operate its facilities. These costs include rent payments to the General Services Administration for building space, postage payments to the postal machine vendor and other direct payments.

[ 53 ] Functional area FY 2010 (in thousands) [ 53 ] [ 54 ] % of total Resource stewardship $347,328 15.3% Visitor services $247,386 10.9% Park protection $368,698 16.3% Facility maintenance and operations $705,220 31.1% Park support $441,854 19.5% External administrative costs $155,530 6.9% Total (2010) $2,266,016 Land and Water Conservation Fund [ edit ] The Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) supports Land Acquisition and State Conservation Assistance (SCA) grant programs. In 2010, the LWCF began an incremental process to fully fund its programs at a total cost of $900 million. The Department of the Interior and the United States Forest Service use these funds to purchase critical lands to protect existing public lands.

The LWCF also issues grants to States and local jurisdictions to preserve and protect Civil War battlefield sites that are not part of the national park system. The SCA program distributes funds for land preservation to individual states.

[ 53 ] Historic Preservation Fund [ edit ] The National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 set the federal vision for historic preservation in the United States. To support the vision and framework laid out in this act, the Historic Preservation Fund (HPF) was established in 1977 to provide financial assistance to, originally, states, to carry out activities related to preservation. Funding is provided from Outer Continental Shelf oil and gas lease revenues, not tax dollars, and an amount is appropriated annually by Congress. Awards from the HPF are made to States, Tribes, Territories, local governments, and non-profits.

[ 55 ] Two specific programs include the Save America's Treasures and the Preserve America . The Historic Preservation Offices makes grants available to the States, territories, and tribal lands.

[ 53 ] To honor the 250th anniversary of the United States, Congress authorized the Semiquincentennial Grant in 2020 to support the preservation of State owned sites and structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places that commemorate the founding of the nation.

[ 56 ] Economic benefits [ edit ] The NPS affects economies at national, state, and local levels. According to a 2011 Michigan State University report prepared for the NPS, for each $1 invested in the NPS, the American public receives $4 in economic value.

[ 57 ] In 2011, national parks generated $30.1 billion in economic activity and 252,000 jobs nationwide. Thirteen billion of that amount went directly into communities within 60 miles of a NPS unit.

In a 2017 study, the NPS found that 331 million park visitors spent $18.2 billion in local areas around National Parks across the nation. This spending helped support 306,000 jobs. The NPS expenditures supported $297 million in economic output in Missouri alone.

[ 58 ] Despite these economic advantages in February 2025 in an effort to decrease federal spending over 1,000 NPS employees were fired, leaving many sites grossly understaffed.

[ 59 ] Concessions [ edit ] In an effort to increase visitation and allow for a larger audience to enjoy national park land, the NPS has numerous concession contracts with private businesses to bring recreation, resorts and other compatible amenities to their parks. NPS lodging opportunities exist at places such as the Wawona Hotel in Yosemite National Park and the Fort Baker Retreat and Conference Center in Golden Gate National Recreation Area .

Delaware North Corporation at Yosemite National Park , Yellowstone National Park , South Rim Grand Canyon National Park .

Forever Resorts at Big Bend National Park , Blue Ridge Parkway , Badlands National Park , North Rim of Grand Canyon National Park , Olympic National Park , Lake Mead National Recreation Area , Mammoth Cave National Park , Isle Royale National Park , and Rocky Mountain National Park .

Xanterra Parks & Resorts at Bryce Canyon National Park , Crater Lake National Park , Death Valley National Park , South Rim Grand Canyon National Park , Mount Rushmore National Memorial , Painted Desert at Petrified Forest National Park , Yellowstone National Park , and Zion National Park .

Litigation with Delaware North [ edit ] In 2015, Delaware North sued the NPS in the United States Court of Federal Claims for breach of contract, alleging that the NPS had undervalued its trademarks of the names of iconic Yosemite National Park concession facilities.

[ 60 ] The NPS estimated the value of the intangible assets including the names "Ahwahnee", "Badger Pass", "Curry Village", and "Yosemite Lodge" at $3.5 million. Delaware North lost the contract, and asserted that the historic names were worth $51 million and maintained that the incoming concessioner had to be paid that amount.

[ 61 ] The Justice Department and the NPS asserted that this was an "improper and wildly inflated" value. Rather than pay Delaware North's demanded valuation, in January 2016 the NPS instead opted to rename the famous landmarks, effective in March. The Ahwahnee Hotel is slated to become The Majestic Yosemite Hotel, Curry Village will become Half Dome Village, and the Wawona Hotel will become Big Trees Lodge.

[ 62 ] Widespread public outcry focused on Delaware North's decision to claim ownership of names within a national park.

[ 63 ] The names were restored in 2019 upon settlement of the dispute.

[ 64 ] Offices [ edit ] Main article: Organization of the National Park Service Depicts twelve figures, most in NPS uniforms, shown in occupations from left to right: a lifeguard, a Civil War reenactor, fire management, mounted patrol, researcher and/or natural resources with fish, a female ranger with two visitors, a laborer, a climber/rescuer, and a youth with a male ranger.

The national headquarters is located in the Main Interior Building , 1849 C Street NW, several blocks southwest of the White House . The central office is composed of eleven directorates: director/deputy directors; business services; workforce management; chief information officer; cultural resources; natural resource stewardship and science; office of the comptroller; park planning, facilities and lands; partnerships and visitor experience; visitor and resource protection; and the United States Park Police .

[ 65 ] Regional offices are in Anchorage , Atlanta , Lakewood, CO ( Denver ), Omaha, NE , Philadelphia , San Francisco and Seattle . The headquarters building of the National Park Service Southwest Regional Office is architecturally significant and is designated a National Historic Landmark .

The NPS is an operating unit of the U.S. Department of the Interior . The NPS director is nominated by the president of the United States and confirmed by the United States Senate .

[ 66 ] The director is supported by six senior executives.

These executives manage national programs, policy, and budget from the Washington, DC, headquarters. Under the deputy director of operations are seven regional directors, who are responsible for national park management and program implementation. Together this group is called the National Leadership Council .

[ 67 ] Staff and volunteers [ edit ] Directors [ edit ] Main article: Director of the National Park Service Stephen Mather (center) and his staff, 1927 or 1928 Chuck Sams , NPS Director from 2021–2025 Employees [ edit ] National Park Service employment levels. Executives: abt 27; Gen Sch: 16–17,000; Others: 6–7,000 [ 68 ] By the mid-1950s, the primary employees of the service were the park rangers, who had broad responsibilities on the parks' behalf. They cleaned up trash, operated heavy equipment, fought fires, managed traffic, cleared trails and roads, provided information to visitors, managed museums, performed rescues, flew aircraft, and investigated crime.

[ 69 ] The NPS employs many kinds of workers: National Park Service Ranger Interpreter Law enforcement Park management (Superintendent/Deputy) United States Park Police Emergency management (Emergency medical providers, search and rescue specialists) Lifeguards Dispatchers Maintenance (including carpenters , plumbers , masons, laborers, auto mechanics, motor vehicle operators, heavy equipment operators , electricians ) Park planning Architects , engineers , and landscape architects Resource management (including archeologist, biologist , botanist , aquatics, soil scientist, geologist ) History ( curators , historians , preservation technicians, historic architects, archivists ) Fire management (managers, weather specialist, firefighters , engine captains, crew superintendents, battalion chiefs) Public affairs Administration (human resources, finance, accountants, information technology, budgeting, concessions management) Locations are varied. Parks exist in the nation's larger cities like New York City ( Federal Hall Memorial National Historic Site), Atlanta ( Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site ), and San Diego ( Cabrillo National Monument ) to some of the remotest areas of the continent like Hovenweep National Monument in southeastern Utah, to Aniakchak National Monument in King Salmon, Alaska .

[ 70 ] Volunteers-In-Parks (VIP) [ edit ] The Volunteers-In-Parks program was authorized in 1969 by the Volunteers in the Parks Act of 1969.

[ 71 ] for the purpose of allowing the public to serve in the nations parks providing support and skills for their enhancement and protection.

[ 72 ] Volunteers come from all walks of life and include professionals, artists, laborers, homemakers and students, performing varied duties. Many come from surrounding communities and some travel significant distances.

[ 72 ] In a 2005 annual report, the NPS reported that, ...137,000 VIPs contributed 5.2 million hours of service (or 2500 FTEs) valued at $91,260,000 based on the private sector value figure of $17.55 as used by AARP, Points of Light Foundation, and other large-scale volunteer programs including many federal agencies. There are 365 separate volunteer programs throughout the NPS. Since 1990, the number of volunteers has increased an average of 2% per year.

[ 73 ] FTE stands for full-time equivalent (one work year). In 2012, the National Park Service reported that over 221,000 volunteers contributed about 6.4 million hours annually.

[ 74 ] Additionally, other types of volunteers also conduct offsite NPS public outreach and education, such as the Trails & Rails program guides on board certain segments of long-haul Amtrak routes, who offer passengers insights to the travel area's natural resources and heritage.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Artist-In-Residence [ edit ] Across the nation, there are special opportunities for artists (visual artists, photographers, sculptors, performers, writers, composers, and crafts) to live and work in a park. Twenty-nine parks currently participate in the Artist-In-Residence program .

[ 77 ] United States Park Rangers [ edit ] Main article: National Park Service ranger See also: National Park Service Law Enforcement Rangers National Park Service rangers are among the uniformed employees charged with protecting and preserving areas set aside in the National Park System by the United States Congress and the President of the United States. While all employees of the agency contribute to the National Park Service mission of preserving unimpaired the natural and cultural resources set aside by the American people for future generations , the term " park ranger " is traditionally used to describe all National Park Service employees who wear the uniform. Broadly speaking, all National Park Service rangers promote stewardship of the resources in their care—either voluntary stewardship via resource interpretation , or compliance with statute or regulation through law enforcement . These comprise the two main disciplines of the ranger profession in the National Park Service.

Law enforcement rangers, or protection rangers, are uniformed federal law enforcement officers with broad authority to enforce federal and state laws within NPS sites. The NPS commonly refers to law enforcement operations in the agency as visitor and resource protection .

In most NPS units, law enforcement rangers are the primary police agency.

[ 78 ] The NPS also employs special agents who conduct more complex criminal investigations. Rangers and agents receive extensive police training at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center and annual in-service and regular firearms training.

United States Park Police [ edit ] Main article: United States Park Police The United States Park Police (USPP) is the oldest uniformed federal law enforcement agency in the United States. It functions as a full service law enforcement agency with responsibilities and jurisdiction in those NPS areas primarily located in the Washington, D.C. Parks, San Francisco, and New York City Parks areas.

In addition to performing the normal crime prevention, investigation, and apprehension functions of an urban police force, the park police are responsible for policing many of the famous monuments in the United States and share law enforcement jurisdiction in all lands administered by the service with a force of national park rangers tasked with the same law enforcement powers and responsibilities.

[ 79 ] Youth programs [ edit ] The NPS partners with a variety of youth oriented programs. The oldest serving group is the Student Conservation Association (SCA). It was established in 1957, committed to conservation and preservation. The SCA's goal is to create the next generation of conservation leaders.

SCA volunteers work through internships, conservation jobs, and crew experiences. Volunteers conduct resource management, historic preservation, cultural resources and conservation programs to gain experience, which can lead to career development and further educational opportunities. The SCA places volunteers in more than 350 national park units and NPS offices each year.

[ 80 ] The Corps Network, formerly known as the National Association for Service and Corps (NASCC), represents 136 Service and Conservation Corps. These groups have programs in 42 states and the District of Columbia. Corpsmembers are between the ages of 16–25. Service and Conservation Corps are direct descendants of the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) of the 1930s that built park facilities in the national parks and other public parks around the country. The Corps Network was established in 1985.

[ 81 ] The Youth Conservation Corps (ages 15–18) brings young people into a park to restore, preserve and protect a natural, cultural, or historical resources. Enrollees are paid for their work.

[ 82 ] Public Land Corps (ages 16–25) is a job helping to restore, protect, and rehabilitate a local national parks. The enrollees learn about environmental issues and the parks.

[ 83 ] Special divisions [ edit ] Historic Preservation Training Center Other special NPS divisions include the Archeology Program, [ 84 ] Historic American Buildings Survey , National Register of Historic Places , National Natural Landmarks , the Rivers, Trails and Conservation Assistance Program, [ 85 ] the Challenge Cost Share Program, [ 86 ] the Federal Lands to Parks, [ 87 ] the Hydropower Relicensing Program, [ 88 ] the Land and Water Conservation Fund, [ 89 ] the National Trails System , [ 90 ] the Partnership Wild and Scenic Rivers Program, [ 91 ] Natural Sounds and Night Skies Division ., [ 92 ] and the Historic Preservation Training Center (HPTC).

[ 93 ] There is also an Investigative Services Branch (ISB), based at NPS headquarters in Washington, D.C. which has personnel distributed among the parks.

[ 94 ] Centers [ edit ] The NPS operates four archaeology-related centers: Harpers Ferry Center, in Harpers Ferry, West Virginia; the Midwest Archeological Center, in Lincoln, Nebraska; the Southeast Archeological Center, in Tallahassee, Florida; and the Western Archeological and Conservation Center, in Tucson, Arizona. The Harpers Ferry Center specializes in developing interpretive media and in conserving objects. The others focus to various degrees on archaeological research and the curation and conservation of museum objects.

National Park Service training centers include the Horace Albright Training Center, Grand Canyon; the Stephen Mather Training Center, Harpers Ferry, West Virginia; the Historic Preservation Training Center, Frederick, Maryland; and the Capital Training Center, Washington, D.C.

The Submerged Resources Center catalogues and evaluates submerged resources in the National Park system.

[ 95 ] The SRC's headquarters are at the Intermountain Region's headquarters, in Lakewood, Colorado.

[ 95 ] The National Center for Preservation Technology and Training , in Natchitoches, Louisiana, conducts research and training in archaeology, architecture, landscape architecture, and materials conservation.

[ 96 ] Preservation Programs [ edit ] Photograph of El Santuario Del Señor Esquipula, Chimayo, New Mexico LaSalle Street Bridge, Chicago, Illinois The oldest federal preservation program, the Historic American Buildings Survey / Historic American Engineering Record (HABS/HAER), produces graphic and written documentation of historically significant architectural, engineering and industrial sites and structures. Dating from 1934, the Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) was chartered to document historic architecture—primarily houses and public buildings—of national or regional significance. Originally a New Deal employment/preservation program, after World War II, HABS employed summer teams of advanced undergraduate and graduate students to carry out the documentation, a tradition followed to this day. Many of the structures they documented no longer exist.

HABS/HAER produces measured drawings, large-format photographs and written histories of historic sites, structures and objects, that are significant to the architectural, engineering and industrial heritage of the U.S. Its 25,000 records are part of the Library of Congress. HABS/HAER is administered by the NPS Washington office and five regional offices.

[ 97 ] Historic American Buildings Survey [ edit ] In 1933, the NPS established the Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS), based on a proposal by Charles E. Peterson, Park Service landscape architect. It was founded as a make-work program for architects, draftsmen and photographers left jobless by the Great Depression. Guided by field instructions from Washington, D.C., the first recorders were tasked with documenting a representative sampling of America's architectural heritage. After 70 years, there is now an archive of historic architecture. HABS provided a database of primary source material for the then fledgling historic preservation movement.

Historic American Engineering Record [ edit ] Recognizing a similar fragility in the national industrial and engineering heritage, the NPS, the Library of Congress and the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) formed the HAER program in 1969, to document nationally and regionally significant engineering and industrial sites. Later, HAER was ratified by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) and the American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers (AIME). HAER documentation, in the forms of measured and interpretive drawings, large-format photographs and written histories, is archivally preserved in the Prints and Photographs Division of the Library of Congress, where it is readily available to the public.

[ 98 ] Historic American Landscapes Survey With the growing vitality of landscape history, preservation and management, proper recognition for historic American landscape documentation must be addressed. In response to this need, the American Society of Landscape Architects Historic Preservation Professional Interest Group worked with the National Park Service to establish a national program. Hence, in October 2000 the National Park Service permanently established the Historic American Landscapes Survey (HALS) program for the systematic documentation of historic American landscapes.

[ 99 ] Rivers, Trails and Conservation Assistance Program [ edit ] The NPS Rivers, Trails and Conservation Assistance (NPS-RTCA) program is designed to assist local communities and the public with planning for conservation and outdoor recreation projects.

[ 100 ] The NPS-RTCA program is able to work with local communities outside the borders of the nation's National Parks because of the second sentence of the NPS Mission Statement.

[ 101 ] Unlike the mainline National Park Programs, these programs take place on non-federal property at the request of the local community. One of their better known programs is Rails to Trails , where unused railroad right-of-ways are converted into public hiking and biking trails.

[ 102 ] Japanese American Confinement Sites [ edit ] The National Park Service is responsible for the management and upkeep of several sites where Americans of Japanese descent were forcibly relocated and incarcerated Japanese Americans during World War II between 1942 and 1946 under the order of President Franklin D. Roosevelt . The Japanese American Confinement Sites (JACS) grant program provides funding for applicants that preserve these sites and their memory.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] National Trails System [ edit ] The National Trails System is a joint mission of the NPS, the Bureau of Land Management and the US Forest Service . It was created in 1968 to establish a system of long-distance National Scenic and National Historic Trails , as well as to recognize existing trails in the states as National Recreation Trails . Several additional trails have been established since 1968, and in 2009 Congress established the first National Geologic Trail .

[ 105 ] National Heritage Areas [ edit ] National Heritage Areas are a unique blend of natural, cultural, historic, and scenic resources. These are not considered units of the NPS, as they are maintained by state/territorial governments or non-profit organizations (described as local coordinating entities ). The National Park Service provides an advisory role and limited technical, planning and financial assistance. Designation of National Heritage Areas is done by an Act of Congress. As of 2021 there are 55 designated heritage areas, some of which cross state lines.

Initiatives [ edit ] "The national parks preserve all life", poster for National Park Service, 1940 24-hr all Taxa BioBlitz: A joint venture of the National Geographic Society and the NPS. Beginning in 2004, at Rock Creek Parkway , the National Geographic Society and the NPS began a 10-year program of hosting a major biological survey of ten selected national park units. The intent is to develop public interest in the nation's natural resources, develop scientific interest in America's youth and to create citizen scientists.

2007: Rock Creek Park , Washington D.C. 661 species [ 106 ] 2008: Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area , Los Angeles, California. 1,700 species and more pending.

[ 106 ] 2009: Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore , near Chicago in northern Indiana. 1,716 species and still counting.

[ 107 ] 2010: Biscayne National Park , Miami, Florida. 810 species were identified during this 24-hr event. As classification continues, more species will be added to the list.

[ 108 ] 2011: Saguaro National Park , Tucson, Arizona.

[ 108 ] During the 24 hours, 859 different species were identified, of which more than 400 were previously unknown in the park.

[ 109 ] 2012: Rocky Mountain National Park , in Estes Park , In August 2012 489 species were identified.

[ 110 ] 2013: Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve , in New Orleans . May 17–18, 2013 in the park's Barataria Preserve.

[ 111 ] 2014: Golden Gate National Recreation Area [ 112 ] 2015: Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park [ 112 ] 2016: Whiskeytown National Recreation Area , Cabrillo National Monument , Channel Islands National Park , Washington, D.C.

[ 112 ] 2017: Virgin Islands National Park [ 112 ] Biological Diversity: Biological Diversity is the vast variety of life as identified through species and genetics. This variety is decreasing as people spread across the globe, altering areas to better meet their needs.

[ 113 ] Climate Change: Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice, and rising global sea levels.

(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007).

[ 114 ] South Florida Restoration Initiative: Rescuing an Ecosystem in Peril: In partnership with the State of Florida , and the Army Corps of Engineers , the NPS is restoring the physical and biological processes of the South Florida ecosystem. Historically, this ecosystem contained some of the most diverse habitats on earth.

[ 115 ] Vanishing Treasures Initiative: Ruins Preservation in the American Southwest: The Vanishing Treasures Initiative began in FY 1998 to reduce threats to prehistoric and historic sites and structures in 44 parks of the Intermountain Region. In 2002, the program expanded to include three parks in the Pacific West Region. The goal is to reduce backlogged work and to bring sites and structures up to a condition where routine maintenance activities can preserve them.

[ 116 ] Wetlands: Wetlands includes marshes , swamps , and bogs . These areas and the plants and animals adapted to these conditions spread from the arctic to the equator. The shrinking wetlands provide habitat for fish and wildlife, help clean water and reduce the impact of storms and floods on the surrounding communities.

[ 117 ] Wildland Fire: Fires have been a natural part of park eco-systems. Many plants and some animals require a cycle of fire or flooding to be successful and productive. With the advent of human intervention and public access to parks, there are safety concerns for the visiting public.

[ 118 ] Green Park Plan [ edit ] In September 2010, the NPS released its Climate Change Response Strategy, followed in April 2012 by the Green Parks Plan.

[ 119 ] Climate Friendly Parks Program [ edit ] The Climate Friendly Parks Program is a subset of the Green Parks Plan.

[ 119 ] It was created in collaboration between the NPS and the US Environmental Protection Agency .

[ 120 ] The program is meant to measure and reduce greenhouse gases to help slow the effects of climate change.

Parks in the CFP program create and implement plans to reduce greenhouse gases through reducing energy and water use. Facilities are designed and retrofitted using sustainable materials. Alternative transportation systems are developed to reduce dependency on fossil fuels.

[ 121 ] Parks in the program offer public education programs about how the parks are already affected.

The CFP program provides climate-friendly solutions to the visiting public, like using clean energy, reducing waste, and making smart transportation choices.

[ 122 ] The CFP program can provide technical assistance, tools and resources for the parks and their neighboring communities to protect the natural and cultural resources.

[ 123 ] The large, isolated parks typically generate their own electricity and heat and must do so without spoiling the values that the visitors have come to experience. Pollution is emitted by the vehicles used to transport visitors around the often-vast expanses of the parks. Many parks have converted vehicles to electric hybrids , and substitute diesel/electric hybrid buses for private automobiles. In 2001 it was estimated that replacement with electric vehicles would eliminate 25 TPY emissions entirely.

[ 124 ] In 2010, the NPS estimated that reducing bottled water could eliminate 6,000 tons of carbon emissions and 8 million kilowatt-hours of electricity every year. The NPS Concessions office voiced concerns about concessions impacts.

[ 125 ] By 2014, 23 parks had banned disposable water bottles.

[ 126 ] In 2015, the International Bottled Water Association stated the NPS was "leaving sugary drinks as a primary alternative", even though the Park Service provides water stations to refill bottles, "encouraging visitors to hydrate for free". The Water Association made the national parks one of its top lobbying targets. In July 2015 Rep.

Keith Rothfus added a "last-minute" amendment into Congress's appropriations bill, blocking the NPS from funding or enforcing the program.

[ 127 ] The NPS discontinued its ban on disposable water bottles in August 2017.

[ 128 ] Cashless [ edit ] In an effort to save on cash processing and hand handling fees, 22 national parks have gone cashless as of 2023. In September 2023, US Senator Cynthia Lummis (R-WY) proposed the " Protecting Access to Recreation with Cash Act " (PARC) which would require national parks to accept cash as a form of payment for entrance fee.

[ 129 ] In April 2024, several NPS visitors sued seeking to restore cash as a payment form noting how cash is legal tender suitable "for all public charges" and that the "additional processing fees that will be borne by NPS and by visitors who ultimately fund the federal government through taxes, in addition to personal surcharges and bank fees visitors may incur under NPS cashless policy." [ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] Related acts [ edit ] Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980 Antiquities Act or Lacy Act of 1906 Consolidated Natural Resources Act of 2008 Endangered Species Act of 1973 Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978 Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act of 1934 Great American Outdoors Act of 2020 Historic Sites Act of 1935 Lacey Act of 1900 (Wildlife preservation) Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 National Environmental Policy Act of 1970 (NEPA) National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA) National Park Service General Authorities Act of 1970 National Park Service Organic Act of 1916 National Wild and Scenic River of 1968 Redwood Act of 1978 , creating one protection standard for the System Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 Wilderness Act of 1964 See also [ edit ] People [ edit ] Individuals [ edit ] Ansel Franklin Hall , first Chief Naturalist and first Chief Forester of the NPS William Kent (U.S. Congressman) , donated early parklands to the government John F. Lacey , congressman from Iowa Harry Yount , progenitor of the modern national park ranger Roles [ edit ] National Park People National Park Ranger Related organizations [ edit ] National Park Foundation National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) Other links [ edit ] Alt National Park Service Land and Water Conservation Fund National Park Passport Stamps National Park Service Rustic , style of architecture National Park Service uniforms National Park Travelers Club National Park to Park Highway US Parks Police United States Senate Committee on Forest Reservations and the Protection of Game Wilderness preservation systems in the United States List of World Heritage Sites in the United States Further reading [ edit ] Szabó, Andrea; Ujhelyi, Gergely (2024). " National parks and economic development ".

Journal of Public Economics .

– Includes a dataset of the history of the US National Park System.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Frequently Asked Questions" .

nps.gov . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2022 . Retrieved July 19, 2021 .

^ Laura B. Comay (May 19, 2022).

National Park Service: FY2022 Appropriations (Report).

Congressional Research Service . p. 1 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ "America's Public Lands Explained" .

www.doi.gov . June 10, 2016.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ a b "National Park System" .

National Park Service . March 18, 2022.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ "The National Park Service Organic Act (1916)" . National Park Service. Archived from the original on May 22, 2020 . Retrieved March 18, 2020 .

^ "What We Do" .

National Park Service . June 9, 2021.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ "Origin of the National Park Idea" .

National Park Service . March 10, 2016.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ a b "Birth of a National Park" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ Johnson, Shelton Invisible Men: Buffalo Soldiers of the Sierra Nevada Archived October 10, 2006, at the Wayback Machine . Park Histories: Sequoia NP (and Kings Canyon NP), National Park Service. Retrieved: 2007-05-18.

^ "1st National Park Service Director: Stephen T. Mather" .

National Park Service . February 6, 2018.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ "Biography: Robert Sterling Yard" .

National Park Service . March 27, 2017.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ "Quick History of the National Park Service" .

National Park Service . May 14, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 9, 2021 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ "NPS Organic Act" .

Department of Justice . April 13, 2015.

Archived from the original on April 21, 2022 . Retrieved April 21, 2022 .

^ "Directors of the National Park Service" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ a b "The NPS in Changing Times" .

National Park Service . March 11, 2016.

Archived from the original on April 21, 2022 . Retrieved April 21, 2022 .

^ a b The National Parks: Shaping the System; National Park Service, Dept of the Interior; 1991; pg 24 ^ "Conrad L. Wirth" .

National Park Service . March 27, 2017.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2021 . Retrieved April 21, 2022 .

^ Glassberg, David (2022).

Laurance S. Rockefeller and the Outdoor Recreation Resources Review Commission: Race, Recreation, and the National Parks (PDF) (Report). Rockefeller Archives Center Research Reports.

This project focuses on the links between the conservation movement and civil rights through an examination of the reach and impact of the Outdoor Recreation Resources Review Commission (ORRRC) and its chairman, Laurance S. Rockefeller (LSR). The Commission's landmark report in 1962 identified large racial disparities in access to public lands and recreation across the USA, which prompted the National Park Service (NPS) to establish new National Recreation Areas and Historical Parks in urban areas in the 1960s and 1970s. The project examines the history of the ORRRC, contextualizes the Commission's work within the longer history of the civil rights movement's efforts to desegregate state and national parks, and NPS efforts to increase recreational opportunities in urban areas.

^ Leopold, A S; Cain, S A ; Cottam, C M ; Gabrielson, I N ; Kimball, T L (March 4, 1963).

"Wildlife Management in the National Parks" (PDF) . U.S. National Park Service.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 18, 2021 . Retrieved October 16, 2021 .

^ Norton, Bryan G (1994).

Toward Unity Among Environmentalists . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 160.

ISBN 0-19-509397-6 .

^ Knowles, Tony; et al. (August 25, 2012).

"Revisiting Leopold: Resource Stewardship in the National Parks (2012)" (PDF) . U.S. National Park Service.

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 1, 2021 . Retrieved October 16, 2021 .

^ a b Schuurman, Gregor W; et al.

"Resist–Accept–Direct (RAD): A Decision Framework for the 21st-century Natural Resource Manager (2021)" .

IRMA Portal . U.S. National Park Service.

Archived from the original on October 18, 2021 . Retrieved October 16, 2021 .

^ Schuurman, Gregor W (January 2022).

"Navigating Ecological Transformation: Resist–Accept–Direct as a Path to a New Resource Management Paradigm" .

BioScience .

72 (1): 16– 29.

doi : 10.1093/biosci/biab067 .

^ Cole, David N; Yung, Laurie, eds. (2012).

Beyond Naturalness: Rethinking Park and Wilderness Stewardship in an Era of Rapid Change . Island Press.

ISBN 9781597269117 .

^ National Park Service.

"Coastal Adaptation Strategies Handbook (2016)" .

nps.gov . U.S. Government . Retrieved May 15, 2025 .

^ Fisichelli, Nicholas A; et al.

"Resource Management and Operations in Central North Dakota: Climate change scenario planning workshop summary" .

usgs.gov . U.S. Government . Retrieved May 15, 2025 .

^ Thompson, Laura M; et al. (July 2020).

"Responding to Ecosystem Transformation: Resist, Accept, or Direct?" .

Fisheries .

46 (1): 8– 21.

doi : 10.1002/fsh.10506 .

hdl : 10150/662904 .

^ "Special Section on the "Resist–Accept–Direct" Framework" .

BioScience .

72 (1). January 2022.

^ National Park Service.

"Policy Memorandum 24-03 (August 2024)" (PDF) .

nps.gov . Retrieved May 15, 2025 .

^ Lee, Ronald F.; Family Tree of the National Park System; Eastern National Parks, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1972; pg 9–12 ^ National Park Service, 2008 Director's Report ; National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior; Washington, D.C.; 2009 ^ Criteria for Parklands brochure; Department of the Interior, National Park Service; 1990 ^ "Chapter 1: The Foundation" .

National Park Service . Archived from the original on April 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 2, 2021 .

^ "National Park System: Establishing New Units" . Congressional Research Service. April 6, 2022.

Archived from the original on January 6, 2023 . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ Hotakainen, Rob; Bogardus, Kevin (January 24, 2023).

"Frustrations mount as National Park Service studies pile up" .

E&E News .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2023 . Retrieved February 19, 2023 .

^ "National Park System (U.S. National Park Service)" . November 4, 2020.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2022 . Retrieved May 14, 2018 .

^ The National Parks: Index 2009–2011, Official Index of the National Park Service, Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.; March 1, 2009 ^ "AcreageReports - Land and Water Conservation Fund" .

U.S. National Park Service . Retrieved January 4, 2024 .

^ a b c d e "Stats Report Viewer" .

irma.nps.gov . Retrieved February 23, 2024 .

^ National Park Service: "New Jersey Pinelands National Reserve" .

[1] . Retrieved September 2, 2010.

^ a b Federal Register, Vol. 75, No. 100; Tuesday, May 25, 2010; pg 29317 ^ a b "NPS Reports" . Nature.nps.gov.

Archived from the original on July 13, 2015 . Retrieved September 6, 2016 .

^ a b c "NPS Public Use Statistics Query Builder" .

irma.nps.gov . Retrieved March 6, 2025 .

^ Friedman, Lisa (March 6, 2025).

"National Parks Had a Record Year. Trump Officials Appear to Want It Kept Quiet" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 6, 2025 .

^ Razek, Raja; Sutton, Joe (October 5, 2024).

"Scenic Blue Ridge Parkway remains closed after suffering catastrophic impacts from Helene" .

CNN . Retrieved March 6, 2025 .

^ "Blue Ridge Parkway — Helene Impacts and Recovery" .

National Park Service . Retrieved March 6, 2025 .

^ Turner, Devarrick (January 14, 2025).

"Great Smoky Mountains National Park visits dropped in 2024 - not just because of Helene" .

Knoxville News Sentinel . Retrieved March 6, 2025 .

^ Butch Street.

"Statistical Abstract 2010" (PDF) .

Natural Resource Data Series NPS/NRPC/SSD/NRDS—2011/147 . National Park Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 16, 2018 . Retrieved September 6, 2016 .

^ "National Parks Have a Long To-Do List but Can't Cover the Repair Costs" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on May 22, 2020 . Retrieved April 6, 2018 .

^ Puko, Timothy (August 4, 2020).

"From Yellowstone to Yosemite, National Parks to Get Long-Awaited Overhaul" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 .

Archived from the original on August 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 8, 2020 .

^ "Interior Account Table 2023 CR1" .

www.doi.gov . December 2, 2022 . Retrieved September 2, 2024 .

^ a b FY 2006 President's Budget, Executive Summary; National Park Service; Government Printing Office; February 7, 2005 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Budget Justification and Performance Information, Fiscal Year 2010, National Park Service, The United States Department of the Interior, 2009 ^ "Budget Justification and Performance Information, Fiscal Year 2010, National Park Service, The United States Department of the Interior, 2009 @ nps.gov" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 12, 2015 . Retrieved September 24, 2014 .

^ "Historic Preservation Fund - Historic Preservation" .

National Park Service . October 19, 2021.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2022 . Retrieved November 8, 2022 .

^ "Semiquincentennial Grant Opportunity" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2022 . Retrieved November 8, 2022 .

^ Slack, Megan (2011).

"By the Numbers: 4" .

United States. Obama White House Archives . Washington, D.C . Retrieved June 9, 2025 .

^ Yue, Cui; Mahoney, Ed; Herbowicz, Teresa (2013).

"Economic Benefits to Local Communities from National Park Visitation – 2011" (PDF) .

United States. National Park Service, Department of the Interior . Washington, D.C. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 6, 2013 . Retrieved April 17, 2013 .

^ "Trump's firing of 1,000 national park workers raises concerns about maintenance and operating hours" .

AP News . February 18, 2025 . Retrieved March 29, 2025 .

^ "Delaware North sues park service over Yosemite contract" .

www.foodservicedirector .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2020 . Retrieved November 2, 2020 .

^ "National Park Service offers Yosemite contract to new company" .

www.fresnobee.com .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2016 . Retrieved January 15, 2016 .

^ "Amid court battle, Yosemite park plans to change some iconic names" .

www.fresnobee.com .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2016 . Retrieved January 15, 2016 .

^ Doyle, Michael.

Public outcry and pressing questions follow Yosemite name changes Archived January 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

The Sacramento Bee , January 15, 2016 ^ Wigglesworth, Alex (July 15, 2019).

"Yosemite to restore names to historic attractions under $12-million settlement" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on July 17, 2019 . Retrieved July 16, 2019 .

^ "Washington Contacts" . Nps.gov.

Archived from the original on August 28, 2010 . Retrieved October 3, 2010 .

^ "NPS About US" . Nps.gov.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2012 . Retrieved October 3, 2010 .

^ National Park Service Headquarters Organization, March 2009 [ full citation needed ] ^ Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Fiscal Year nnnn Budget Justifications;, where nnnn = 2000, 2001, 2003, 2006, and 2009 ^ Park Ranger, The Work, Thrills and Equipment of the National Park Rangers , Colby, C.B.; Coward-McCann, Inc., New York, 1955 ^ Careers in the National Parks ; Gartner, Bob; The Rosen Publishing Company, New York; 1993 ^ "Director's Order #7: Volunteers in Parks; June 13, 2005; Department of the Interior, National Park Service" . Nps.gov. Archived from the original on May 30, 2009 . Retrieved October 3, 2010 .

^ a b Volunteers in Parks; National Park Service, United States Department of the Interior, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.; 1990 ^ Volunteer in Parks, FY05 Annual Report, Department of the Interior, National Park Service; GPO, Washington D.C.; 2006 ^ "NPS.gov Homepage (U.S. National Park Service)" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on April 20, 1997 . Retrieved April 30, 2020 .

^ "Amtrak" .

Archived from the original on March 28, 2017 . Retrieved March 16, 2017 .

^ "Partnering to Connect People with Places - Amtrak Trails & Rails" .

U.S. National Park Service .

Archived from the original on April 4, 2017 . Retrieved March 16, 2017 .

^ "NPS Artist-in-Residence" . Nps.gov. Archived from the original on September 4, 2010 . Retrieved October 3, 2010 .

^ "54 U.S. Code § 102701 - Law enforcement personnel within System" .

Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on August 4, 2020 . Retrieved December 31, 2019 .

^ "United States Park Police" . Nps.gov.

Archived from the original on February 19, 2015 . Retrieved December 31, 2013 .

^ SCA [ dead link ] ^ "The Corps Network" . September 20, 2016. Archived from the original on September 20, 2016 . Retrieved April 30, 2020 .

^ YCC Archived November 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ PLC Archived November 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ "National Park Service Archeology Program" . National Park Service. April 30, 1996.

Archived from the original on August 31, 2009 . Retrieved October 15, 2009 .

^ "Rivers, Trails, and Conservation Assistance Program" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on April 3, 2008 . Retrieved April 5, 2008 .

^ "Challenge Cost Share Program" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on April 6, 2008 . Retrieved April 5, 2008 .

^ "Federal Lands to Parks" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2008 . Retrieved April 5, 2008 .

^ "Hydropower Relicensing Program" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on February 4, 2007 . Retrieved April 5, 2008 .

^ "Land and Water Conservation Fund" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on April 15, 2008 . Retrieved April 5, 2008 .

^ "National Trails System" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2008 . Retrieved April 5, 2008 .

^ "Partnership Wild & Scenic Rivers" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on February 24, 2008 . Retrieved April 5, 2008 .

^ "Natural Sounds and Night Skies Division (U.S. National Park Service)" .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2015 . Retrieved December 5, 2015 .

^ "the Historic Preservation Training Center (U.S. National Park Service)" .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2015 . Retrieved January 31, 2025 .

^ "Investigative Services" .

www.nps.gov . Retrieved November 8, 2024 .

^ a b Nimz, J; Clark, T (2012).

"Aquatic Research Opportunities with the National Park Service" .

In: Steller D, Lobel L, Eds. Diving for Science 2012. Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences 31st Symposium .

ISBN 978-0-9800423-6-8 . Archived from the original on September 22, 2013 . Retrieved September 22, 2013 .

^ "National Center for Preservation Technology & Training (U.S. National Park Service)" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2022 . Retrieved November 8, 2022 .

^ NPS brochure A Heritage So Rich ^ National Park Service Almanac, Edited and Compiled by Ben Moffett and Vickie Carson, Rocky Mountain Region – Public Affairs, 1994 ^ "About HALS | HABS/HAER/HALS" .

National Park Service . Archived from the original on November 8, 2022 . Retrieved November 8, 2022 .

^ "Rivers, Trails, and Conservation Assistance Program" .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 10, 2023 .

^ "What We Do (U.S. National Park Service)" .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 10, 2023 .

^ Rivers, Trails and Conservation Assistance Program brochure; National Park Service, Department of the Interior ^ "Japanese American Confinement Sites Grant Program" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on April 26, 2023 . Retrieved April 26, 2023 .

^ "Japanese American Confinement Education Act" .

JACL .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2023 . Retrieved April 26, 2023 .

^ National Trails System Map and Guide; National Park Service (DOI); Bureau of Land Management (DOI); Forest Service (USDA): Government Printing Office, 1993 ^ a b "BioBlitz, Species Inventory Information, Facts" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on December 25, 2007 . Retrieved October 3, 2010 .

^ "National Parks Traveler, May 17th, 2009; Kurt Repanshek" . Nationalparkstraveler.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011 . Retrieved October 3, 2010 .

^ a b "Biscayne BioBlitz page" . Nps.gov. Archived from the original on May 18, 2011 . Retrieved May 22, 2011 .

^ Arrowhead; The Newsletter of the Employees & Alumni Association of the National Park Service; Eastern National; Spring/Summer 2012, vol. 19 no. 3 ^ Braun, David (August 26, 2012).

"BioBlitz Finds 489 Species in Rocky Mountain National Park" . National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012 . Retrieved October 22, 2012 .

^ "BioBlitz 2013: Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve" . National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on October 31, 2012 . Retrieved October 22, 2012 .

^ a b c d "The NPS/National Geographic Society BioBlitzes" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on June 5, 2021 . Retrieved June 5, 2021 .

^ Biological Diversity brochure; National Park Service; 1993 ^ Climate Change in National Parks brochure; Dept of the Interior, National Park Service; 2007 ^ [2] Archived February 22, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ [3] [ dead link ] ^ Wetlands in the National Parks; Dept of the Interior, National Park Service; 1998 ^ Managing Wildland Fire brochure; Dept of the Interior, National Park Service & National Interagency Fire Center ; 2003 ^ a b National Park Service (July 2019).

"Green Parks Plan" . Archived from the original on July 2, 2019 . Retrieved July 18, 2019 .

^ National Park Service.

"Climate Friendly Parks Program" . US Dpt of the Interior.

Archived from the original on September 4, 2015 . Retrieved September 2, 2015 .

^ Climate Friendly Parks, Environmental Leadership Program; National Park Service, Harpers Ferry, WV, 2009 ^ Seth Shteir (April 9, 2010).

"The Grange; Climate Friendly National Parks" . High Country News.

Archived from the original on April 12, 2010 . Retrieved May 22, 2011 .

^ National Park Service.

"Explore Climate Friendly Parks" . Nps.gov.

Archived from the original on June 6, 2011 . Retrieved May 22, 2011 .

^ Don Shepherd Estimating and Reducing Emissions from Within National Parks Archived December 10, 2011, at the Wayback Machine National Park Service, April 2001 ^ Norton, Shawn (January 5, 2010).

"Plastic Water Bottles in National Parks and the Green Parks Plan" (PDF) . National Park Service. Archived from the original on April 17, 2018.

^ "Nearly two dozen national park sites ban plastic water bottle sales" . The Wilderness Society. April 10, 2014. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015 . Retrieved September 2, 2015 .

^ Lisa Rein, How Big Water is trying to stop the National Park Service from cleaning up plastic bottles fouling the parks Archived October 4, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , Washington Post, July 13, 2015.

^ "National Park Service Ends Effort to Eliminate Sale of Disposable Water Bottles" .

National Park Service . August 16, 2017.

Archived from the original on September 24, 2018 . Retrieved September 24, 2018 .

^ "Lummis Introduces Bill to Require National Parks to Accept Cash » Senator Cynthia Lummis" .

Senator Cynthia Lummis . September 21, 2023 . Retrieved March 23, 2024 .

^ Hauser, Christine (March 21, 2024).

"U.S. Park Service Says to Leave Your Cash at Home, but Some Object" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 23, 2024 .

^ Lin, Summer (March 20, 2024).

"The National Park Service will only take plastic at its parks. Three visitors are suing to use cash" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved March 23, 2024 .

^ Golder, Dave (March 18, 2024).

"Irate visitors sue National Park Service over cashless entrance fees" .

Yahoo Life . Retrieved March 23, 2024 .

Sources [ edit ] Albright, Horace M. (as told to Robert Cahn).

The Birth of the National Park Service . Salt Lake City: Howe Brothers, 1985.

Albright, Horace M, and Marian Albright Schenck.

Creating the National Park Service: The Missing Years . Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1999.

Berkowitz, Paul D. (2017).

The Ranger Image and Noble Cause Corruption in the National Park Service . Walterville Oregon: Trine Day Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-63424-126-7 .

Berkowitz, Paul D., The Case of the Indian Trader , University of New Mexico Press ISBN 978-0-8263-4860-9 , ISBN 978-0-8263-4859-3 , 2011.

Dilsaver, Lary M., ed.

America's National Park System: The Critical Documents . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1994.

Everhardt, William C.

The National Park Service . New York: Praeger, 1972.

Forrant, Robert and Mary-Anne Trasciatti, eds.

Where Are the Workers? Labor’s Stories at Museums and Historic Sites.

University of Illinois Press, 2022.

Foresta, Ronald A.

America's National Parks and Their Keepers . Washington: Resources for the Future, 1985.

Freemuth, John.

Islands Under Siege: National Parks and the Politics of External Threats . Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1991.

Garrison, Lemuel A;.

The Making of a Ranger . Salt Lake City: Howe Brothers, 1983.

Gartner, Bob; Exploring Careers in the National Parks . New York: The Rosen Publishing Group, Inc. 1993 Hartzog, George B. Jr; Battling for the National Parks ; Moyer Bell Limited; Mt. Kisco, New York; 1988 Ise, John.

Our National Park Policy: A Critical History . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1961.

Lee, Ronald F.; Family Tree of the National Park System ; Eastern National Parks, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1972 Lowery, William.

Repairing Paradise: The Restoration of Nature in America's National Parks . Washington: Brookings, 2009 Mackintosh, Barry.

The National Parks: Shaping the System . Washington: National Park Service, 1991.

National Parks for the 21st Century; The Vail Agenda ; The National Park Foundation, 1991 National Park Service Almanac , Edited and Compiled by Ben Moffett and Vickie Carson: Rocky Mountain Region, National Park Service, 1991, revised 2006 The National Parks: Shaping The System ; National Park Service, Washington D.C. 1991.

Rettie, Dwight F.; Our National Park System ; University of Illinois Press; Urbana, Illinois; 1995 Ridenour, James M.

The National Parks Compromised: Pork Barrel Politics and America's Treasures . Merrillville, IN: ICS Books, 1994.

Rothman, Hal K.

Preserving Different Pasts: The American National Monuments . Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1989.

Runte, Alfred.

National Parks, the American Experience , Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press, 1987.

Sellars, Richard West.

Preserving Nature in the National Parks: A History . New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997.

Shankland, Robert; Steve Mather of the National Parks ; Alfred A. Knopf, New York; 1970 Sontag, William H.

National Park Service: The First 75 Years . Philadelphia: Eastern National Park & Monument Assn., 1991.

Sutter, Paul. 2002.

Driven Wild: How the Fight against Automobiles Launched the Modern Wilderness Movement . Seattle: University of Washington press.

ISBN 978-0-295-98219-9 .

Swain, Donald.

Wilderness Defender: Horace M. Albright and Conservation . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970.

Udall, Stewart L., The Quiet Crisis . New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1963.

Wirth, Conrad L.

Parks, Politics, and the People . Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press, 1980.

Other sources [ edit ] Governance National Parks Conservation Association (2025).

Parks group responds to executive order targeting American history .

Criteria for inclusion in the National Park System Designation of National Park System Units (national monument vs national park, etc.) National Park Service Meeting Notices and Rule Changes from The Federal Register RSS Feed Assistance Community Assistance Available from the National Park Service NPS Climate Friendly Parks History National Park System Timeline The National Parks: America's Best Idea from the National Park Service Archeology Program Metadata National Park Service in the Federal Register Records of the National Park Service , including an administrative history and a list of regional offices of the National Park Service up to 1988 NPS Research Links/Reference Desk NPS Library Information Center NPS Focus Digital Library & Research Station NPS Civil War Soldiers and Sailors System (CWSS) National Park Service Records available in the Archival Research Catalog of the National Archives and Records Administration National Park Service Records at National Archives and Records Administration , Atlanta Visual NPS Historic Photograph Collection NPS B-Roll Video (public domain) Photos of Park Rangers over the last 100+ years NPS Digital Image Archives (public domain) The short film National Parks: An American Legacy (1992) is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive .

"Alice's Adventures in the New Wonderland" . Northern Pacific Railroad Company. 1884.

Gallery of all US National Parks (does not include National Park System units of any other designation) Gallery of National Park "Welcome" Signs External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Park Service (United States Department of the Interior) .

Wikiquote has quotations related to National Park Service .

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for United States national parks .

NPS official website National Park Foundation , the Congressionally chartered national charitable partner of America's National Parks 38°53′40″N 77°02′33″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8944°N 77.0426°W ﻿ / 38.8944; -77.0426 v t e U.S. National Trails System National Historic Trails Scenic motor routes Butterfield Overland California Trail El Camino Real de los Tejas Trail El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro Juan Bautista de Anza Trail Mormon Trail Nez Perce Trail Old Spanish Trail Oregon Trail Pony Express Trail Santa Fe Trail Selma to Montgomery Trail Trail of Tears Washington–Rochambeau Revolutionary Route Natural surface trails Ala Kahakai Trail Chilkoot Trail Iditarod Trail Water trails Captain John Smith Chesapeake Trail Combination Lewis and Clark Trail (motor, land, and water) Overmountain Victory Trail (motor and land) Star-Spangled Banner Trail (motor and water) National Scenic Trails Appalachian Trail by state Arizona Trail Continental Divide Trail New England Trail Florida Trail Ice Age Trail Natchez Trace Trail North Country Trail by state Pacific Crest Trail Pacific Northwest Trail Potomac Heritage Trail National Geologic Trail Ice Age Floods Trail National Recreation Trails Category Related Triple Crown of Hiking v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places Topics Architectural style categories Contributing property Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places Keeper of the Register National Park Service Property types Lists by state List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state : Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Lists by insular areas American Samoa Guam Minor Outlying Islands Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Lists by associated state Federated States of Micronesia Marshall Islands Palau Other areas District of Columbia American Legation, Morocco Lists of specific structure types Amusement rides Jails and prisons University and college buildings Related National Historic Preservation Act Historic Preservation Fund National Register of Historic Places portal Category v t e United States Department of the Interior Headquarters: Main Interior Building Doug Burgum , Secretary of the Interior Vacant , Deputy Secretary of the Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs Bureau of Indian Education Bureau of Land Management Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement Bureau of Reclamation Bureau of Trust Funds Administration National Indian Gaming Commission National Park Service Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement United States Fish and Wildlife Service United States Geological Survey Office of the Assistant Secretary for Insular and International Affairs Office of the Solicitor Office of Natural Resources Revenue Central Utah Project Completion Act Office Indian Arts and Crafts Board National Invasive Species Council v t e Federal law enforcement agencies of the United States Commerce Office of Export Enforcement National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - Fisheries: Office of Law Enforcement Office of Security Defense Defense Criminal Investigative Service Department of Defense police Defense Logistics Agency Police Pentagon Force Protection Agency ( Pentagon Police ) National Security Agency Police Department of the Army Intelligence and Security Command Criminal Investigation Division Military Police Corps Army Department Police Corrections Command Navy Criminal Investigative Service Marine Corps Criminal Investigation Division Master-at-Arms Navy Police Marine Corps Police Naval Academy Police Air Force Office of Special Investigations Security Forces Department of the Air Force Police Health and Human Services United States Food and Drug Administration ( Office of Criminal Investigations ) National Institutes of Health Police Homeland Security Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers Citizenship and Immigration Services United States Coast Guard Investigative Service Coast Guard Police Customs and Border Protection Border Patrol Federal Protective Service Immigration and Customs Enforcement United States Secret Service Uniformed Division Transportation Security Administration Office of Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs Police Bureau of Land Management: Office of Law Enforcement Hoover Dam Police National Park Service Rangers United States Park Police Fish and Wildlife Service: Office of Law Enforcement National Wildlife Refuge System: Division of Refuge Law Enforcement Justice Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives Drug Enforcement Administration Federal Bureau of Investigation FBI Police Federal Bureau of Prisons United States Marshals Service State Bureau of Diplomatic Security Diplomatic Security Service Office of Foreign Missions Treasury Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau Bureau of Engraving and Printing Financial Crimes Enforcement Network Internal Revenue Service, Criminal Investigation United States Mint Police Others (executive) Agriculture : US Forest Service: Law Enforcement & Investigations Energy : Office of Secure Transportation Transportation : United States Merchant Marine Academy Department of Public Safety Veterans Affairs : Department of Veterans Affairs Police Congress Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms of the Senate United States Capitol Police Government Publishing Office Police Judicial U.S. Probation and Pretrial Services System Marshal of the United States Supreme Court ( Supreme Court Police ) Others (federal law) Amtrak Police Department Central Intelligence Agency: Security Protective Service Environmental Protection Agency: Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance Federal Reserve Police Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia Postal Inspection Service ( U.S. Postal Police ) Smithsonian Institution Office of Protection Services ( National Zoological Park Police ) v t e United States government agencies involved in environmental science Environmental Protection Agency Global Change Research Program National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Science Foundation Smithsonian Institution Department of the Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs Bureau of Land Management Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Bureau of Reclamation National Park Service United States Fish and Wildlife Service United States Geological Survey Office of the Assistant Secretary for Insular and International Affairs Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation, and Enforcement Department of Commerce National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Geodetic Survey Marine Fisheries Service Ocean Service Oceanic and Atmospheric Research UxSRTO Weather Service Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office of Environmental Management Office of Science National Laboratories and Technology Centers Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service Farm Service Agency Food and Nutrition Service Foreign Agricultural Service Natural Resources Conservation Service ( National Water and Climate Center ) Rural Utilities Service Forest Service Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate United States Coast Guard Department of Health and Human Services Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Department of Defense Air Force Research Laboratory Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Joint Typhoon Warning Center Office of Naval Research Combat Capabilities Development Command Executive Office of the President Climate Policy Office Clean Energy Innovation and Implementation U.S. Special Presidential Envoy for Climate Council on Environmental Quality Defunct Environmental Science Services Administration United States Fish Commission United States Coast and Geodetic Survey White House Office of Energy and Climate Change Policy v t e Woodrow Wilson 28th President of the United States (1913–1921) 34th Governor of New Jersey (1911–1913) 13th President of Princeton University (1902–1910) Presidency ( timeline ) Transition 1913 inauguration 1917 inauguration Roosevelt desk Judicial appointments Supreme Court nominees Louis Brandeis Supreme Court nomination Cabinet 1919 Nobel Peace Prize 19th Amendment Silent Sentinels Woman Suffrage Procession State of the Union Address 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1920 Harding transition Foreign policy Wilsonianism Bryan–Chamorro Treaty (1914) Occupation of Haiti (1915–1934) Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916–1924) Army Appropriations Act of 1916 Council of National Defense Philippine Autonomy Act (1916) World War I 1917–1918; entry campaigns home front Committee on Public Information Four Minute Men Fourteen Points The Inquiry American Commission to Negotiate Peace Armistice of 11 November 1918 Espionage Act of 1917 Immigration Act of 1917 Selective Service Act of 1917 Immigration Act of 1918 Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 National War Labor Board (1918) Sedition Act of 1918 Wartime Measure Act of 1918 Paris Peace Conference 1919–1920; Racial Equality Proposal Pueblo speech (1919) Treaty of Versailles 1919; Big Four League of Nations 1920; charter Wilsonian Armenia (1920) New Freedom Federal racial segregation Federal Reserve Act 1913; Federal Reserve Newlands Labor Act 1913; Board of Mediation and Conciliation Raker Act (1913) Revenue Act of 1913 Federal income tax Rivers and Harbors Acts 1913 1914 1915 1916 Sabath Act (1913) Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914 Cotton Futures Act of 1914 Cutter Service Act (1914) Emergency Internal Revenue Tax Act (1914) Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914 Federal Trade Commission Glacier National Park Act of 1914 Legislative Reference Service (1914) Smith–Lever Act of 1914 War Risk Insurance Act (1914) Locomotive Inspection Act (1915) National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (1915) Occupancy Permits Act (1915) Adamson Act (1916) Brush Disposal Act of 1916 Cotton Futures Act of 1916 Federal Aid Road Act of 1916 Federal Employees' Compensation Act (1916) Federal Farm Loan Act 1916; Farm Credit System Federal Farm Loan Board Flag Day (1916) Fraudulent Advertising Act of 1916 Keating–Owen Act (1916) National Park Service Organic Act 1916; National Park Service Revenue Act of 1916 Rural Post Roads Act of 1916 Smith Act (1916) Stock-Raising Homestead Act (1916) United States Grain Standards Act of 1916 Warehouse Act of 1916 Wildlife Game Refuges Act of 1916 Flood Control Act of 1917 Smith–Hughes Act 1917; U.S. Federal Board for Vocational Education United States Railroad Administration 1917; USRA standard War Revenue Act of 1917 Revenue Act of 1918 Acadia National Park Act of 1919 Grand Canyon Park Act of 1919 Red Summer (1919) Wheat Price Guarantee Act (1919) Esch–Cummins Act 1920; Railroad Labor Board Federal Power Act 1920; Federal Power Commission Merchant Marine Act of 1920 Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 Life Birthplace and Presidential Library papers and manuscripts Boyhood home in Georgia Boyhood home in South Carolina Princeton University president Summer White House (Harlakenden Shadow Lawn) Woodrow Wilson House Gravesite Books Congressional Government (1900) When a Man Comes to Himself (1901) The New Freedom (1913) Elections 1910 New Jersey gubernatorial election 1912 Democratic National Convention 1912 U.S. presidential election 1916 Democratic National Convention 1916 U.S. presidential election Legacy ( memorials ) Bibliography Woodrow Wilson Awards Woodrow Wilson Foundation Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars The Wilson Quarterly Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs High schools Woodrow Wilson Junior College Celestial Sphere Woodrow Wilson Memorial Woodrow Wilson (Austin statue) Wilson Square (Warsaw) Woodrow Wilson Monument (Prague) Woodrow Wilson Bridge Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation Mount Wilson (Vermont) SS President Wilson U.S. Postage stamps United States one-hundred-thousand-dollar bill Popular culture Wilson (1944 film) Profiles in Courage (1965 series) Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries) Woodrow Wilson and the Birth of the American Century (2002 documentary) Wilson (2013 book) Suffs (2022 musical) Family Ellen Axson Wilson (wife, 1885–1914, death) Edith Bolling Wilson (wife, 1915–1924) Margaret Wilson (daughter, acting first lady) Jessie Wilson Sayre (daughter) Eleanor Wilson McAdoo (daughter) Francis Sayre Jr.

(grandson) Joseph Ruggles Wilson (father) James Wilson (grandfather) Helen Woodrow Bones (cousin, secretary) William McAdoo (son-in-law) Related Progressive Era Jefferson Literary and Debating Society Woodrow Wilson and race ← William Howard Taft Warren G. Harding → Category Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Norway Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Photographers' Identities People Trove Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐wzgdr
Cached time: 20250817043952
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.521 seconds
Real time usage: 1.807 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11906/1000000
Revision size: 118413/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 624667/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11062/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 23/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 500959/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.762/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12315758/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1291.251      1 -total
 46.82%  604.624      1 Template:Reflist
 30.69%  396.291     80 Template:Cite_web
 11.45%  147.794      2 Template:Infobox
 10.70%  138.182      1 Template:Infobox_government_agency
  9.82%  126.757     14 Template:Navbox
  6.15%   79.395      1 Template:Short_description
  5.23%   67.486      1 Template:National_parks_of_the_United_States
  4.37%   56.480      1 Template:Official_URL
  3.95%   50.979      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:161535:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043952 and revision id 1306254122. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Park_Service&oldid=1306254122 " Categories : National Park Service 1916 establishments in the United States Environmental agencies in the United States Government agencies established in 1916 Land management in the United States National park administrators Nature conservation in the United States Organizations based in Washington, D.C.

Park police departments of the United States United States public land law Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from March 2020 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2025 CS1: unfit URL Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from March 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates not on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 19:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Park Service 41 languages Add topic

