Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Registers Toggle Registers subsection 2.1 Standard Hindi 2.2 Standard Urdu 2.3 Bazaar Hindustani 3 Names 4 Official status Toggle Official status subsection 4.1 Hindi 4.2 Urdu 5 Geographical distribution 6 Phonology 7 Grammar 8 Vocabulary 9 Writing system 10 Sample text Toggle Sample text subsection 10.1 Colloquial Hindustani 10.2 Literary Hindi 10.3 Literary Urdu 11 Hindustani and Bollywood 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References 15 Bibliography 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Hindustani language 114 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių मैथिली Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Kumoring Yerwa Kanuri Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indo-Aryan language For its official forms, see Hindi and Urdu . For other languages named Hindustani based off Bhojpuri and Awadhi, see Fijian Hindustani and Caribbean Hindustani .

Hindustani Hindi–Urdu हिन्दुस्तानी ہندوستانی The word Hindustani in the Devanagari and the Nastaliq -style Perso-Arabic scripts Pronunciation [ɦɪnd̪ʊst̪ɑːniː] Native to India and Pakistan Region Western Uttar Pradesh / Delhi ( Hindustani Belt ) and Deccan ( South India ), Pakistan [ 1 ] Speakers L1 speakers : c.

250 million (2011 & 2017 censuses) [ 2 ] L2 speakers : ~500 million (1999–2016) [ 2 ] Language family Indo-European Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryan Central Zone Western Hindi Hindustani Early forms Shauraseni Prakrit Apabhraṃśa Old Hindi Standard forms Hindi Urdu Dialects Andaman Creole Hindi Arunachali Hindi Begamati Bihari Hindi [ a ] Bangalori Urdu Bombay Hindi Dhakaiya Urdu Deccani Haflong Hindi Hinglish Hyderabadi Urdu Judeo-Urdu Kalkatiya Urdu Karkhandari Urdu Kauravi Rekhta Urdish Writing system Devanagari (Hindi) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Perso-Arabic Nastaliq ( Urdu alphabet ) (Urdu) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Kaithi (historical) Bengali–Assamese script (for Urdu in Bangladesh ) Hebrew ( Judeo-Urdu ) Laṇḍā (historical) [ 5 ] Mahajani (historical, mainly Hindi ) Hindi Braille Urdu Braille Signed forms Indian Signing System (ISS) [ 6 ] Official status Official language in India (as Hindi and Urdu ) Pakistan (as Urdu ) Recognised minority language in South Africa ( Hindi and Urdu - protected language) [ 7 ] United Arab Emirates ( Hindi - third official court language) [ 8 ] Regulated by Central Hindi Directorate (Hindi, India) [ 9 ] National Council for Promotion of Urdu Language (Urdu, India) [ 10 ] National Language Promotion Department (Urdu, Pakistan) [ 11 ] Language codes ISO 639-1 hi – Hindi ur – Urdu ISO 639-2 hin – Hindi urd – Urdu ISO 639-3 Either: hin – Hindi urd – Urdu Glottolog hind1270 Linguasphere to -qf 59-AAF-qa to -qf Areas (red) where Hindustani (Delhlavi or Kauravi ) is the native language You may need rendering support to display the uncommon Unicode characters in this article correctly.

Part of a series on the Hindustani language (or the Hindi-Urdu continuum) Hindi Urdu Regional or dialectal variants ( Andaman Bihari Bombay Deccani Dhakaiya Hinglish Hyderabadi Judeo-Urdu Kauravi Rekhta Urdish ) History Hindi–Urdu controversy Persian and Urdu Hindi literature Urdu literature Hindustani orthography Grammar Numerals Declension Verbs Linguistic history Vocabulary Phonological history Accessibility Hindi–Urdu transliteration Hindustani Braille Hindi Braille Urdu Braille Roman Hindi Roman Urdu Indo-Pakistani Sign Language v t e Hindustani [ d ] is an Indo-Aryan language spoken in North India and Pakistan as the lingua franca of the region.

[ 14 ] It is also spoken by the Deccani-speaking community in the Deccan plateau . Hindustani is a pluricentric language with two standard registers , known as Hindi ( Sanskritised register written in the Devanagari script ) and Urdu ( Persianized and Arabized register written in the Perso-Arabic script ) which serve as official languages of India and Pakistan, respectively.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Thus, it is also called Hindi–Urdu .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Colloquial registers of the language fall on a spectrum between these standards.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In modern times, a third variety of Hindustani with significant English influences has also appeared, which is sometimes called Hinglish or Urdish .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] The concept of a Hindustani language as a "unifying language" or "fusion language" that could transcend communal and religious divisions across the subcontinent was endorsed by Mahatma Gandhi , [ 27 ] as it was not seen to be associated with either the Hindu or Muslim communities as was the case with Hindi and Urdu respectively, and it was also considered a simpler language for people to learn.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The conversion from Hindi to Urdu (or vice versa) is generally achieved by merely transliterating between the two scripts . Translation, on the other hand, is generally only required for religious and literary texts.

[ 30 ] Scholars trace the language's first written poetry, in the form of Old Hindi , to the Delhi Sultanate era around the twelfth and thirteenth century.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] During the period of the Delhi Sultanate , which covered most of today's India, eastern Pakistan, southern Nepal and Bangladesh [ 34 ] and which resulted in the contact of Hindu and Muslim cultures , the Sanskrit and Prakrit base of Old Hindi became enriched with loanwords from Persian , evolving into the present form of Hindustani.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] The Hindustani vernacular became an expression of Indian national unity during the Indian Independence movement , [ 42 ] [ 43 ] and continues to be spoken as the common language of the people of the northern Indian subcontinent , [ 44 ] which is reflected in the Hindustani vocabulary of Bollywood films and songs.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] The language's core vocabulary is derived from Prakrit (a descendant of Sanskrit ), [ 21 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] with substantial loanwords from Persian and Arabic (via Persian).

[ 35 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 47 ] [ 53 ] It is often written in the Devanagari script or the Arabic-derived Urdu script in the case of Hindi and Urdu respectively, with romanization increasingly employed in modern times as a neutral script.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] As of 2025, Hindi and Urdu together constitute the 3rd-most-spoken language in the world after English and Mandarin , with 855 million native and second-language speakers, according to Ethnologue , [ 56 ] though this includes millions who self-reported their language as 'Hindi' on the Indian census but speak a number of other Hindi languages than Hindustani.

[ 57 ] The total number of Hindi–Urdu speakers was reported to be over 300 million in 1995, making Hindustani the third- or fourth-most spoken language in the world.

[ 58 ] [ 47 ] History Main article: History of Hindustani See also: Persian language in the Indian subcontinent Early forms of present-day Hindustani developed from the Middle Indo-Aryan apabhraṃśa vernaculars of present-day North India in the 7th–13th centuries.

[ 35 ] [ 40 ] Hindustani emerged as a contact language around the Ganges-Yamuna Doab ( Delhi , Meerut and Saharanpur ), a result of the increasing linguistic diversity that occurred during the Muslim period in the Indian subcontinent .

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Amir Khusrow , who lived in the thirteenth century during the Delhi Sultanate period in North India, used these forms (which was the lingua franca of the period) in his writings and referred to it as Hindavi ( Persian : ھندوی , lit.

'of Hindus or Indians').

[ 61 ] [ 41 ] By the end of the century, the military exploits of Alauddin Khalji , introduced the language in the Deccan region, which led to the development of its southern dialect Deccani , which was promoted by Muslim rulers in the Deccan.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] The Delhi Sultanate, which comprised several Turkic and Afghan dynasties that ruled much of the subcontinent from Delhi, [ 64 ] was succeeded by the Mughal Empire in 1526 and preceded by the Ghorid dynasty and Ghaznavid Empire before that.

Ancestors of the language were known as Hindui , Hindavi , Zabān-e Hind ( transl.

'Language of India' ), Zabān-e Hindustan ( transl.

'Language of Hindustan' ), Hindustan ki boli ( transl.

'Language of Hindustan' ), Rekhta , and Hindi.

[ 14 ] [ 65 ] Its regional dialects became known as Zabān-e Dakhani in southern India, Zabān-e Gujari ( transl.

'Language of Gujars' ) in Gujarat, and as Zabān-e Dehlavi or Urdu around Delhi. It is an Indo-Aryan language , deriving its base from the Western Hindi dialect of the Ganges-Yamuna Doab ( Delhi , Meerut and Saharanpur ) known as Khariboli —the contemporary form being classed under the umbrella of Old Hindi .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 59 ] Although the Mughals were of Timurid ( Gurkānī ) Turco-Mongol descent, [ 68 ] they were Persianised , and Persian had gradually become the state language of the Mughal empire after Babur .

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] Mughal patronage led to a continuation and reinforcement of Persian by Central Asian Turkic rulers in the Indian Subcontinent, [ 73 ] since Persian was also patronized by the earlier Turko-Afghan Delhi Sultanate who laid the basis for the introduction and use of Persian in the subcontinent.

[ 74 ] Hindustani began to take shape as a Persianised vernacular during the Delhi Sultanate (1206–1526 AD) and Mughal Empire (1526–1858 AD) in South Asia .

[ 75 ] Hindustani retained the grammar , as well as the core Sanskritic and Prakritic vocabulary , of the local Indian language of the Ganges-Yamuna Doab called Khariboli .

[ 59 ] [ 35 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] However, as an emerging common dialect, Hindustani absorbed large numbers of Persian, Arabic, and Turkic loanwords, and as Mughal conquests grew it spread as a lingua franca across much of northern India; this was a result of the contact of Hindu and Muslim cultures in Hindustan that created a composite Ganga-Jamuni tehzeeb .

[ 38 ] [ 36 ] [ 39 ] [ 78 ] The language was also known as Rekhta , or 'mixed', which implies that the Sanskritic and Prakritic vocabulary base of Old Hindi was mixed with Persian loanwords.

[ 76 ] [ 35 ] [ 37 ] [ 59 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] Written in the Perso-Arabic , Devanagari , [ 81 ] and occasionally Kaithi or Gurmukhi scripts, [ 82 ] it remained the primary lingua franca of northern India for the next four centuries, although it varied significantly in vocabulary depending on the local language. Alongside Persian, it achieved the status of a literary language in Muslim courts and was also used for literary purposes in various other settings such as Sufi , Nirgun Sant , Krishna Bhakta circles, and Rajput Hindu courts. Its major centres of development included the Mughal courts of Delhi, Lucknow , Agra and Lahore as well as the Rajput courts of Amber and Jaipur .

[ 82 ] In the 18th century, towards the end of the Mughal period, with the fragmentation of the empire and the elite system, a variant of Hindustani, one of the successors of apabhraṃśa vernaculars at Delhi, and nearby cities, came to gradually replace Persian as the lingua franca among the educated elite upper class particularly in northern India, though Persian still retained much of its pre-eminence for a short period. The term Hindustani was given to that language.

[ 83 ] The Perso-Arabic script form of this language underwent a standardisation process and further Persianisation during this period (18th century) and came to be known as Urdu, a name derived from Persian: Zabān-e Urdū-e Mualla ('language of the court') or Zabān-e Urdū ( زبان اردو , 'language of the camp'). The etymology of the word Urdu is of Chagatai origin, Ordū ('camp'), cognate with English horde , and known in local translation as Lashkari Zabān ( لشکری زبان ), [ 84 ] which is shortened to Lashkari ( لشکری ).

[ 85 ] This is all due to its origin as the common speech of the Mughal army. As a literary language, Urdu took shape in courtly, elite settings. Along with English, it became an official language of northern parts of British India in 1837.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Hindi as a standardised literary register of the Hindustani arose in the 19th century. While the first literary works (mostly translations of earlier works) in Sanskritised Hindustani were already written in the early 19th century as part of a literary project that included both Hindu and Muslim writers (e.g.

Lallu Lal , Insha Allah Khan ), the call for a distinct Sanskritised standard of Hindustani written in Devanagari under the name of Hindi became increasingly politicised in the course of the century and gained pace around 1880 in an effort to displace Urdu's official position.

[ 88 ] John Fletcher Hurst in his book published in 1891 mentioned that the Hindustani or camp language of the Mughal Empire 's courts at Delhi was not regarded by philologists as a distinct language but only as a dialect of Hindi with admixture of Persian. He continued: "But it has all the magnitude and importance of separate language. It is linguistic result of Muslim rule of eleventh & twelfth centuries and is spoken by many Hindus in North India and by Musalman population in all parts of India." Next to English it was the official language of British Indian Empire , was commonly written in Arabic or Persian characters, and was spoken by approximately 100,000,000 people.

[ 89 ] The process of hybridization also led to the formation of words in which the first element of the compound was from Khari Boli and the second from Persian , such as rajmahal 'palace' ( raja 'royal, king' + mahal 'house, place') and rangmahal 'fashion house' ( rang 'colour, dye' + mahal 'house, place').

[ 90 ] As Muslim rule expanded, Hindustani speakers traveled to distant parts of India as administrators, soldiers, merchants, and artisans. As it reached new areas, Hindustani further hybridized with local languages. In the Deccan , for instance, Hindustani blended with Telugu and came to be called Dakhani . In Dakhani, aspirated consonants were replaced with their unaspirated counterparts; for instance, dekh 'see' became dek , ghula 'dissolved' became gula , kuch 'some' became kuc , and samajh 'understand' became samaj .

[ 90 ] When the British colonised the Indian subcontinent from the late 18th through to the late 19th century, they used the words 'Hindustani', 'Hindi', and 'Urdu' interchangeably. They developed it as the language of administration of British India , [ 91 ] further preparing it to be the official language of modern India and Pakistan. However, with independence, use of the word 'Hindustani' declined, being largely replaced by 'Hindi' and 'Urdu', or 'Hindi–Urdu' when either of those was too specific.

[ 92 ] More recently, the word 'Hindustani' has been used for the colloquial language of Bollywood films, which are popular in both India and Pakistan and which cannot be unambiguously identified as either Hindi or Urdu.

British rule over India also introduced some English words into Hindustani, with these influences increasing with the later spread of English as a world language. This has created a new variant of Hindustani known as Hinglish or Urdish .

[ 93 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Registers See also: Hindi–Urdu controversy , Register (sociolinguistics) , and digraphia At the spoken level, Hindi and Urdu are considered registers of a single language, Hindustani or Hindi–Urdu, as they share a common grammar and core vocabulary, [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 94 ] [ 49 ] [ 47 ] they differ in literary and formal vocabulary; where literary Hindi draws heavily on Sanskrit and to a lesser extent Prakrit , literary Urdu draws heavily on Persian and Arabic loanwords.

[ 95 ] The grammar and base vocabulary (most pronouns, verbs, adpositions, etc.) of both Hindi and Urdu, however, are the same and derive from a Prakritic base, and both have Persian/Arabic influence.

[ 94 ] A grammar of the Hindustani language, published 1843 A road sign using Hindi, Urdu, and English The standardised registers Hindi and Urdu are collectively known as Hindi–Urdu .

[ 13 ] Hindustani is the lingua franca of the north and west of the Indian subcontinent , though it is understood fairly well in other regions also, especially in the urban areas.

[ 14 ] This has led it to be characterised as a continuum that ranges between Hindi and Urdu.

[ 96 ] A common vernacular sharing characteristics with Sanskritised Hindi, regional Hindi and Urdu, Hindustani is more commonly used as a vernacular than highly Sanskritised Hindi or highly Persianised Urdu.

[ 44 ] This can be seen in the popular culture of Bollywood or, more generally, the vernacular of North Indians and Pakistanis, which generally employs a lexicon common to both Hindi and Urdu speakers.

[ 46 ] Minor subtleties in region will also affect the 'brand' of Hindustani, sometimes pushing the Hindustani closer to Urdu or to Hindi. One might reasonably assume that the Hindustani spoken in Lucknow , Uttar Pradesh (known for its usage of Urdu) and Varanasi (a holy city for Hindus and thus using highly Sanskritised Hindi) is somewhat different.

[ 13 ] Standard Hindi Main article: Hindi Standard Hindi, one of the 22 officially recognized languages of India and the official language of the Union, is usually written in the indigenous Devanagari script of India and exhibits less Persian and Arabic influence than Urdu. It has a literature of 500 years, with prose, poetry, religion and philosophy. One could conceive of a wide spectrum of dialects and registers, with the highly Persianised Urdu at one end of the spectrum and a heavily Sanskritised variety spoken in the region around Varanasi , at the other end. In common usage in India, the term Hindi includes all these dialects except those at the Urdu spectrum. Thus, the different meanings of the word Hindi include, among others: [ citation needed ] standardized Hindi as taught in schools throughout India (except some states such as Tamil Nadu), formal or official Hindi advocated by Purushottam Das Tandon and as instituted by the post-independence Indian government, heavily influenced by Sanskrit, the vernacular dialects of Hindustani as spoken throughout India, the neutralized form of Hindustani used in popular television and films (which is nearly identical to colloquial Urdu), or the more formal neutralized form of Hindustani used in television and print news reports.

Standard Urdu Main article: Urdu The phrase Zabān-e Urdu-ye Mualla in Nastaʿlīq Urdu is the national language and state language of Pakistan and one of the 22 officially recognised languages of India . It is written, except in some parts of India, in the Nastaliq style of the Urdu alphabet , an extended Perso-Arabic script incorporating Indic phonemes. It is heavily influenced by Persian vocabulary and was historically also known as Rekhta .

Lashkari Zabān title in the Perso-Arabic script As Dakhini (or Deccani) where it also draws words from local languages, it survives and enjoys a rich history in the Deccan and other parts of South India , with the prestige dialect being Hyderabadi Urdu spoken in and around the capital of the Nizams and the Deccan Sultanates .

Earliest forms of the language's literature may be traced back to the 13th–14th century works of Amīr Khusrau Dehlavī , often called the "father of Urdu literature ", while Walī Deccani is seen as the progenitor of Urdu poetry .

Bazaar Hindustani The term bazaar Hindustani , in other words, the 'street talk' or literally 'marketplace Hindustani', also known as Colloquial Hindi [ e ] or Simplified Urdu , [ f ] has arisen to denote a colloquial register of the language that uses vocabulary common to both Hindi and Urdu while eschewing high-register and specialized Arabic or Sanskrit derived words.

[ 99 ] It has emerged in various South Asian cities where Hindustani is not the main language, in order to facilitate communication across language barriers. It is characterized by loanwords from local languages.

[ 100 ] Names Amir Khusro c.

1300 referred to this language of his writings as Dehlavi ( देहलवी / دہلوی , 'of Delhi') or Hindavi ( हिन्दवी / ہندوی ). During this period, Hindustani was used by Sufis in promulgating their message across the Indian subcontinent .

[ citation needed ] After the advent of the Mughals in the subcontinent, Hindustani acquired more Persian loanwords.

Rekhta ('mixture'), Hindi ('Indian'), Hindustani, Hindvi, Lahori , and Dakni (amongst others) became popular names for the same language until the 18th century.

[ 81 ] [ 101 ] The name Urdu (from Zabān-i-Ordu , or Orda ) appeared around 1780.

[ 101 ] It is believed to have been coined by the poet Mashafi .

[ 102 ] In local literature and speech, it was also known as the Lashkari Zabān (military language) or Lashkari .

[ 103 ] Mashafi was the first person to simply modify the name Zabān-i-Ordu to Urdu .

[ 104 ] During the British Raj , the term Hindustani was used by British officials.

[ 101 ] In 1796, John Borthwick Gilchrist published "A Grammar of the Hindoostanee Language".

[ 101 ] [ 105 ] Upon partition , India and Pakistan established national standards that they called Hindi and Urdu, respectively, and attempted to make distinct, with the result that Hindustani commonly, but mistakenly, came to be seen as a "mixture" of Hindi and Urdu.

Grierson , in his highly influential Linguistic Survey of India , proposed that the names Hindustani, Urdu, and Hindi be separated in use for different varieties of the Hindustani language, rather than as the overlapping synonyms they frequently were: We may now define the three main varieties of Hindōstānī as follows:—Hindōstānī is primarily the language of the Upper Gangetic Doab, and is also the lingua franca of India, capable of being written in both Persian and Dēva-nāgarī characters, and without purism, avoiding alike the excessive use of either Persian or Sanskrit words when employed for literature. The name 'Urdū' can then be confined to that special variety of Hindōstānī in which Persian words are of frequent occurrence, and which hence can only be written in the Persian character, and, similarly, 'Hindī' can be confined to the form of Hindōstānī in which Sanskrit words abound, and which hence can only be written in the Dēva-nāgarī character.

[ 3 ] Official status Hindustani, in its standardised registers, is one of the official languages of both India (Hindi) and Pakistan (Urdu).

Before 1947, Hindustani was officially recognised by the British Raj. In the post-independence period however, the term Hindustani has lost currency and is not given any official recognition by the Indian or Pakistani governments. The language is instead recognised by its standard forms, Hindi and Urdu.

[ 106 ] Hindi Hindi is declared by Article 343(1), Part 17 of the Indian Constitution as the "official language ( राजभाषा , rājabhāṣā ) of the Union." (In this context, "Union" means the Federal Government and not the entire country [ citation needed ] —India has 23 official languages .) At the same time, however, the definitive text of federal laws is officially the English text and proceedings in the higher appellate courts must be conducted in English.

At the state level, Hindi is one of the official languages in 10 of the 29 Indian states and three Union Territories , respectively: Bihar , Chhattisgarh , Haryana , Himachal Pradesh , Jharkhand , Madhya Pradesh , Rajasthan , Uttarakhand , Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal ; Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli , and Delhi.

In the remaining states, Hindi is not an official language. In states like Tamil Nadu and Karnataka , studying Hindi is not compulsory in the state curriculum. However, an option to take the same as second or third language does exist. In many other states, studying Hindi is usually compulsory in the school curriculum as a third language (the first two languages being the state's official language and English), though the intensiveness of Hindi in the curriculum varies.

[ 107 ] Urdu Urdu is the national language ( قومی زبان , qaumi zabān ) of Pakistan, where it shares official language status with English . Although English is spoken by many, and Punjabi is the native language of the majority of the population, Urdu is the lingua franca . In India, Urdu is one of the languages recognised in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India and is an official language of the Indian states of Jharkhand , Bihar , Telangana , Uttar Pradesh , West Bengal , and also the Union Territories of Delhi and Jammu and Kashmir. Although the government school system in most other states emphasises Standard Hindi, at universities in cities such as Lucknow , Aligarh and Hyderabad , Urdu is spoken and learnt, and Saaf or Khaalis Urdu is treated with just as much respect as Shuddh Hindi.

Geographical distribution Main article: Hindustani-speaking world Spread of Hindustani across the world Majority/Official Significant Minority/Recognized Minority Besides being the lingua franca of North India and Pakistan in South Asia, [ 14 ] [ 44 ] Hindustani is also spoken by many in the South Asian diaspora and their descendants around the world, including North America (e.g., in Canada, Hindustani is one of the fastest growing languages), [ 108 ] Europe , and the Middle East .

A sizeable population in Afghanistan , especially in Kabul , can also speak and understand Hindi–Urdu due to the popularity and influence of Bollywood films and songs in the region, as well as the fact that many Afghan refugees spent time in Pakistan in the 1980s and 1990s.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Fiji Hindi was derived from the Hindustani linguistic group and is spoken widely by Fijians of Indian origin.

Hindustani was also one of the languages that was spoken widely during British rule in Burma . Many older citizens of Myanmar , particularly Anglo-Indians and the Anglo-Burmese , still know it, although it has had no official status in the country since military rule began.

Hindustani is also spoken in the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council , where migrant workers from various countries live and work for several years.

Phonology Main article: Hindustani phonology Hindustani phonology, shared by both Hindi and Urdu, is characterized by a symmetrical ten-vowel system, where vowels are distinguished by length, with long vowels typically being tense and short vowels lax. The language also includes nasalized vowels, as well as a wide array of consonants, including aspirated and murmured sounds. Hindustani maintains a four-way phonation distinction among plosives, unlike the two-way distinction in English.

Grammar Main article: Hindustani grammar Vocabulary See also: Hindustani etymology and Hindustani vocabulary Hindi–Urdu's core vocabulary has an Indic base, being derived from Prakrit , which in turn derives from Sanskrit , [ 47 ] [ 21 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] as well as a substantial number of loanwords from Persian and Arabic (via Persian).

[ 95 ] [ 51 ] Hindustani contains around 5,500 words of Persian and Arabic origin.

[ 111 ] There are also quite a few words borrowed from English, as well as some words from other European languages such as Portuguese and Dutch .

[ 112 ] Hindustani also borrowed Persian prefixes to create new words. Persian affixes became so assimilated that they were used with original Khari Boli words as well.

Writing system Main articles: Hindustani orthography , Devanagari Braille , and Urdu Braille "Surahi" in Samrup Rachna calligraphy Historically, Hindustani was written in the Kaithi , Devanagari, and Urdu alphabets.

[ 81 ] Kaithi and Devanagari are two of the Brahmic scripts native to India, whereas the Urdu alphabet is a derivation of the Perso-Arabic script written in Nastaʿlīq , which is the preferred calligraphic style for Urdu.

Today, Hindustani continues to be written in the Urdu alphabet in Pakistan. In India, the Hindi register is officially written in Devanagari, and Urdu in the Urdu alphabet, to the extent that these standards are partly defined by their script.

However, in popular publications in India, Urdu is also written in Devanagari, with slight variations to establish a Devanagari Urdu alphabet alongside the Devanagari Hindi alphabet.

Devanagari अ आ इ ई उ ऊ ए ऐ ओ औ ə aː ɪ iː ʊ uː eː ɛː oː ɔː क क़ ख ख़ ग ग़ घ ङ k q kʰ x ɡ ɣ ɡʱ ŋ च छ ज ज़ झ झ़ ञ t͡ʃ t͡ʃʰ d͡ʒ z d͡ʒʱ ʒ ɲ [ 113 ] ट ठ ड ड़ ढ ढ़ ण ʈ ʈʰ ɖ ɽ ɖʱ ɽʱ ɳ त थ द ध न t tʰ d dʱ n प फ फ़ ब भ म p pʰ f b bʱ m य र ल व श ष स ह j ɾ l ʋ ʃ ʂ s ɦ Urdu alphabet Letter Name of letter Transliteration IPA ا alif a, ā, i, or u / ə / , / aː / , / ɪ / , or / ʊ / ب be b / b / پ pe p / p / ت te t / t / ٹ ṭe ṭ / ʈ / ث se s / s / ج jīm j / d͡ʒ / چ che c / t͡ʃ / ح baṛī he h̤ / h ~ ɦ / خ khe k͟h / x / د dāl d / d / ڈ ḍāl ḍ / ɖ / ذ zāl z / z / ر re r / r ~ ɾ / ڑ ṛe ṛ / ɽ / ز ze z / z / ژ zhe ž / ʒ / س sīn s / s / ش shīn sh / ʃ / ص su'ād s̤ / s / ض zu'ād ż / z / ط to'e t̤ / t / ظ zo'e ẓ / z / ع ‘ain ‘ – غ ghain ġ / ɣ / ف fe f / f / ق qāf q / q / ک kāf k / k / گ gāf g / ɡ / ل lām l / l / م mīm m / m / ن nūn n / n / ں nūn ghunna ṁ or m̐ / ◌̃ / و wā'o w, v, ō, or ū / ʋ / , / oː / , / ɔ / or / uː / ہ choṭī he h / h ~ ɦ / ھ do chashmī he h / ʰ / or / ʱ / ء hamza ' / ʔ / ی ye y or ī / j / or / iː / ے baṛī ye ai or ē / ɛː / , or / eː / Because of anglicisation in South Asia and the international use of the Latin script , Hindustani is occasionally written in the Latin script. This adaptation is called Roman Urdu or Romanised Hindi, depending upon the register used. Since Urdu and Hindi are mutually intelligible when spoken, Romanised Hindi and Roman Urdu (unlike Devanagari Hindi and Urdu in the Urdu alphabet) are mostly mutually intelligible as well.

Sample text Colloquial Hindustani An example of colloquial Hindustani: [ 47 ] Devanagari : ये कितने का है?

Urdu : یہ کتنے کا ہے؟ Romanisation : Ye kitnē kā hai?

English : How much is this?

The following is a sample text, Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , in the two official registers of Hindustani, Hindi and Urdu. Because this is a formal legal text, differences in vocabulary are most pronounced.

Literary Hindi अनुच्छेद १ — सभी मनुष्यों को गौरव और अधिकारों के विषय में जन्मजात स्वतन्त्रता और समानता प्राप्त हैं। उन्हें बुद्धि और अन्तरात्मा की देन प्राप्त है और परस्पर उन्हें भाईचारे के भाव से बर्ताव करना चाहिए। [ 114 ] Urdu transliteration انُچھید ١ : سبھی منُشیوں کو گورو اور ادھکاروں کے وِشئے میں جنمجات سوَتنتْرتا پراپت ہیں۔ اُنہیں بدھی اور انتراتما کی دین پراپت ہے اور پرسپر اُنہیں بھائی چارے کے بھاؤ سے برتاؤ کرنا چاہئے۔ Transliteration (ISO 15919) Anucchēd 1: Sabhī manuṣyō̃ kō gaurav aur adhikārō̃ kē viṣay mē̃ janmajāt svatantratā aur samāntā prāpt haĩ. Unhē̃ buddhi aur antarātmā kī dēn prāpt hai aur paraspar unhē̃ bhāīcārē kē bhāv sē bartāv karnā cāhiē.

Transcription ( IPA ) səbʰiː mənʊʂjõː koː ɡɔːɾəʋ ɔːɾ ədʰɪkɑːɾõː keː ʋɪʂəj mẽː dʒənmədʒɑːt sʋətəntɾətɑː ɔːɾ səmɑːntɑː pɾɑːpt ɦɛ̃ː ‖ ʊnʰẽː bʊdːʰɪ ɔːɾ əntəɾɑːtmɑː kiː deːn pɾɑːpt ɦɛː ɔːɾ pəɾəspəɾ ʊnʰẽː bʰɑːiːtʃɑːɾeː keː bʰɑːʋ seː bəɾtɑːʋ kəɾnɑː tʃɑːɦɪeː ‖] Gloss (word-to-word) Article 1— All human-beings to dignity and rights' matter in from-birth freedom acquired is. Them to reason and conscience's endowment acquired is and always them to brotherhood's spirit with behaviour to do should.

Translation (grammatical) Article 1—All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

Literary Urdu :دفعہ ١: تمام اِنسان آزاد اور حُقوق و عِزت کے اعتبار سے برابر پَیدا ہُوئے ہَیں۔ انہیں ضمِیر اور عقل ودِیعت ہوئی ہَیں۔ اِس لئے انہیں ایک دُوسرے کے ساتھ بھائی چارے کا سُلُوک کرنا چاہئے۔ Devanagari transliteration दफ़ा १ — तमाम इनसान आज़ाद और हुक़ूक़ ओ इज़्ज़त के ऐतबार से बराबर पैदा हुए हैं। उन्हें ज़मीर और अक़्ल वदीयत हुई हैं। इसलिए उन्हें एक दूसरे के साथ भाई चारे का सुलूक करना चाहीए। Transliteration (ISO 15919) Dafʻah 1: Tamām insān āzād aur ḥuqūq ō ʻizzat kē iʻtibār sē barābar paidā hu’ē haĩ. Unhē̃ żamīr aur ʻaql wadīʻat hu’ī haĩ. Isli’ē unhē̃ ēk dūsrē kē sāth bhā’ī cārē kā sulūk karnā cāhi’ē.

Transcription ( IPA ) dəfaː eːk təmaːm ɪnsaːn aːzaːd ɔːɾ hʊquːq oː izːət keː ɛːtəbaːɾ seː bəɾaːbəɾ pɛːdaː hʊeː hɛ̃ː ʊnʱẽː zəmiːɾ ɔːɾ əql ʋədiːət hʊiː hɛ̃ː ɪs lɪeː ʊnʱẽː eːk duːsɾeː keː saːtʰ bʱaːiː tʃaːɾeː kaː sʊluːk kəɾnaː tʃaːhɪeː Gloss (word-to-word) Article 1: All humans free[,] and rights and dignity's consideration from equal born are. To them conscience and intellect endowed is. Therefore, they one another's with brotherhood's treatment do must.

Translation (grammatical) Article 1—All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience. Therefore, they should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

Hindustani and Bollywood The predominant Indian film industry Bollywood , located in Mumbai , Maharashtra , uses Standard Hindi, colloquial Hindustani, Bombay Hindi , Urdu , [ 115 ] Awadhi , Rajasthani , Bhojpuri , and Braj Bhasha , along with Punjabi and with the liberal use of English or Hinglish in scripts and soundtrack lyrics.

Film titles are often screened in three scripts: Latin, Devanagari and occasionally Perso-Arabic. The use of Urdu or Hindi in films depends on the film's context: historical films set in the Delhi Sultanate or Mughal Empire are almost entirely in Urdu, whereas films based on Hindu mythology or ancient India make heavy use of Hindi with Sanskrit vocabulary.

In recent years, boycotts have been launched against Bollywood films by Hindu nationalists partially on the basis that the films feature too much Urdu, with some critics employing the epithet "Urduwood".

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] See also India portal Pakistan portal Language portal Caribbean Hindustani Hindustan (Indian subcontinent) Languages of India Languages of Pakistan List of Hindi authors List of Urdu authors Hindi–Urdu transliteration Uddin and Begum Hindustani Romanisation Notes ^ Not to be confused with the Bihari languages , a group of Eastern Indo-Aryan languages .

^ Also written as हिंदुस्तानी ^ This will only display in a Nastaliq font if you will have one installed, otherwise it may display in a modern Arabic font in a style more common for writing Arabic and most other non-Urdu languages such as Naskh . If this پاکستان and this پاکستان looks like this پاکستان , then you are not seeing it in Nastaliq.

^ / ˌ h ɪ n d ʊ ˈ s t ɑː n i / ; Devanagari : हिन्दुस्तानी , [ b ] Perso-Arabic : ہندوستانی , [ c ] transliteration : Hindustānī , pronounced [ɦɪnd̪ʊst̪ɑːniː] , lit.

' of Hindustan ' [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] ^ [ 97 ] ( Hindi : बोलचाल हिन्दी, Urdu : بول چال ہندی) ^ [ 98 ] ( Hindi : आसान उर्दू, Urdu : آسان اردو) References ^ Robina Kausar; Muhammad Sarwar; Muhammad Shabbir (eds.).

"The History of the Urdu Language Together with Its Origin and Geographic Distribution" (PDF) .

International Journal of Innovation and Research in Educational Sciences .

2 (1).

^ a b "Hindi" L1: 322 million (2011 Indian census), including perhaps 150 million speakers of other languages that reported their language as "Hindi" on the census. L2: 274 million (2016, source unknown). Urdu L1: 67 million (2011 & 2017 censuses), L2: 102 million (1999 Pakistan, source unknown, and 2001 Indian census): Ethnologue 21.

Hindi at Ethnologue (21st ed., 2018) .

Urdu at Ethnologue (21st ed., 2018) .

^ a b c d Grierson, vol. 9–1, p. 47.

We may now define the three main varieties of Hindōstānī as follows:—Hindōstānī is primarily the language of the Upper Gangetic Doab, and is also the lingua franca of India, capable of being written in both Persian and Dēva-nāgarī characters, and without purism, avoiding alike the excessive use of either Persian or Sanskrit words when employed for literature. The name 'Urdū' can then be confined to that special variety of Hindōstānī in which Persian words are of frequent occurrence, and which hence can only be written in the Persian character, and, similarly, 'Hindī' can be confined to the form of Hindōstānī in which Sanskrit words abound, and which hence can only be written in the Dēva-nāgarī character.

^ a b c Ray, Aniruddha (2011).

The Varied Facets of History: Essays in Honour of Aniruddha Ray . Primus Books.

ISBN 978-93-80607-16-0 .

There was the Hindustani Dictionary of Fallon published in 1879; and two years later (1881), John J. Platts produced his Dictionary of Urdu, Classical Hindi and English , which implied that Hindi and Urdu  were literary forms of a single language. More recently, Christopher R. King in his One Language, Two Scripts (1994) has presented the late history of the single spoken language in two forms, with the clarity and detail that the subject deserves.

^ Gangopadhyay, Avik (2020).

Glimpses of Indian Languages . Evincepub publishing. p. 43.

ISBN 9789390197828 .

^ Norms & Guidelines Archived 13 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine , 2009. D.Ed. Special Education (Deaf & Hard of Hearing), Rehabilitation Council of India ^ "Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 – Chapter 1: Founding Provisions" .

www.gov.za . Retrieved 6 December 2014 .

^ "Abu Dhabi includes Hindi as third official court language" .

The Hindu . 10 February 2019 – via www.thehindu.com.

^ The Central Hindi Directorate regulates the use of Devanagari and Hindi spelling in India . Source: Central Hindi Directorate: Introduction Archived 15 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ "National Council for Promotion of Urdu Language" .

www.urducouncil.nic.in .

^ Zia, K. (1999).

Standard Code Table for Urdu Archived 8 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine . 4th Symposium on Multilingual Information Processing, (MLIT-4), Yangon , Myanmar . CICC, Japan . Retrieved on 28 May 2008.

^ McGregor, R. S., ed. (1993), "हिंदुस्तानी", The Oxford Hindi-English Dictionary , Oxford University Press, p. 1071, 2.

hindustani [P. hindustani] f Hindustani (a mixed Hindi dialect of the Delhi region which came to be used as a lingua franca widely throughout India and what is now Pakistan) "हिंदुस्तानी", बृहत हिंदी कोश खंड 2 (Large Hindi Dictionary, Volume 2) , केन्द्रीय हिंदी निदेशालय, भारत सरकार (Central Hindi Directorate, Government of India), p. 1458 , retrieved 17 October 2021 Das, Shyamasundar (1975), Hindi Shabda Sagar (Hindi dictionary) in 11 volumes, revised edition , Kashi (Varanasi): Nagari Pracharini Sabha , p. 5505, हिंदुस्तानी hindustānī३ संज्ञा स्त्री॰ १. हिंदुस्तान की भाषा । २. बोलचाल या व्यवहार की वह हिंदी जिसमें न तो बहुत अरबी फारसी के शब्द हों न संस्कृत के । उ॰—साहिब लोगों ने इस देश की भाषा का एक नया नाम हिंदुस्तानी रखा । Translation: Hindustani hindustānī3 noun feminine 1. The language of Hindustan. 2. That version of  Hindi employed for common speech or business in which neither many Arabic or Persian words nor Sanskrit words are present. Context: The British gave the new name Hindustani to the language of this country.

Chaturvedi, Mahendra (1970), "हिंदुस्तानी", A Practical Hindi-English Dictionary , Delhi: National Publishing House, hindustānī hīndusta:nī:  a theoretically existent style of the Hindi language which is supposed to consist of current and simple words of any sources whatever and is neither too much biassed in favour of Perso-Arabic elements nor has any place for too much high-flown Sanskritized vocabulary ^ a b c "About Hindi-Urdu" .

North Carolina State University . Archived from the original on 15 August 2009 . Retrieved 9 August 2009 .

^ a b c d Mohammad Tahsin Siddiqi (1994), Hindustani-English code-mixing in modern literary texts , University of Wisconsin, ... Hindustani is the lingua franca of both India and Pakistan ...

^ "Hindustani language" . Encyclopedia Britannica. 1 November 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

(subscription required) lingua franca of northern India and Pakistan. Two variants of Hindustani, Urdu and Hindi, are official languages in Pakistan and India, respectively. Hindustani began to develop during the 13th century CE in and around the Indian cities of Delhi and Meerut in response to the increasing linguistic diversity that resulted from Muslim hegemony. In the 19th century its use was widely promoted by the British, who initiated an effort at standardization. Hindustani is widely recognized as India's most common lingua franca, but its status as a vernacular renders it difficult to measure precisely its number of speakers.

^ Yoon, Bogum; Pratt, Kristen L., eds. (15 January 2023).

Primary Language Impact on Second Language and Literacy Learning . Lexington Books. p. 198.

In terms of cross-linguistic relations, Urdu's combinations of Arabic-Persian orthography and Sanskrit linguistic roots provides interesting theoretical as well as practical comparisons demonstrated in table 12.1.

^ Trask, R. L. (8 August 2019), "Hindi-Urdu" , Dictionary of Historical and Comparative Linguistics , Edinburgh University Press, pp.

149– 150, ISBN 9781474473316 , Hindi-Urdu The most important modern Indo-Aryan language, spoken by well over 250 million people, mainly in India and Pakistan. At the spoken level Hindi and Urdu are the same language (called Hindustani before the political partition), but the two varieties are written in different alphabets and differ substantially in their abstract and technical vocabularies ^ Crystal, David (2001), A Dictionary of Language , Chicago : University of Chicago Press , ISBN 9780226122038 , (p. 115) Figure: A family of languages: the Indo-European family tree, reflecting geographical distribution. Proto Indo-European>Indo-Iranian>Indo-Aryan (Sanskrit)> Midland (Rajasthani, Bihari, Hindi/Urdu); (p. 149) Hindi There is little structural difference between Hindi and Urdu, and the two are often grouped together under the single label Hindi/Urdu, sometimes abbreviated to Hirdu, and formerly often called Hindustani; (p. 160) India ... With such linguistic diversity, Hindi/Urdu has come to be widely used as a lingua franca.

^ Gandhi, M. K.

(2018).

An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments with Truth: A Critical Edition . Translated by Desai, Mahadev . annotation by Suhrud, Tridip.

New Haven and London: Yale University Press .

ISBN 9780300234077 .

(p. 737) I was handicapped for want of suitable Hindi or Urdu words. This was my first occasion for delivering an argumentative speech before an audience especially composed of Mussalmans of the North. I had spoken in Urdu at the Muslim League at Calcutta, but it was only for a few minutes, and the speech was intended only to be a feeling appeal to the audience. Here, on the contrary, I was faced with a critical, if not hostile, audience, to whom I had to explain and bring home my view-point. But I had cast aside all shyness. I was not there to deliver an address in the faultless, polished Urdu of the Delhi Muslims, but to place before the gathering my views in such broken Hindi as I could command. And in this I was successful. This meeting afforded me a direct proof of the fact that Hindi-Urdu alone could become the lingua franca<Footnote M8> of India. (M8: "national language" in the Gujarati original).

^ a b Basu, Manisha (2017).

The Rhetoric of Hindutva .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-14987-8 .

Urdu, like Hindi, was a standardized register of the Hindustani language deriving from the Dehlavi dialect and emerged in the eighteenth century under the rule of the late Mughals.

^ a b c d Gube, Jan; Gao, Fang (2019).

Education, Ethnicity and Equity in the Multilingual Asian Context .

Springer Publishing .

ISBN 978-981-13-3125-1 .

The national language of India and Pakistan 'Standard Urdu' is mutually intelligible with 'Standard Hindi' because both languages share the same Indic base and are all but indistinguishable in phonology and grammar (Lust et al. 2000).

^ Kothari, Rita; Snell, Rupert (2011).

Chutnefying English: The Phenomenon of Hinglish . Penguin Books India.

ISBN 978-0-14-341639-5 .

^ a b Vajpeyi, Ananya (2012).

"Hindi, Hinglish: Head to Head" .

World Policy Journal .

29 (2): 97– 103.

doi : 10.1177/0740277512451519 . Retrieved 29 October 2023 .

^ a b Salwathura, A. N. " Evolutionary development of ‘hinglish’language within the Indian sub-continent.

" International Journal of Research-GRANTHAALAYAH . Vol. 8. No. 11. Granthaalayah Publications and Printers, 2020. 41-48.

^ a b Vanita, Ruth (1 April 2009).

"Eloquent Parrots; Mixed Language and the Examples of Hinglish and Rekhti" .

International Institute for Asian Studies Newsletter (50): 16– 17.

^ a b Singh, Rajendra (1 January 1985).

"Modern Hindustani and Formal and Social Aspects of Language Contact" .

ITL - International Journal of Applied Linguistics .

70 (1): 33– 60.

doi : 10.1075/itl.70.02sin .

ISSN 0019-0829 .

^ "After experiments with Hindi as national language, how Gandhi changed his mind" .

Prabhu Mallikarjunan . The Feral. 3 October 2019.

^ Rai, Alok.

"The Persistence of Hindustani" .

ResearchGate .

^ Lelyveld, David (1 January 1993).

"Colonial knowledge and the fate of Hindustani" .

Comparative Studies in Society and History .

35 (4): 665– 682.

doi : 10.1017/S0010417500018661 .

S2CID 144180838 .

^ Bhat, Riyaz Ahmad; Bhat, Irshad Ahmad; Jain, Naman; Sharma, Dipti Misra (2016).

"A House United: Bridging the Script and Lexical Barrier between Hindi and Urdu" (PDF) . Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference on Computational Linguistics . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

Hindi and Urdu transliteration has received a lot of attention from the NLP research community of South Asia (Malik et al., 2008; Lehal and Saini, 2012; Lehal and Saini, 2014). It has been seen to break the barrier that makes the two look different.

^ Dhanesh Jain; George Cardona, eds. (2007).

The Indo-Aryan languages . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-79711-9 .

OCLC 648298147 .

Such an early date for the inception of a Hindi literature, one made possible only by subsuming the large body of Apabhraṁśa literature into Hindi, has not, however, been generally accepted by scholars (p. 279).

^ Kachru, Yamuna (2006).

Hindi . Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing.

The period between 1000 AD-1200/1300 AD is designated the Old NIA stage because it is at this stage  that  the  NIA  languages  such  as  Assamese,  Bengali,  Gujarati, Hindi , Marathi, Oriya, Punjabi assumed distinct identities (p. 1, emphasis added) ^ Dua, Hans (2008). "Hindustani". In Keith Brown; Sarah Ogilvie (eds.).

Concise Encyclopedia of Languages of the World . Oxford: Elsevier. pp.

497– 500.

Hindustani as a colloquial speech developed over almost seven centuries from 1100 to 1800 (p. 497, emphasis added).

^ Chapman, Graham. "Religious vs. regional determinism: India, Pakistan and Bangladesh as inheritors of empire." Shared space: Divided space. Essays on conflict and territorial organization (1990): 106-134.

^ a b c d e First Encyclopaedia of Islam: 1913-1936 .

Brill Academic Publishers . 1993. p. 1024.

ISBN 9789004097964 .

Whilst the Muhammadan rulers of India spoke Persian, which enjoyed the prestige of being their court language, the common language of the country continued to be Hindi, derived through Prakrit from Sanskrit. On this dialect of the common people was grafted the Persian language, which brought a new language, Urdu, into existence. Sir George Grierson, in the Linguistic Survey of India, assigns no distinct place to Urdu, but treats it as an offshoot of Western Hindi.

^ a b "Women of the Indian Sub-Continent: Makings of a Culture - Rekhta Foundation" .

Google Arts & Culture . Retrieved 25 February 2020 .

The "Ganga-Jamuni tehzeeb" is one such instance of the composite culture that marks various regions of the country.  Prevalent in the North, particularly in the central plains, it is born of the union between the Hindu and Muslim cultures. Most of the temples were lined along the Ganges and the Khanqah (Sufi school of thought) were situated along the Yamuna river (also called Jamuna). Thus, it came to be known as the Ganga-Jamuni tehzeeb, with the word "tehzeeb" meaning culture. More than communal harmony, its most beautiful by-product was "Hindustani" which later gave us the Hindi and Urdu languages.

^ a b Matthews, David John; Shackle, C.; Husain, Shahanara (1985).

Urdu literature . Urdu Markaz; Third World Foundation for Social and Economic Studies.

ISBN 978-0-907962-30-4 .

But with the establishment of Muslim rule in Delhi, it was the Old Hindi of this area which came to form the major partner with Persian. This variety of Hindi is called Khari Boli, 'the upright speech'.

^ a b Dhulipala, Venkat (2000).

The Politics of Secularism: Medieval Indian Historiography and the Sufis .

University of Wisconsin–Madison . p. 27.

Persian became the court language, and many Persian words crept into popular usage. The composite culture of northern India, known as the Ganga Jamuni tehzeeb was a product of the interaction between Hindu society and Islam.

^ a b Indian Journal of Social Work, Volume 4 .

Tata Institute of Social Sciences . 1943. p. 264.

... more words of Sanskrit origin but 75% of the vocabulary is common. It is also admitted that while this language is known as Hindustani, ... Muslims call it Urdu and the Hindus call it Hindi. ... Urdu is a national language evolved through years of Hindu and Muslim cultural contact and, as stated by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, is essentially an Indian language and has no place outside.

^ a b Mody, Sujata Sudhakar (2008).

Literature, Language, and Nation Formation: The Story of a Modern Hindi Journal 1900-1920 . University of California, Berkeley. p. 7.

...Hindustani, Rekhta, and Urdu as later names of the old Hindi (a.k.a. Hindavi).

^ a b Kesavan, B. S. (1997).

History Of Printing And Publishing In India . National Book Trust, India. p. 31.

ISBN 978-81-237-2120-0 .

It might be useful to recall here that Old Hindi or Hindavi, which was a naturally Persian- mixed language in the largest measure, has played this role before, as we have seen, for five or six centuries.

^ Hans Henrich Hock (1991).

Principles of Historical Linguistics . Walter de Gruyter. p. 475.

ISBN 978-3-11-012962-5 .

During the time of British rule, Hindi (in its religiously neutral, 'Hindustani' variety) increasingly came to be the symbol of national unity over against the English of the foreign oppressor. And Hindustani was learned widely throughout India, even in Bengal and the Dravidian south. ... Independence had been accompanied by the division of former British India into two countries, Pakistan and India. The former had been established as a Muslim state and had made Urdu, the Muslim variety of Hindi–Urdu or Hindustani, its national language.

^ Masica, Colin P. (1993).

The Indo-Aryan Languages . Cambridge University Press. pp. 430 (Appendix I).

ISBN 978-0-521-29944-2 .

Hindustani - term referring to common colloquial base of HINDI and URDU and to its function as lingua franca over much of India, much in vogue during Independence movement as expression of national unity; after Partition in 1947 and subsequent linguistic polarization it fell into disfavor; census of 1951 registered an enormous decline (86-98 per cent) in no. of persons declaring it their mother tongue (the majority of HINDI speakers and many URDU speakers had done so in previous censuses); trend continued in subsequent censuses: only 11,053 returned it in 1971...mostly from S India; [see Khubchandani 1983: 90-1].

^ a b c Ashmore, Harry S. (1961).

Encyclopaedia Britannica: a new survey of universal knowledge, Volume 11 .

Encyclopædia Britannica . p. 579.

The everyday speech of well over 50,000,000 persons of all communities in the north of India and in West Pakistan is the expression of a common language, Hindustani.

^ Tunstall, Jeremy (2008).

The media were American: U.S. mass media in decline . Oxford University Press. p.

160 .

ISBN 978-0-19-518146-3 .

The Hindi film industry used the most popular street level version of Hindi, namely Hindustani, which included a lot of Urdu and Persian words.

^ a b Hiro, Dilip (2015).

The Longest August: The Unflinching Rivalry Between India and Pakistan .

PublicAffairs . p. 398.

ISBN 978-1-56858-503-1 .

Spoken Hindi is akin to spoken Urdu, and that language is often called Hindustani. Bollywood's screenplays are written in Hindustani.

^ a b c d e f Delacy, Richard; Ahmed, Shahara (2005).

Hindi, Urdu & Bengali . Lonely Planet. pp.

11– 12.

Hindi and Urdu are generally considered to be one spoken language with two different literary traditions. That means that Hindi and Urdu speakers who shop in the same markets (and watch the same Bollywood films) have no problems understanding each other.

^ "Ties between Urdu & Sanskrit deeply rooted: Scholar" .

The Times of India . 12 March 2024 . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

The linguistic and cultural ties between Sanskrit and Urdu are deeply rooted and significant, said Ishtiaque Ahmed, registrar, Maula Azad National Urdu University during a two-day workshop titled "Introduction to Sanskrit for Urdu medium students". Ahmed said a substantial portion of Urdu's vocabulary and cultural capital, as well as its syntactic structure, is derived from Sanskrit.

^ a b c Kuiper, Kathleen (2010).

The Culture of India .

Rosen Publishing .

ISBN 978-1-61530-149-2 .

Urdu is closely related to Hindi, a language that originated and developed in the Indian subcontinent. They share the same Indic base and are so similar in phonology and grammar that they appear to be one language.

^ a b Chatterji, Suniti Kumar; Siṃha, Udaẏa Nārāẏana; Padikkal, Shivarama (1997).

Suniti Kumar Chatterji: a centenary tribute . Sahitya Akademi.

ISBN 978-81-260-0353-2 .

High Hindi written in Devanagari, having identical grammar with Urdu, employing the native Hindi or Hindustani (Prakrit) elements to the fullest, but for words of high culture, going to Sanskrit. Hindustani proper that represents the basic Khari Boli with vocabulary holding a balance between Urdu and High Hindi.

^ a b Draper, Allison Stark (2003).

India: A Primary Source Cultural Guide .

Rosen Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-0-8239-3838-4 .

People in Delhi spoke Khari Boli, a language the British called Hindustani. It used an Indo-Aryan grammatical structure and numerous Persian "loan-words." ^ Ahmad, Aijaz (2002).

Lineages of the Present: Ideology and Politics in Contemporary South Asia . Verso. p. 113.

ISBN 9781859843581 .

On this there are far more reliable statistics than those on population.

Farhang-e-Asafiya is by general agreement the most reliable Urdu dictionary. It twas compiled in the late nineteenth century by an Indian scholar little exposed to British or Orientalist scholarship. The lexicographer in question, Syed Ahmed Dehlavi, had no desire to sunder Urdu's relationship with Farsi, as is evident even from the title of his dictionary. He estimates that roughly 75 per cent of the total stock of 55,000 Urdu words that he compiled in his dictionary are derived from Sanskrit and Prakrit, and that the entire stock of the base words of the language, without exception, are derived from these sources. What distinguishes Urdu from a great many other Indian languauges ... is that is draws almost a quarter of its vocabulary from language communities to the west of India, such as Farsi, Turkish, and Tajik. Most of the little it takes from Arabic has not come directly but through Farsi.

^ Dalmia, Vasudha (31 July 2017).

Hindu Pasts: Women, Religion, Histories .

SUNY Press . p. 310.

ISBN 9781438468075 .

On the issue of vocabulary, Ahmad goes on to cite Syed Ahmad Dehlavi as he set about to compile the Farhang-e-Asafiya, an Urdu dictionary, in the late nineteenth century. Syed Ahmad 'had no desire to sunder Urdu's relationship with Farsi, as is evident from the title of his dictionary. He estimates that roughly 75 per cent of the total stock of 55.000 Urdu words that he compiled in his dictionary are derived from Sanskrit and Prakrit, and that the entire stock of the base words of the language, without exception, are from these sources' (2000: 112-13). As Ahmad points out, Syed Ahmad, as a member of Delhi's aristocratic elite, had a clear bias towards Persian and Arabic. His estimate of the percentage of Prakitic words in Urdu should therefore be considered more conservative than not. The actual proportion of Prakitic words in everyday language would clearly be much higher.

^ Brandt, Carmen; Sohoni, Pushkar (2 January 2018).

"Script and identity – the politics of writing in South Asia: an introduction" .

South Asian History and Culture .

9 (1): 1– 15.

doi : 10.1080/19472498.2017.1411048 .

ISSN 1947-2498 .

S2CID 148802248 .

^ Brandt, Carmen (1 January 2020).

"From a Symbol of Colonial Conquest to the Scripta Franca: The Roman Script for South Asian Languages" .

Academia .

^ Not considering whether speakers may be bilingual in Hindi and Urdu.

"What are the top 200 most spoken languages?" .

Ethnologue . 2025 . Retrieved 11 May 2025 .

^ "Scheduled Languages in descending order of speaker's strength - 2011" (PDF) .

Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India . 29 June 2018.

^ Gambhir, Vijay (1995).

The Teaching and Acquisition of South Asian Languages .

University of Pennsylvania Press .

ISBN 978-0-8122-3328-5 .

The position of Hindi–Urdu among the languages of the world is anomalous. The number of its proficient speakers, over three hundred million, places it in third of fourth place after Mandarin, English, and perhaps Spanish.

^ a b c d Students' Britannica India .

Encyclopaedia Britannica . 2000. p. 299.

Hindustani developed as lingua franca in the medieval ages in and around Delhi, Meerut and Saharanpur because of the interaction between the speakers of Khariboli (a dialect developed in this region out of Shauraseni Prakrit) and the speakers of Persian , Turkish , and various dialects of Arabic who migrated to North India. Initially it was known by various names such as Rekhta (mixed), Urdu (language of the camp) and Hindvi or Hindustani (language of Hindustan). Though Khariboli supplied its basic vocabulary and grammar, it borrowed quite a lot of words from Persian and Arabic ^ Kathleen Kuiper, ed. (2011).

The Culture of India .

Rosen Publishing . p. 80.

ISBN 9781615301492 .

Hindustani began to develop during the 13th century AD in and around the Indian cities of Dehli and Meerut in response to the increasing linguistic diversity that resulted from Muslim hegemony.

^ Keith Brown; Sarah Ogilvie (2008), Concise Encyclopedia of Languages of the World , Elsevier, ISBN 978-0-08-087774-7 , Apabhramsha seemed to be in a state of transition from Middle Indo-Aryan to the New Indo-Aryan stage. Some elements of Hindustani appear ... the distinct form of the lingua franca Hindustani appears in the writings of Amir Khusro (1253–1325), who called it Hindwi[.] ^ Prakāśaṃ, Vennelakaṇṭi (2008).

Encyclopaedia of the Linguistic Sciences: Issues and Theories . Allied Publishers. p. 186.

ISBN 9788184242799 .

In Deccan the dialect developed and flourished independently. It is here that it received, among others, the name Dakkhni. The kings of many independent kingdoms such as Bahmani, Ādil Shahi and Qutb Shahi that came into being in Deccan patronized the dialect. It was elevated as the official language.

^ Mustafa 2008 , p. 185.

^ Gat, Azar ; Yakobson, Alexander (2013).

Nations: The Long History and Deep Roots of Political Ethnicity and Nationalism . Cambridge University Press. p. 126.

ISBN 978-1-107-00785-7 .

^ Lydia Mihelič Pulsipher; Alex Pulsipher; Holly M. Hapke (2005), World Regional Geography: Global Patterns, Local Lives , Macmillan, ISBN 978-0-7167-1904-5 , ... By the time of British colonialism, Hindustani was the lingua franca of all of northern India and what is today Pakistan ...

^ Concise Encyclopedia of Languages of the World . Elsevier. 2010. p. 497.

ISBN 978-0-08-087775-4 .

Hindustani is a Central Indo-Aryan language based on Khari Boli (Khaṛi Boli). Its origin, development, and function reflect the dynamics of the sociolinguistic contact situation from which it emerged as a colloquial speech. It is inextricably linked with the emergence and standardisation of Urdu and Hindi.

^ Williams, Tyler; Malhotra, Anshu; Hawley, John S. (3 January 2018).

Text and Tradition in Early Modern North India . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-909167-6 .

These traditions intensively fed into each other and can be perceived as forming a 'super-tradition', which with a modern, heuristic term is called Old Hindi.

^ Zahir ud-Din Mohammad (10 September 2002), Thackston, Wheeler M. (ed.), The Baburnama: Memoirs of Babur, Prince and Emperor , Modern Library Classics, ISBN 978-0-375-76137-9 , Note: Gurkānī is the Persianized form of the Mongolian word "kürügän" ("son-in-law"), the title given to the dynasty's founder after his marriage into Genghis Khan 's family.

^ B.F. Manz, "Tīmūr Lang" , in Encyclopaedia of Islam , Online Edition, 2006 ^ Encyclopædia Britannica , " Timurid Dynasty ", Online Academic Edition, 2007. (Quotation: "Turkic dynasty descended from the conqueror Timur (Tamerlane), renowned for its brilliant revival of artistic and intellectual life in Iran and Central Asia. ... Trading and artistic communities were brought into the capital city of Herat, where a library was founded, and the capital became the centre of a renewed and artistically brilliant Persian culture.") ^ "Timurids" .

The Columbia Encyclopedia (Sixth ed.). New York City: Columbia University . Archived from the original on 5 December 2006 . Retrieved 8 November 2006 .

^ Encyclopædia Britannica article: Consolidation & expansion of the Indo-Timurids , Online Edition, 2007.

^ Bennett, Clinton ; Ramsey, Charles M. (2012).

South Asian Sufis: Devotion, Deviation, and Destiny . A&C Black. p. 18.

ISBN 978-1-4411-5127-8 .

^ Laet, Sigfried J. de Laet (1994).

History of Humanity: From the seventh to the sixteenth century . UNESCO. p. 734.

ISBN 978-92-3-102813-7 .

^ a b Taj, Afroz (1997).

"About Hindi-Urdu" .

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2010 . Retrieved 30 June 2019 .

^ a b Strnad, Jaroslav (2013).

Morphology and Syntax of Old Hindī: Edition and Analysis of One Hundred Kabīr vānī Poems from Rājasthān .

Brill Academic Publishers .

ISBN 978-90-04-25489-3 .

Quite different group of nouns occurring with the ending -a in the dir. plural consists of words of Arabic or Persian origin borrowed by the Old Hindi with their Persian plural endings.

^ Grajcar, Rhône (6 February 2024).

"In Delhi, an Urdu Wala, and a 'Dying' Language's Quiet, Vibrant Life" . Mangoprism . Retrieved 15 October 2024 .

But those who make this claim focus more on the fate of Urdu in its place of origin, the Doab plains between the Ganga and Jamuna rivers of Northern India.

^ Farooqi, M. (2012).

Urdu Literary Culture: Vernacular Modernity in the Writing of Muhammad Hasan Askari .

Springer .

ISBN 978-1-137-02692-7 .

Historically speaking, Urdu grew out of interaction between Hindus and Muslims.

^ Hindustani (2005).

Keith Brown (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (2 ed.). Elsevier.

ISBN 0-08-044299-4 .

^ Alyssa Ayres (23 July 2009).

Speaking Like a State: Language and Nationalism in Pakistan . Cambridge University Press. pp.

19 –.

ISBN 978-0-521-51931-1 .

^ a b c Pollock, Sheldon (2003).

Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia . University of California Press. p. 912.

ISBN 978-0-520-22821-4 .

^ a b "Rekhta: Poetry in Mixed Language, The Emergence of Khari Boli Literature in North India" (PDF) .

Columbia University . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 April 2018 .

^ Nijhawan, S. 2016. "Hindi, Urdu or Hindustani? Revisiting 'National Language' Debates through Radio Broadcasting in Late Colonial India." South Asia Research 36(1):80–97.

doi : 10.1177/0262728015615486 .

^ Khalid, Kanwal. "Lahore During the Ghanavid Period".

^ Aijazuddin Ahmad (2009).

Geography of the South Asian Subcontinent: A Critical Approach . Concept Publishing Company. pp. 120–.

ISBN 978-81-8069-568-1 .

^ Coatsworth, John (2015).

Global Connections: Politics, Exchange, and Social Life in World History . United States: Cambridge Univ Pr. p. 159.

ISBN 9780521761062 .

^ Tariq Rahman (2011).

"Urdu as the Language of Education in British India" (PDF) .

Pakistan Journal of History and Culture .

32 (2). NIHCR: 1– 42.

^ King, Christopher R. (1994).

One Language, Two Scripts: The Hindi Movement in Nineteenth Century North India . New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

^ Hurst, John Fletcher (1992).

Indika, The country and People of India and Ceylon . Concept Publishing Company. p. 344. GGKEY:P8ZHWWKEKAJ.

^ a b "Hindustani language: Origins & Vocabulary" .

archive.ph . 1 April 2022. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022 . Retrieved 17 April 2022 .

^ Coulmas, Florian (2003).

Writing Systems: An Introduction to Their Linguistic Analysis . Cambridge University Press. p. 232.

ISBN 978-0-521-78737-6 .

^ Masica, Colin (1991).

The Indo-Aryan Languages . Cambridge University Press. p. 430.

after Partition in 1947 and subsequent linguistic polarization it [Hindustani] fell into disfavor; census of 1951 registered an enormous decline (86-98 per cent) in no. of persons declaring it as their mother language ^ Coleman, Julie (10 January 2014).

Global English Slang: Methodologies and Perspectives . Routledge. p. 130.

ISBN 978-1-317-93476-9 .

Within India, however, other regional forms exist, all denoting a mixing of English with indigenous languages.

Bonglish (derived from the slang term Bong 'a Bengali') or Benglish refers to 'a mixture of Bengali and English', Gunglish or Gujlish 'Gujarati + English', Kanglish 'Kannada + English', Manglish 'Malayalam + English', Marlish 'Marathi + English', Tamlish or Tanglish 'Tamil + English' and Urdish 'Urdu + English'. These terms are found in texts on regional variations of Indian English, usually in complaint-tradition discussions of failing standards of language purity.

^ a b Peter-Dass, Rakesh (2019).

Hindi Christian Literature in Contemporary India .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-00-070224-8 .

Two forms of the same language, Nagarai Hindi and Persianized Hindi (Urdu) had identical grammar, shared common words and roots, and employed different scripts.

^ a b Jain, Danesh; Cardona, George (2007).

The Indo-Aryan Languages . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-79711-9 .

The primary sources of non-IA loans into MSH are Arabic, Persian, Portuguese, Turkic and English. Conversational registers of Hindi/Urdu (not to mentioned formal registers of Urdu) employ large numbers of Persian and Arabic loanwords, although in Sanskritized registers many of these words are replaced by tatsama forms from Sanskrit. The Persian and Arabic lexical elements in Hindi result from the effects of centuries of Islamic administrative rule over much of north India in the centuries before the establishment of British rule in India. Although it is conventional to differentiate among Persian and Arabic loan elements into Hindi/Urdu, in practice it is often difficult to separate these strands from one another. The Arabic (and also Turkic) lexemes borrowed into Hindi frequently were mediated through Persian, as a result of which a throrough intertwining of Persian and Arabic elements took place, as manifest by such phenomena as hybrid compounds and compound words. Moreover, although the dominant trajectory of lexical borrowing was from Arabic into Persian, and thence into Hindi/Urdu, examples can be found of words that in origin are actually Persian loanwords into both Arabic and Hindi/Urdu.

^ Rahman, Tariq (2011).

From Hindi to Urdu: A Social and Political History (PDF) . Oxford University Press. p. 99. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2014.

^ Agnihotri, Rama Kant (2007).

Hindi: an essential grammar . Essential grammars (1. publ ed.). London: Routledge. p. 05.

ISBN 978-0-415-35671-8 .

^ Shackle, C.; Snell, Rupert (1990).

Hindi and Urdu since 1800: a common reader (in English, Hindi, and Urdu). New Delhi, India: Heritage Publishers. p. 09.

ISBN 978-81-7026-162-9 .

^ King, Robert D. (10 January 2001).

"The poisonous potency of script: Hindi and Urdu" .

International Journal of the Sociology of Language (150).

doi : 10.1515/ijsl.2001.035 .

ISSN 0165-2516 .

^ Smith, Ian (2008). "Pidgins, Creoles, and Bazaar Hindi". In Kachru, Braj B; Kachru, Yamuna; Sridhar, S.N (eds.).

Language in South Asia . Cambridge University Press. pp. 254.

ISBN 1139465503 ^ a b c d Faruqi, Shamsur Rahman (2003), "A Long History of Urdu Literarature, Part 1", in Pollock (ed.), Literary cultures in history: reconstructions from South Asia , University of California Press, p. 806, ISBN 978-0-520-22821-4 ^ Garcia, Maria Isabel Maldonado. 2011. "The Urdu language reforms." Studies 26(97).

^ Alyssa Ayres (23 July 2009).

Speaking Like a State: Language and Nationalism in Pakistan .

Cambridge University Press . p.

19 .

ISBN 9780521519311 .

^ P.V.Kate (1987).

Marathwada Under the Nizams . Mittal Publications. p. 136.

ISBN 9788170990178 .

^ A Grammar of the Hindoostanee Language , Chronicle Press, 1796 , retrieved 8 January 2007 ^ Schmidt, Ruth L (2003). Cardona, George; Jain, Dhanesh (eds.).

Urdu . Routledge. pp.

318– 319.

ISBN 9780700711307 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Government of India: National Policy on Education Archived 20 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Census data shows Canada increasingly bilingual, linguistically diverse" .

^ Hakala, Walter N. (2012).

"Languages as a Key to Understanding Afghanistan's Cultures" (PDF) .

National Geographic . Retrieved 13 March 2018 .

In the 1980s and '90s, at least three million Afghans--mostly Pashtun--fled to Pakistan, where a substantial number spent several years being exposed to Hindi- and Urdu-language media, especially Bollywood films and songs, and being educated in Urdu-language schools, both of which contributed to the decline of Dari, even among urban Pashtuns.

^ Krishnamurthy, Rajeshwari (28 June 2013).

"Kabul Diary: Discovering the Indian connection" . Gateway House: Indian Council on Global Relations . Retrieved 13 March 2018 .

Most Afghans in Kabul understand and/or speak Hindi, thanks to the popularity of Indian cinema in the country.

^ Kuczkiewicz-Fraś, Agnieszka (2008).

Perso-Arabic Loanwords in Hindustani . Kraków: Księgarnia Akademicka. p. x.

ISBN 978-83-7188-161-9 .

^ Chandola, Anoop Chandra (1963).

"Some Linguistic Influences of English on Hindi" .

Anthropological Linguistics .

5 (2): 9– 13.

ISSN 0003-5483 .

JSTOR 30022405 .

^ Kachru, Yamuna (2006), Hindi , John Benjamins Publishing, p. 17, ISBN 90-272-3812-X ^ "UDHR - Hindi" (PDF) .

UN Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner .

^ "Decoding the Bollywood poster" .

National Science and Media Museum . 28 February 2013.

^ "Is the Hindu Nationalist 'Boycott Bollywood' Campaign Impacting the Box Office?" .

thediplomat.com . Retrieved 31 October 2023 .

^ Raj, Kaushik; Gurmat, Sabah (30 September 2022).

"Bollywood under siege as rightwing social media boycotts start to bite" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 31 October 2023 .

^ "The siege of Bollywood" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 31 October 2023 .

Bibliography Asher, R. E. 1994. "Hindi." Pp. 1547–49 in The Encyclopedia of language and linguistics , edited by R. E. Asher. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

ISBN 0-08-035943-4 .

Bailey, Thomas G. 1950.

Teach yourself Hindustani . London: English Universities Press.

Chatterji, Suniti K. 1960.

Indo-Aryan and Hindi (rev. 2nd ed.). Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay.

Dua, Hans R. 1992. "Hindi-Urdu as a pluricentric language." In Pluricentric languages: Differing norms in different nations , edited by M. G. Clyne. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

ISBN 3-11-012855-1 .

Dua, Hans R. 1994a. "Hindustani." Pp. 1554 in The Encyclopedia of language and linguistics , edited by R. E. Asher. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Mustafa, K.S (2008), "Dakkhni" , in Prakāśaṃ, Vennelakaṇṭi (ed.), Encyclopaedia of the Linguistic Sciences: Issues and Theories , Allied Publishers, pp.

185– 186, ISBN 978-1139465502 —— 1994b. "Urdu." Pp. 4863–64 in The Encyclopedia of language and linguistics , edited by R. E. Asher. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Rai, Amrit. 1984.

A house divided: The origin and development of Hindi-Hindustani . Delhi: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-561643-X Further reading Henry Blochmann (1877).

English and Urdu dictionary, romanized (8 ed.). Calcutta: Printed at the Baptist mission press for the Calcutta school-book society. p. 215 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

the University of Michigan John Dowson (1908).

A grammar of the Urdū or Hindūstānī language (3 ed.). London: K. Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., ltd. p.

264 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

the University of Michigan Duncan Forbes (1857).

A dictionary, Hindustani and English, accompanied by a reversed dictionary, English and Hindustani (2nd ed.). London: Sampson Low, Marston & Company. p. 1144.

OCLC 1043011501 .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

John Thompson Platts (1874).

A grammar of the Hindūstānī or Urdū language . Vol. 6423 of Harvard College Library preservation microfilm program. London: W.H. Allen. p. 399 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

Oxford University —— (1892).

A grammar of the Hindūstānī or Urdū language . London: W.H. Allen. p. 399 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

the New York Public Library —— (1884).

A dictionary of Urdū, classical Hindī, and English (reprint ed.). London: H. Milford. p. 1259 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

Oxford University Shakespear, John.

A Dictionary, Hindustani and English.

3rd ed., much enl. London: Printed for the author by J.L. Cox and Son: Sold by Parbury, Allen, & Co., 1834.

Taylor, Joseph.

A dictionary, Hindoostanee and English . Available at Hathi Trust . (A dictionary, Hindoostanee and English / abridged from the quarto edition of Major Joseph Taylor; as edited by the late W. Hunter; by William Carmichael Smyth.) External links Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Hindi-Urdu_phrasebook .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Hindostani ".

Bolti Dictionary (Hindustani) Hamari Boli (Hindustani) Hindustani as an anxiety between Hindi–Urdu Commitment Hindi? Urdu? Hindustani? Hindi-Urdu?

Hindi/Urdu-English-Kalasha-Khowar-Nuristani-Pashtu Comparative Word List GRN Report for Hindustani Hindustani Poetry [ usurped ] Hindustani online resources National Language Authority (Urdu), Pakistan (muqtadera qaumi zaban) v t e Hindi Etymology Grammar Declension Pronouns Verbs Orthography Phonology Devanagari Numerals Braille History Profanity Vocabulary Varieties Western Braj Bundeli Haryanvi Hindustani Kauravi Kannauji Parya Sansi Eastern Awadhi Bihari Hindi Caribbean Hindustani Fiji Hindi Surinamese Hindustani Bagheli Chhattisgarhi Pidgins and Creoles Andaman Creole Hindi Arunachali Hindi Bombay Hindi Haflong Hindi Hinglish Language politics Anti-Hindi agitations of Karnataka Anti-Hindi agitations of Tamil Nadu Anti-Hindi agitations of West Bengal Hindi imposition Hindi–Urdu controversy Hindutva boycott of Hindi films Punjabi Suba movement National organizations Department of Official Language Central Hindi Directorate Hindi Academy Hindustani Academy Global organizations World Hindi Secretariat World Hindi Conference HindiUSA Arts Literature Authors Poets Blogosphere Awards Sahitya Akademi Award Sahitya Akademi Award recipients Sahitya Akademi Fellowship Jnanpith Award Vyas Samman Cinema Actors Actresses Television Actors Actresses Music Classical Dance Film Wedding Media School Theatre Hindi Day Hindi-speaking world v t e Urdu Hindustani History Alphabet Grammar Phonology Vocabulary Nastaliq Braille Varieties Dialects Standard Urdu Begamati Dakhini Dhakaiya Hyderabadi Judeo-Urdu Kalkatiya Karkhandari Rekhta Forms Aurangabad Urdu British Urdu Roman Urdu Urdish Politics Urdu movement Hindi-Urdu controversy Arts Awards Literature Informatics Cinema Poetry Music Writers Poets Progressive Writers' Movement Uddin & Begum Romanisation v t e Indo-Aryan languages Dardic Kashmiri Kashmiri Kishtwari Shina Shina Brokskat Kundal Shahi Kalkoti Ushoji Palula Sawi Pashayi Pashayi Kunar Dameli Gawar-Bati Nangalami Shumashti Wotapuri-Katarqalai Chitral Kalasha Khowar Hazara Division Indus Kohistani Bateri Chilisso Gowro Kalami Tirahi Mankiyali Northern Eastern Doteli Jumli Nepali Central Garhwali Kumaoni Western Dogri Kangri Bhadarwahi Churahi Bhateali Bilaspuri Chambeali Gaddi Pangwali Mandeali Mahasu Pahari Jaunsari Kullui Pahari Kinnauri Hinduri Sirmauri Sarazi Northwestern Punjabi Eastern Punjabi dialects Sansi Lahnda Hindko Inku Khetrani Pahari-Pothwari Saraiki Sindhi Jadgali Kholosi Kutchi Luwati Memoni Sindhi Western Gujarati Aer Gujarati Lisan ud-Dawat Jandavra Koli Kachi Parkari Wadiyara Saurashtra Vaghri Rajasthani Bagri Goaria Loarki Gujari Dhundari Harauti Malvi Marwari Mewati Mewari Shekhawati Dhatki Od Nimadi Bhil Bhili Bhilali Chodri Dhodia–Kukna Dhanki Dubli Bauria Bhilori Mawchi Magari Palya Bareli Pauri Bareli Rathwi Bareli Pardhi Gamit Kalto Vasavi Wagdi Vaagri Booli Others Khandeshi Lambadi Dawoodi Domari Romani list of languages Central Western Braj Bhasha Bundeli Haryanvi Hindustani Kauravi Hindi Hinglish / Urdish Urdu Deccani Judeo-Urdu Hyderabadi Urdu Rekhta Kannauji Sansi Sadhukkadi Eastern Awadhi Bagheli Chhattisgarhi Fiji Hindi Others Parya Eastern Bihari Bhojpuric Bhojpuri Caribbean Hindustani Magahi Magahi Khortha Maithili Maithili Angika Bajjika Sadanic Sadri Kurmali Tharuic Tharu Kochila Buksa Majhi Musasa Others Kumhali Kuswaric Bote-Darai Danwar Gauda– Kamarupa Bengali Bengali dialects Bishnupriya Manipuri Hajong Kharia Thar Kurmukar Mal Paharia Noakhali Sylheti Tanchangya Chittagonian Chakma Rohingya Kamarupic Assamese Kamrupi Dehan Goalpariya Rajbanshi (Nepal) Rangpuri Surjapuri Odia Odia Sambalpuri Desia Bhatri Bodo Parja Reli Kupia Halbic Halbi Kamar Bhunjia Nahari Southern Marathi– Konkani Marathic Marathi Varhadi Andh Berar Deccan Varli Phudagi Katkari Kadodi Konkanic Konkani Maharashtrian Konkani Nawayathi Insular Maldivian Sinhala Old Sanskrit Vedic Classical Mitanni superstrate Middle Early Ashokan Prakrit Pāli Early Ardhamagadhi Middle ( Prakrit ) Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dramatic Prakrits Ardhamagadhi Magadhi Maharashtri Shauraseni Gāndhārī Gaudi Paishachi Late ( Apabhraṃśa ) Abahattha Apabhraṃśa Elu Kamarupi Khasa Prakrit Proto- languages Proto-Indo-Iranian Proto-Indo-Aryan Unclassified Badeshi (unknown further classification) Bazigar Chinali–Lahul Chinali Lahul Lohar Sheikhgal Pidgins and creoles Andaman Creole Hindi Bombay Hindi Haflong Hindi Nagamese Nefamese Vedda See also Indo-Iranian languages Nuristani languages Iranian languages v t e Major languages of South Asia Languages of Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan India list by number of speakers scheduled classical Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Contemporary languages Great Andamanese Aka-Jeru Aka-Bo Dravidian Brahui Kannada Malayalam Tamil Telugu Tulu Germanic English Bangladeshi Indian Nepalese Pakistani Sri Lankan Indo-Aryan Angika Assamese Bhojpuri Bengali Chakma Chittagonian Dhivehi Dogri Gujarati Hindustani Hindi Urdu Hinglish Hindko Kashmiri Konkani Kumaoni Magahi Mahal Maithili Marathi Nepali Odia Punjabi Rajasthani Rangpuri Sanskrit Saraiki Sindhi Sinhala Sylheti Iranian Balochi Dari Pashto Wakhi Isolates Burushaski Nihali Kusunda Khasic Khasi Lyngngam Pnar War Malay creoles Sri Lankan Creole Malay Munda Ho Korku Mundari Santali Sora Nicobaric Car Central Nicobarese Chaura Southern Nicobarese Teressa Ongan Önge Jarawa Romance French Portuguese Sino-Tibetan Ao Balti Bodo Dzongkha Garo Hajong Ladakhi Limbu Meitei Mizo Nepal Bhasa Sikkimese Tenyidie Tibetan Tripuri Turkic Turkmen Uzbek Scripts Historical Brahmi (Abugida) Greek Indus (Undeciphered) Kharosthi Arabic Arabi Malayalam Arwi Nastaliq Shahmukhi Brahmic Devanagari Bengali Gujarati Gurmukhi Malayalam Kannada Odia Ranjana Sinhala Tamil Telugu Old Italic Latin Other Thaana Prestige language- influence Englishisation Hinglish Perso-Arabization Urdu Sanskritisation Activism Bengali movement Hela Havula Meitei associate official language movement Meitei classical language movement Meitei linguistic purism movement Newar movement Nepali movement Punjabi Movement Pure Tamil movement Sanskrit revival Urdu movement Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hindustani_language&oldid=1304321850 " Categories : Hindustani language Languages attested from the 13th century Lingua francas Indo-Aryan languages Languages written in Devanagari Hidden categories: Articles containing Hindi-language text Articles with text in Indic languages Pages with Hindustani IPA Language articles citing Ethnologue 21 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Hindi-language sources (hi) CS1 Urdu-language sources (ur) CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from March 2022 Use Indian English from April 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Language articles with Linguasphere code Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Urdu-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Pages with plain IPA CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 09:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hindustani language 114 languages Add topic

