Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tectonic plate movement Toggle Tectonic plate movement subsection 1.1 Subduction 2 Geologic characteristics Toggle Geologic characteristics subsection 2.1 Sedimentary compositions 2.2 Ophiolites 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Chile triple junction 6 languages Español Français Italiano Polski Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Place where the South American, Nazca and Antarctic tectonic plates meet Chile triple junction (CTJ) The Chile triple junction (or Chile margin triple junction ) is a geologic triple junction located on the seafloor of the Pacific Ocean off Taitao and Tres Montes Peninsula on the southern coast of Chile . Here three tectonic plates meet: the South American plate , the Nazca plate and the Antarctic plate . This triple junction is unusual in that it consists of a mid-oceanic ridge , the Chile Rise , being subducted under the South American plate at the Peru–Chile Trench . The Chile triple junction is the boundary between the Chilean Rise and the Chilean margin, where the Nazca, Antarctic, and South American plates meet at the trench.

Tectonic plate movement [ edit ] The Nazca plate and Antarctic plate are colliding with the South American plate at the Chile triple junction.

The Antarctic plate started to subduct beneath South America 14 million years ago in the Miocene epoch forming the Chile triple junction. At first the Antarctic plate subducted only in the southernmost tip of Patagonia , meaning that the Chile triple junction lay near the Strait of Magellan . As the southern part of Nazca plate and the Chile Rise became consumed by subduction and the more northerly regions of the Antarctic plate begun to subduct beneath Patagonia so that the Chile triple junction advanced gradually to its present position in front of Taitao Peninsula at 46°15'.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The South American plate is moving away from the Nazca plate and moving in a direction to the north of the Chile ridge spreading center, while the Nazca plate is subducting under the South American plate at a rate of about 80–90 mm/a north of the triple junction.

[ 3 ] The triple junction of the Chile Ridge, the Chile Trench and the Antarctic plate collided about 14 Ma ago near the latitude of Tierra del Fuego . Since then it has migrated north, with the actual triple junction now located at 46°12'S.The Chilean margin consists of the Nazca-Antarctic spreading center, the Chile Rise or Chile Ridge, and the Chile Ridge, with the Nazca-Antarctic spreading center being at 46.5° S, the Chile Rise or Chile Ridge being more prominent in the south. Additionally around 14 Ma, the Chile Rise collided with the South American continental plate . The high relief topography caused the trench to be devoid of sediment at the Chile-South America junction.

[ 4 ] Subduction [ edit ] The Chile triple junction, a geologic junction off the southern coast of Chile where the South American, Nazca and Antarctic tectonic plates meet Subduction accretion is an important process that leads to mountain building and the growth of continents, but it is also associated with the destruction of forearc material. The impact of topographic features, such as topographic features of mountain ranges and faulting, is one important mechanism. An impact between a spreading ridge and a continental forearc can result in a thermal pulse within the forearc. This thermal pulse can be quantified using apatite fission track data and the thermal maturity of organic carbon in the forearc sediment. Several authors have suggested that subduction erosion or slip during earthquakes may be responsible for the uplift of the Coastal Cordillera, a trench-parallel morphostructural system in north Chile.

[ 4 ] Geologic characteristics [ edit ] The Juan Fernández Ridge (JFR) is a prominent feature on the oceanic Nazca lithosphere located west of the Chile Trench. The O'Higgins seamount group, surrounded by a topographic swell, acts as a barrier between the north and south half of the Chile Trench.

[ 3 ] Sedimentary compositions [ edit ] The continental basement of southern Chile is mainly formed of metasedimentary and metavolcanic rocks of Paleozoic age intruded by Cretaceous and Tertiary, acidic, I-type plutonic rocks of the Patagonian Batholith. In the southern-central Chilean margin, the sediment in the Chile trench is confined to the Chile Rise. The trench is unusually poor in sediments north of the JFR, but is heavily sedimented south of the Chile triple junction. The accretionary prism is confined between the two large topographic features, the Chile Rise and the JFR. The northern Chilean margin is poor in sediments due to low sediment supplies from the Andes and the presence of the JFR, which acts as a barrier to the transport of trench sediments from the southern Chile trench to the north.

[ 3 ] Ophiolites [ edit ] Taitao Peninsula lies near the triple junction and various geological features, such as the Taitao ophiolite , are related to the dynamics of the triple junction.

[ 5 ] Ridge and trench collisions are clear indications of the subduction history around the Pacific Ocean and are likely a dominant mechanism of ophiolite positioning. This results in a rapid sinking and spreading along with magmatic activity near the oceanic trench .

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Liquiñe-Ofqui Fault References [ edit ] Tectonics of South America: Chile Triple Junction The Chile Margin Triple Junction: Modern Analog to Ancient California?

^ Cande, S.C.; Leslie, R.B. (1986). "Late Cenozoic Tectonics of the Southern Chile Trench".

Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth .

91 (B1): 471– 496.

Bibcode : 1986JGR....91..471C .

doi : 10.1029/JB091iB01p00471 .

^ Pedoja, Kevin; Regard, Vincent; Husson, Laurent; Martinod, Joseph; Guillaume, Benjamin; Fucks, Enrique; Iglesias, Maximiliano; Weill, Pierre (2011).

"Uplift of quaternary shorelines in eastern Patagonia: Darwin revisited" .

Geomorphology .

127 (3): 121– 142.

Bibcode : 2011Geomo.127..121P .

doi : 10.1016/j.geomorph.2010.08.003 .

S2CID 55240986 .

^ a b c Contreras-Reyes, Eduardo (2018).

Structure and Tectonics of the ChileanConvergent Margin from Wide-AngleSeismic Studies: A Review . Santiago, Chile. pp.

1– 25.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c Behermann, Lewis, Cande, J.H., S.D., S.C. (August 5, 1994). "Tectonics and geology of spreading ridge subduction at the Chile triple junction: a synthesis of results from Leg 141 of the Ocean Drilling Program".

ODP Leg 141 Scientific Party .

83 (4): 832– 851.

Bibcode : 1994GeoRu..83..832B .

doi : 10.1007/BF00251080 .

S2CID 129583136 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Nelson, Eric; Forsythe, Randall; Diemer, John; Allen, Mike (1993).

"Taitao ophiolite: a ridge collision ophiolite in the forearc of southern Chile (46°S)" .

Revista Geológica de Chile .

20 (2): 137– 165 . Retrieved December 23, 2018 .

v t e Geology of Chile Sedimentary basins Altiplano Arauco Aysén Caldera Neuquén Magallanes Osorno–Llanquihue Pucatrihue Salar de Atacama Salta Santiago Temuco Valdivia Faults Atacama Fault Biobío-Aluminé Fault Cachet Fault Domeyko Fault El Arrayán Fault Futrono Fault Gastre Fault Lanalhue Fault Liquiñe-Ofqui Fault Magallanes-Fagnano Fault Mocha-Villarrica Fault Pichilemu Fault Reigolil-Pirihueico Fault San Ramón Fault Valeriano Fault Batholiths Coastal central Chile Elqui-Limarí Futrono-Riñihue North Patagonian Panguipulli South Patagonian Vicuña Mackenna Metamorphic complexes Bahía Mansa Belén Chañaral Choapa Chonos Cordillera Darwin Eastern Andes Mejillones Puerto Edén Punta de Choros Quebrada del Carrizo Trafún Tierra del Fuego Terranes Arequipa-Antofalla Chaitenia Chilenia Chiloé Cuyania Fitz Roy Madre de Dios Mejillonia Patagonia Geology portal • Chile portal v t e Triple junctions Triple trench Boso Banda Sea Triple ridge Aden–Owen–Carlsberg Afar Azores Fifteen-Twenty fracture zone Galápagos Bouvet Rivera Rodrigues South Greenland Tongareva Triple fault Karlıova Trench–trench–ridge Chile Fault–fault–trench Kamchatka–Aleutian Maraş Mendocino Ridge–fault–fault Macquarie Ridge–trench–fault Queen Charlotte See also Mount Fuji Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chile_triple_junction&oldid=1276105004 " Categories : Plate tectonics Triple junctions Geology of Aysén Region Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 February 2025, at 22:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chile triple junction 6 languages Add topic

