Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Oriental revolution 1.3 Liga Federal 1.4 Luso Brazilian invasion 2 Ideals 3 Legacy 4 See also 5 Footnotes 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents José Gervasio Artigas 42 languages العربية Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Uruguayan military leader during the War for Independence You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish .

(November 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:José Gervasio Artigas]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|es|José Gervasio Artigas}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

In this Spanish name , the first or paternal surname is Artigas and the second or maternal family name is Arnal .

"Artigas" redirects here. For other uses, see Artigas (disambiguation) .

José Gervasio Artigas Artigas en la Ciudadela by Juan Manuel Blanes Nickname(s) Karaí-Guasú Born ( 1764-06-19 ) June 19, 1764 Montevideo , Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata Died September 23, 1850 (1850-09-23) (aged 86) Asunción , Paraguay Buried Plaza Independencia Allegiance United Provinces of the Río de la Plata Years of service 1797–1820 Rank General Battles / wars British invasions of the River Plate Portuguese invasion of the Banda Oriental (1811–12) Argentine War of Independence Portuguese conquest of the Banda Oriental Argentine Civil Wars Signature Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e José Gervasio Artigas Arnal ( Spanish pronunciation: [xoˈse xeɾˈβa.sjo aɾˈti.ɣas aɾˈnal] ; June 19, 1764 – September 23, 1850) was a soldier and statesman who is regarded as a national hero in Uruguay and the father of Uruguayan nationhood.

Born in Montevideo , Artigas enlisted in the Spanish military in 1797 and fought the British in the Anglo-Spanish War . At the outbreak of the Spanish-American wars of independence , Artigas supported the Primera Junta in Buenos Aires against Spain. He defeated the Spanish royalists at Las Piedras and laid siege to Montevideo, but was forced to withdraw in the face of Portuguese intervention . Artigas subsequently broke with the centralist government of Buenos Aires and took over Montevideo in 1815. He then oversaw the creation of the Federal League , an alliance of six provinces under a federal style of government. In 1816, the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves invaded the Banda Oriental , eventually annexing it as a province. Artigas was driven into Paraguay , where he lived in exile until his death in 1850. His remains were re-interred at the Central Cemetery of Montevideo in 1855, and in 1977 they were transferred to the Artigas Mausoleum .

Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Artigas was born in Montevideo on June 19, 1764. His grandparents were from Zaragoza , Buenos Aires and Tenerife ( Canary Islands ).

[ 1 ] His grandparents fought in the War of the Spanish Succession and moved to the Americas to escape from poverty, settling in Buenos Aires in 1716.

[ 2 ] Artigas was the son of Martín José Artigas and Francisca Antonia Arnal, who came from a wealthy family. His parents enrolled him in the Colegio de San Bernardino , to pursue religious studies, but Artigas refused to submit to the school's strict discipline. Before he left the school, he developed a strong friendship with Fernando Otorgues , who would work with him in later years.

[ 3 ] At the age of 12, he moved to the countryside and worked on his family's farms. His contact with the customs and perspectives of gauchos and Indians made a great impression on him.

[ 4 ] Once he had come of age, he distanced himself from his parents and became involved in cattle smuggling. This made him a wanted man among the owners of haciendas and with the government in Montevideo. A reward was put out for his death.

[ 5 ] Things changed with the opening of the Anglo-Spanish War , and the threat of a British invasion upon the viceroyalty. The viceroy Antonio de Olaguer y Feliú negotiated a pardon with his family, on the condition that he joined the Corps of Blandengues with a hundred men, to form a battalion.

[ 6 ] Thus, he began his military career in 1797, at the age of 33, with the rank of lieutenant. The attack finally came in 1806, when William Beresford invaded Buenos Aires, in the first British invasion of the River Plate . Although Artigas's unit was tasked with patrolling the frontier with Brazil, he requested to take part in the military expedition that Santiago de Liniers launched from Montevideo to drive the British out of Buenos Aires. His request was granted, and the British were defeated. After the recapture of Buenos Aires, he was tasked with returning to Montevideo and informing the governor Pascual Ruiz Huidobro of the result of the battle.

[ 7 ] A second British invasion was launched culminating in the Battle of Montevideo , which ended in the fall of Montevideo. Artigas was taken prisoner, but he managed to escape and took refuge in the countryside. He organized groups of gauchos and began a guerrilla war against the British.

[ 8 ] The British tried to capture Buenos Aires a second time. They were defeated by the local troops and returned Montevideo to Spanish control as part of the terms of capitulation. Artigas was promoted to captain in 1809.

[ 9 ] Oriental revolution [ edit ] La Mañana de Asencio , portrait by Carlos María Herrera about the cry of Asencio .

The ideas of the Age of Enlightenment and the outbreak of the Peninsular War (from 1807 to 1814) in Spain, along with the capture of King Ferdinand VII , generated political turbulence all across the Spanish Empire . The absence of the king from the throne (replaced by the French Joseph Bonaparte ) and the new ideas of the Enlightenment sparked the Spanish-American wars of independence , between patriots (who wanted to establish republics or constitutional monarchies) and royalists (who wanted to keep an absolute monarchy).
Artigas, who thought that the gauchos were not treated well, supported the new ideas.

Buenos Aires deposed the viceroy in 1810, during the May Revolution , replacing him with the Primera Junta .

Spain declared Buenos Aires a rogue city, and appointed Montevideo as the new capital, with Francisco Javier de Elío , who was an experienced hard-line colonialist from Cádiz , as the new viceroy.

[ 10 ] In February 1811, he declared war on Buenos Aires and this sparked the independence movement of Banda Oriental.

[ 11 ] Mariano Moreno , the Argentine secretary of war, wrote at the Operations plan that Artigas would be a decisive ally against the royalists in Montevideo, and called him for an interview. However, by the time Artigas arrived in Buenos Aires, Moreno had already left the government. He was still welcomed, but received little help. He was promoted to colonel and received some weapons, money and 150 men, very little to organize a rebellion at the Banda Oriental . This was the last time Artigas saw the city of Buenos Aires.

[ 12 ] Equestrian monument of Artigas in Minas , Uruguay.

The alliance between Artigas and the Argentines sustained initial successes, particularly in the late 1810 to mid-1811.

[ 13 ] Montevideo had financial problems, however, and the measures taken by Elío to maintain the royalist armies were highly unpopular in the countryside. This allowed Artigas to channel the popular discontent against the colonial authorities.

[ 14 ] A hundred men met near the Asencio stream and made the cry of Asencio , a pronunciamiento against the viceroy. They captured many villages in the Banda Oriental , such as Mercedes , Santo Domingo , Colla , Maldonado , Paso del Rey , Santa Teresa and San José . They also captured Gualeguay , Gualeguaychú and Arroyo de la China , the west of the Uruguay River.

[ 15 ] Elío sent some soldiers to kill Artigas, but they failed to accomplish their mission. Then, he sent Manuel Villagrán, a relative of Artigas, to offer him a pardon and appoint him general and military leader of the Banda Oriental if he gave up the rebellion. Artigas considered the offer an insult, and sent Villagrán prisoner to Buenos Aires.

[ 15 ] Montevideo was soon surrounded by Artigas's forces. A Montevidean army tried to stop the patriots at the Battle of Las Piedras , but they were defeated, and the city was put under siege.

José Rondeau , commanding forces from Buenos Aires, joined the siege. Artigas wanted to attack the city right away, but Rondeau thought that there would be less loss of lives by establishing a blockade and waiting for the city to surrender. However, the besiegers did not consider the naval forces of Montevideo, who kept the city supplied and enabled them to endure the blockade.

[ 16 ] On the verge of defeat, Elío allied himself with Brazilian forces, requesting their intervention in the conflict . Dom Diogo de Sousa entered the Banda Oriental, leading an army of five thousand men. This added to the Argentinian defeat of Manuel Belgrano at the Paraguay campaign , the defeat of Juan José Castelli at the First Upper Peru campaign and the Montevidean naval blockade of Buenos Aires. Fearing a complete defeat, Buenos Aires signed a truce with Elío, recognizing him as the ruler of the Banda Oriental and half of Entre Ríos. Artigas felt the truce to be treasonous. He broke relations with the city, and lifted the blockade over Montevideo.

[ 17 ] Portrait of the Oriental exodus .

Artigas left the Banda Oriental and moved to Salto Chico , in Entre Ríos. All his supporters moved with him. This massive departure is known as the Oriental exodus .

The Supreme Director Gervasio Antonio de Posadas offered a reward of $6.000 for the capture of Artigas, dead or alive. The only consequence of this action was increased resentment of the Orientals towards Buenos Aires. Several royalist leaders, such as Vigodet or Pezuela, sought an alliance with Artigas against Buenos Aires, but he rejected them: " I may not be sold, nor do I want more reward for my efforts than to see my nation free from the Spanish rule ".

[ 18 ] Despite the deep disputes, Artigas was still eager to return to good terms with Buenos Aires, but only if the city accepted a national organization based on federalist principles.

[ 19 ] Posadas sent two more armies to capture and execute Artigas, but they mutinied and joined the Orientals. When the Artiguist influence expanded to Corrientes, Posadas sought to negotiate by accepting the autonomy of the provinces. Artigas accepted the terms, but clarified that such autonomy must not be understood as national independence. He did not want to secede the Banda Oriental from the United provinces, but to organize them as a confederation. Posadas, who supported the authority of Buenos Aires as the head of a centralized state, delayed the approval of the treaty.

[ 20 ] Buenos Aires renewed the military actions against Montevideo. This time, the naval skills of Argentinian William Brown helped to overcome the strength of the Montevidean navy, leading to the final defeat of the royalist stronghold.

Carlos María de Alvear led the capture of Montevideo, and lured Artigas there by promising that he would turn over the city to the Oriental patriots. Alvear attacked them without warning at Las Piedras, but Artigas managed to escape from the trap.

[ 21 ] Liga Federal [ edit ] Artigas Mausoleum at Plaza Independencia in Montevideo.

In 1814, Artigas organized the Liga de los Pueblos Libres ( League of the Free Peoples ), of which he was declared Protector. In the following year, he liberated Montevideo from the control of the "Unitarians" from Buenos Aires.

In 1815, Artigas attended the Congress of Oriente, a year before the Congress of Tucuman, held in Arrollo de la China (today known as Concepción del Uruguay).  It was at this congress that the provinces of the Oriental Province (today the country of Uruguay ), Córdoba , Corrientes , Entre Ríos , Misiones and Santa Fe declared themselves independent from Spain and formed the Liga Federal ("Federal League").  The Liga Federal invited other provinces of the former Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata to join them under a federal system.

In this congress, Artigas rectified the use of the flag created by Manuel Belgrano (which would later become the flag of the Argentine Republic ), adding a diagonal festoon in red, the color of federalism in Argentina at that time, and changing the Borbonic light blue for Revolutionary dark blue.

Luso Brazilian invasion [ edit ] "Artigas in Paraguay" , painting by Eduardo Dionisio Carbajal .

Main article: Luso-Brazilian invasion The continued growth of influence and prestige of the Federal League frightened the governments in Buenos Aires (because of its federalism) and Portugal (because of its republicanism), and in August 1816, Portugal invaded the Eastern Province (with tacit complicity from Buenos Aires), with the intention of destroying Artigas and his revolution.

The Portuguese forces, led by Carlos Frederico Lecor , captured Artigas and his deputies and occupied Montevideo on 20 January 1817, but the struggle continued for three years in the countryside. Infuriated by Buenos Aires's passivity, Artigas declared war on Buenos Aires while he was losing to the Portuguese. His subordinates, members of the Federal League— Francisco Ramírez , governor of Entre Ríos , and Estanislao López , governor of Santa Fe —managed to defeat the centralism of Buenos Aires . But hope for a new nation was short-lived; both commanders entered agreements with Buenos Aires that went against the principles of Artigas.  They rebelled against him and left him to be crushed by the Portuguese.

Without resources and men, Artigas withdrew to Paraguay in September 1820. In Paraguay, Dr.

Francia , the dictator, banished him to Candelaria.  He then disappeared from the political life of the region.

After a long exile, he died in Paraguay on September 23rd in 1850, at age 86. It is said that Artigas, feeling himself to be near death, asked for a horse and died in the saddle, as a gaucho. His remains were buried and then re-interred at the Panteón Nacional in 1855. On 19 June 1977, his remains were transferred to the Artigas Mausoleum in the centre of the Plaza Independencia .

Ideals [ edit ] Artigas funeral urn in its Mausoleum.

Main article: Artiguism Artigas was a staunch democrat and federalist, opposed to monarchism and centralism .

Artiguism has two main sources: the works of American authors such as Thomas Paine (supporters of federalism ) and the French authors of the Enlightenment as Jean-Jacques Rousseau . Some books Artigas read in his teens include Paine's Common Sense and Rousseau's The Social Contract .

The first "Caudillo" or Founding Father of the La Plata territory seems to be inspired more in the British enlightenment than from the French.

The ideology of Artigas is partially taken from U.S. legal texts. The American political liberalism exerted a strong influence on Artigas. Other Hispanic independence leaders, however, were more influenced by the French Revolution and the authors of France. Some historians such as Eugenio Petit Muñoz and Ariosto González, have shown that some paragraphs of the Artiguist documents were taken directly from "The Independence of the Mainland Justified by Thomas Paine, Thirty Years Ago" published by Paine in Philadelphia in 1811 and translated immediately into Spanish, and "Concise History of the United States" by John McCulloch. Artigas had both books.

The first of the works cited contained a large appendix of documents with the United States Declaration of Independence , the Federal Constitution of 1787 and the State Constitutions of Massachusetts , New Jersey , Pennsylvania and Virginia .

Legacy [ edit ] Bust of Artigas in Belo Horizonte .

Statue of Artigas in Plaza Uruguaya , Asunción.

Artigas has become a national hero in Uruguay. This is significant as, since independence, many Uruguayan figures have been heroes of either the Colorado or the Blanco party, while being reviled by the other side. As such, Artigas has been the namesake of numerous places, vessels, etc. throughout Uruguayan history , particularly during periods of peace and reunification between the parties.

Artigas Department , the northernmost region of Uruguay (formed 1 October 1884 from Salto Department ).

Artigas , the homonymous capital of the aforementioned department (established 1852).

Artigas Airport (SUAG/ATI), its airport.

General Artigas Bridge , which connects Paysandú, Uruguay and Colón, Argentina (completed 1975).

Fortress General Artigas , a military museum on Montevideo Hill (completed 1809, renamed 1882, rededicated 1916).

General Artigas Military Club in Montevideo (established 1925).

General Artigas Military School in Montevideo (established 1947).

Artigas Base , Uruguay's Antarctic research station (established 1984).

The Uruguayan 1st Cavalry Regiment ( Reg. "Blandengues de Artigas" de Caballería Nº 1 ).

The ROU 04 General Artigas , a converted German Lüneburg (E)-class replenishment oiler (commissioned 2005).

The former ROU 02 General Artigas , a converted French Commandant Rivière -class frigate (commissioned 1988, decommissioned 2005).

The former ROU Artigas (DE-2), a converted American Cannon -class destroyer escort (commissioned 1952, decommissioned 1988).

The former General Artigas , an Uruguayan (Austro-Hungarian built) gunboat (commissioned 1884, decommissioned 1915).

The former steamship General Artigas , employed by President Flores during his successful rebellion.

The Artigas flag , flown outside Uruguayan government buildings and used by all branches of the Armed Forces .

The Plaza Uruguay in Polanco, in Mexico City has a statue of Artigas.

Artigas's birthday (19 June) is celebrated as a national holiday in Uruguay.

Statues of José Artigas stand on Constitution Avenue in Washington, D.C.; on 6th Avenue in Spring Street Park , New York; in Plaza Artigas Salto, Uruguay ; in Caracas , Venezuela ; in Athens , Greece ; in Mexico City ; in Newark, New Jersey ; in Quito, Ecuador as well as in the town centre of Montevideo, Minnesota and in Punta del Este , Uruguay.

Asunción, Paraguay has a statue of Artigas in its Plaza Uruguay, and the Calle Sebastián Gaboto was renamed the Avenida Artigas in his honor in 1926. An imposing monument of the Uruguayan caudillo stands in Buenos Aires ' Recoleta district on the Avenida Libertador, the work of Uruguayan sculptor Juan José Zorrilla de San Martín and architect Alejandro Bustillo. A bust of José Gervasio Artigas can be also found at Luis Muñoz Rivera Park in San Juan, Puerto Rico .

The Crest of Club Nacional de Football is inspired by the Artigas flag.

Additionally, an extinct giant rodent genus , whose fossils were first found in San José Department , was named Josephoartigasia after José Artigas.

There is also a monument and square dedicated to Artigas in Rome, in the Villa Borghese park, Italy .

There is a monument in honor of José Artigas in Bucharest , Romania .

There is a monument in honor of José Artigas in Sofia , Bulgaria .

Jose Artigas Marg is a street named in honor of Jose Artigas in New Delhi , India .

There is a bust of Artigas and an abstract sculpture representing his flag in Avenida do Uruguai, Lisbon, Portugal.

There is an order of Merit, the Order of Military Merit of the Companions of Artigas , founded in 1980.

There is one in Elizabeth, New Jersey, United States, April 19, 2013.

See also [ edit ] Spain portal Latin America portal Uruguay portal Artiguism Artigas flag Order of Military Merit of the Companions of Artigas#Historical reference Statues of the Liberators Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Los abuelos de José Artigas (The grandparents of José Artigas). Accessed October 5, 2010 at 11:35.

^ Luna, p. 25 ^ Luna, p. 26 ^ Luna, p. 27 ^ Luna, p. 31 ^ Luna, pp. 31–32 ^ Luna, p. 20 ^ Luna, p. 23 ^ Luna, p. 33 ^ Chasteen, John Charles (2008).

Americanos: Latin America's Struggle for Independence . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 84.

ISBN 978-0-19-517881-4 .

^ Fowler, Will (2008).

Latin America since 1780 . Oxon: Routledge. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-340-95873-5 .

^ Luna, p. 39–40 ^ McFarlane, Anthony (2014).

War and Independence In Spanish America . New York: Routledge. p. 172.

ISBN 978-1-85728-782-0 .

^ Luna, p. 41 ^ a b Luna, p. 43 ^ Luna, pp. 44–46 ^ Luna, pp. 46–47 ^ Luna, p. 54 ^ Luna, p. 55 ^ Luna, pp. 55–59 ^ Luna, pp. 59–60 Further reading [ edit ] Félix Luna , José Artigas: El caudillo revolucionario (José Artigas: The Revolutionary Leader). Buenos Aires: Planeta de Agostini, 2009.

Tyson Reeder, "'Sovereign Lords' and 'Dependent Administrators': Artigan Privateers, Atlantic Borderwaters, and State Building in the Early Nineteenth Century," Journal of American History, vol. 103, no. 2 (September 2016), pp. 323–346.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to General Artigas, a town in Paraguay, is named in his honor.

.

Biblioteca Artiguista (in Spanish) Pictures of the Artigas Mausoleum in Montevideo Uruguay todobuenosaires.com Archived 2018-10-23 at the Wayback Machine v t e Argentine Civil Wars (1814–76) Parties involved (leaders) Federalists José Gervasio Artigas Mariano Vera Estanislao López Francisco Ramírez Juan Bautista Bustos Manuel Dorrego Facundo Quiroga Alejandro Heredia Pascual Echagüe Juan Manuel de Rosas Justo José de Urquiza Ricardo López Jordán Juan Felipe Varela [ es ] Chacho Peñaloza Unitarians Juan Martín de Pueyrredón José Rondeau Bernardino Rivadavia Juan Lavalle José María Paz Juan Esteban Pedernera Gregorio Aráoz de Lamadrid Pedro Ferré Domingo Faustino Sarmiento Battles Cepeda (1820) Navarro (1828) San Roque (1829) Márquez Bridge (1829) La Tablada (1829) Oncativo (1830) Sauce Grande (1840) Famaillá (1841) Caaguazú (1841) Laguna Limpia (1846) Caseros (1852) Cepeda (1859) Pavón (1861) Pozo de Vargas (1867) Don Gonzalo (1873) Treaties Pilar (1820) Benegas (1820) Quadrilateral (1822) Cañuelas Pact (1829) Federal Pact (1831) Protocol of Palermo (1852) San Nicolás (1852) Pact of San José de Flores (1859) See also United Provinces of the Río de la Plata League of the Free Peoples Arequito Revolt Revolution of the Restorers Unitarian League Argentine Confederation Uruguayan Civil War Freemen of the South Revolution of 11 September 1852 State of Buenos Aires Argentine Constitution of 1853 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia 2 Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Argentina Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove 2 Uruguay DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nn7dx
Cached time: 20250817050914
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.898 seconds
Real time usage: 1.138 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3066/1000000
Revision size: 25591/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 116771/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5115/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 47733/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.583/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22989129/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  927.326      1 -total
 18.17%  168.467      1 Template:Liberalism_sidebar
 17.91%  166.038      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.46%  143.383      1 Template:IPA
 13.23%  122.667      1 Template:Infobox_military_person
 13.20%  122.408      1 Template:Reflist
 12.66%  117.389      1 Template:Infobox
 10.97%  101.774      3 Template:Cite_book
  9.40%   87.131      1 Template:Expand_Spanish
  8.97%   83.217      1 Template:Expand_language Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:315831:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050914 and revision id 1300638966. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=José_Gervasio_Artigas&oldid=1300638966 " Categories : José Gervasio Artigas People of the Spanish American wars of independence Uruguayan generals 1764 births 1850 deaths Colonial Uruguay Military personnel from Montevideo Argentine generals Uruguayan cattlemen Uruguayan people of Argentine descent Uruguayan people of Spanish descent Uruguayan people of Canarian descent Uruguayan prisoners of war Uruguayan exiles Uruguayan expatriates in Paraguay Uruguayan expatriates in Spain Paraguayan people of Uruguayan descent 19th-century Uruguayan politicians Uruguayan independence activists People from the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia Articles with excerpts Pages with Spanish IPA Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 14:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents José Gervasio Artigas 42 languages Add topic

