Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Current practice 2 Metric system 3 British imperial and US customary units 4 Natural units 5 Non-standard units Toggle Non-standard units subsection 5.1 Area 5.2 Energy 6 Units of currency 7 Historical systems of measurement Toggle Historical systems of measurement subsection 7.1 Africa 7.2 Asia 7.3 Europe 7.4 North America 7.5 South America 8 Ancient 9 See also 10 Notes and references 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents System of units of measurement 37 languages العربية বাংলা Català Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ilokano Interlingua Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Монгол 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from System of units ) Collection of units of measurement and rules relating them to each other This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "System of units of measurement" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "Customary system" redirects here. For the system of measurement used in the United States, also known as the customary system, see United States customary system .

A system of units of measurement , also known as a system of units or system of measurement , is a collection of units of measurement and rules relating them to each other. Systems of historically been important, regulated and defined for the purposes of science and commerce . Instances in use include the International System of Units or SI (the modern form of the metric system ), the British imperial system , and the United States customary system .

History [ edit ] See also: Units of measurement § History Further information: History of measurement In antiquity, systems of measurement were defined locally: the different units might be defined independently according to the length of a king's thumb or the size of his foot, the length of stride, the length of arm, or maybe the weight of water in a keg of specific size, perhaps itself defined in hands and knuckles . The unifying characteristic is that there was some definition based on some standard. Eventually cubits and strides gave way to "customary units" to meet the needs of merchants and scientists.

The preference for a more universal and consistent system only gradually spread with the growth of international trade and science. Changing a measurement system has costs in the near term, which often results in resistance to such a change. The substantial benefit of conversion to a more rational and internationally consistent system of measurement has been recognized and promoted by scientists, engineers, businesses and politicians, and has resulted in most of the world adopting a commonly agreed metric system.

The French Revolution gave rise to the metric system , and this has spread around the world, replacing most customary units of measure. In most systems, length (distance), mass , and time are base quantities .

Later, science developments showed that an electromagnetic quantity such as electric charge or electric current could be added to extend the set of base quantities.

Gaussian units have only length, mass, and time as base quantities, with no separate electromagnetic dimension. Other quantities, such as power and speed , are derived from the base quantities: for example, speed is distance per unit time. Historically, a wide range of units was used for the same type of quantity.  In different contexts length was measured in inches , feet , yards , fathoms , rods , chains , furlongs , miles , nautical miles , stadia , leagues , with conversion factors that were not based on power of ten.

In the metric system and other recent systems, underlying relationships between quantities, as expressed by formulae of physics such as Newton's laws of motion , is used to select a small number of base quantities for which a unit is defined for each, from which all other units may be derived. Secondary units (multiples and submultiples) are derived from these base and derived units by multiplying by powers of ten.  For example, where the unit of length is the metre ; a distance of 1 metre is 1,000 millimetres, or 0.001 kilometres.

Current practice [ edit ] Main article: Metrication Metrication is complete or nearly complete in most countries.

However, US customary units remain heavily used in the United States and to some degree in Liberia . Traditional Burmese units of measurement are used in Burma , with partial transition to the metric system. U.S. units are used in limited contexts in Canada due to the large volume of trade with the U.S.  There is also considerable use of imperial weights and measures, despite de jure Canadian conversion to metric.

A number of other jurisdictions have laws mandating or permitting other systems of measurement in some or all contexts, such as the United Kingdom whose road signage legislation , for instance, only allows distance signs displaying imperial units (miles or yards) [ 1 ] or Hong Kong.

[ 2 ] In the United States, metric units are virtually always used in science, frequently in the military, and partially in industry.  U.S. customary units are primarily used in U.S. households. At retail stores, the litre (spelled 'liter' in the U.S.) is a commonly used unit for volume, especially on bottles of beverages, and milligrams, rather than grains , are used for medications.

Some other non- SI units are still in international use, such as nautical miles and knots in aviation and shipping, and feet for aircraft altitude.

Metric system [ edit ] Main articles: Metric system and International System of Units A baby bottle that measures in three measurement systems—metric, imperial (UK), and US customary Metric systems of units have evolved since the adoption of the first well-defined system in France in 1795. During this evolution the use of these systems has spread throughout the world, first to non-English-speaking countries, and then to English speaking countries.

Multiples and submultiples of metric units are related by powers of ten and their names are formed with prefixes . This relationship is compatible with the decimal system of numbers and it contributes greatly to the convenience of metric units.

In the early metric system there were two base units, the metre for length and the gram for mass. The other units of length and mass, and all units of area, volume, and derived units such as density were derived from these two base units.

Mesures usuelles ( French for customary measures ) were a system of measurement introduced as a compromise between the metric system and traditional measurements. It was used in France from 1812 to 1839.

A number of variations on the metric system have been in use. These include gravitational systems , the centimetre–gram–second systems (cgs) useful in science, the metre–tonne–second system (mts) once used in the USSR and the metre–kilogram–second system (mks). In some engineering fields, like computer-aided design , millimetre–gram–second (mmgs) is also used.

[ 3 ] The current international standard for the metric system is the International System of Units ( Système international d'unités or SI). It is a system in which all units can be expressed in terms of seven units.  The units that serve as the SI base units are the metre , kilogram , second , ampere , kelvin , mole , and candela .

British imperial and US customary units [ edit ] Main articles: Imperial and US customary measurement systems , Imperial units , and US customary units Both British imperial units and US customary units derive from earlier English units . Imperial units were mostly used in the former British Empire and the British Commonwealth , but in all these countries they have been largely supplanted by the metric system. They are still used for some applications in the United Kingdom but have been mostly replaced by the metric system in commercial , scientific , and industrial applications. US customary units, however, are still the main system of measurement in the United States . While some steps towards metrication have been made (mainly in the late 1960s and early 1970s), the customary units have a strong hold due to the vast industrial infrastructure and commercial development.

While British imperial and US customary systems are closely related, there are a number of differences between them . Units of length and area (the inch , foot , yard , mile , etc.) have been identical since the adoption of the International Yard and Pound Agreement ; however, the US and, formerly, India retained older definitions for surveying purposes. This gave rise to the US survey foot , for instance. The avoirdupois units of mass and weight differ for units larger than a pound (lb). The British imperial system uses a stone of 14 lb, a long hundredweight of 112 lb and a long ton of 2,240 lb. The stone is not a measurement of weight used in the US. The US customary system uses the short hundredweight of 100 lb and short ton of 2,000 lb.

Where these systems most notably differ is in their units of volume. An imperial fluid ounce of 28.4130625 ml is 3.924% smaller than the US fluid ounce (fl oz) of  29.5735295625 millilitres (ml). However, as there are 16 US fl oz to a US pint and 20 imp fl oz to an imperial pint, the imperial pint is 20.095% larger than a US pint, and the same is true for gills , quarts , and gallons : six US gallons (22.712470704 L) is only 0.08% less than five imperial gallons (22.73045 L).

The avoirdupois system served as the general system of mass and weight. In addition to this, there are the troy and the apothecaries' systems . Troy weight was customarily used for precious metals , black powder , and gemstones . The troy ounce is the only unit of the system in current use; it is used for precious metals. Although the troy ounce is larger than its avoirdupois equivalent, the pound is smaller. The obsolete troy pound was divided into 12 ounces, rather than the 16 ounces per pound of the avoirdupois system. The apothecaries' system was traditionally used in pharmacology , but has now been replaced by the metric system; it shared the same pound and ounce as the troy system but with different further subdivisions.

Natural units [ edit ] Natural units are units of measurement defined in terms of universal physical constants in such a manner that selected physical constants take on the numerical value of one when expressed in terms of those units.  Natural units are so named because their definition relies on only properties of nature and not on any human construct. Varying systems of natural units are possible, depending on the choice of constants used.

Some examples are as follows: Geometrized unit systems are useful in relativistic physics . In these systems, speed of light and the gravitational constant are among the constants chosen.

Planck units is system of geometrized units in which the reduced Planck constant is included in the list of defining constants. It is based on only properties of free space rather than of any object or particle.

Stoney units is a system of geometrized units in which the Coulomb constant and the elementary charge are included.

Atomic units are a system of units used in atomic physics , particularly for describing the properties of electrons . The atomic units have been chosen to use several constants relating to the electron: the electron mass , the elementary charge , the Coulomb constant and the reduced Planck constant . The unit of energy in this system is the total energy of the electron in the Bohr atom and called the Hartree energy . The unit of length is the Bohr radius .

Non-standard units [ edit ] Non-standard measurement units also found in books, newspapers etc., include: Area [ edit ] The American football field , which has a playing area 100 yards (91.4 m) long by 160 feet (48.8 m) wide. This is often used by the American public media for the sizes of large buildings or parks. It is used both as a unit of length (100 yd or 91.4 m, the length of the playing field excluding goal areas) and as a unit of area (57,600 sq ft or 5,350 m 2 ), about 1.32 acres (0.53 ha ).

British media also frequently uses the football pitch for equivalent purposes, although soccer pitches are not of a fixed size, but instead can vary within defined limits (100–130 yd or 91.4–118.9 m long, and 50–100 yd or 45.7–91.4 m wide, giving an area of 5,000 to 13,000 sq yd or 4,181 to 10,870 m 2 ). However the UEFA Champions League field must be exactly 105 by 68 m (114.83 by 74.37 yd) giving an area of 7,140 m 2 (0.714 ha) or 8,539 sq yd (1.764 acres ). For example, " HSS vessels are aluminium catamarans about the size of a football pitch ." [ 4 ] Larger areas are also expressed as a multiple of the areas of states and countries understood to be familiar to the reader.

Energy [ edit ] A ton of TNT equivalent , and its multiples the kiloton, the megaton, and the gigaton. Often used in stating the power of very energetic events such as explosions and volcanic events and earthquakes and asteroid impacts. A gram of TNT as a unit of energy has been defined as 1000 thermochemical calories (1,000 cal or 4,184 J ).

The atom bomb dropped on Hiroshima . Its energy yield is often used in the public media and popular books as a unit of energy. (Its yield was roughly 13 kilotons, or 60 TJ.) One stick of dynamite .

Units of currency [ edit ] A unit of measurement that applies to money is called a unit of account in economics and unit of measure in accounting.

[ 5 ] This is normally a currency issued by a country or a fraction thereof; for instance, the US dollar and US cent ( 1 ⁄ 100 of a dollar), or the euro and euro cent.

ISO 4217 is the international standard describing three letter codes (also known as the currency code) to define the names of currencies established by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO).

Historical systems of measurement [ edit ] Main article: History of measurement Throughout history, many official systems of measurement have been used. While no longer in official use, some of these customary systems are occasionally used in day-to-day life, for instance in cooking .

Africa [ edit ] Algerian Egyptian Ethiopian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somalian Tunisian South African Tanzanian Asia [ edit ] See also: History of measurement systems in India Arabic [ 6 ] Afghan Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Hebrew ( Biblical and Talmudic ) Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Omani Pakistani Philippine Mesopotamian Persian Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tamil Thai Vietnamese Nepalese Still in use: Myanmar Europe [ edit ] Ancient Greek Belgian Byzantine Czech Cypriot Danish Dutch English Estonian Finnish French (now) French (to 1795) German Greek Hungary Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Polish Portuguese Roman Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Switzerland Turkish Tatar Welsh North America [ edit ] Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexico Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America [ edit ] Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient [ edit ] Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu (time) Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman See also [ edit ] Conversion of units History of the metric system ISO 31 Level of measurement Medieval weights and measures Megalithic yard Petrograd Standard Pseudoscientific metrology Unified Code for Units of Measure Weights and measures Notes and references [ edit ] ^ "Statutory Instrument 2002 No. 3113 The Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions 2002" . Her Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO). 2002 . Retrieved 18 March 2010 .

^ HK Weights and Measures Ordinance ^ "Units and Dimension Standard - 2021 - SOLIDWORKS Help" .

help.solidworks.com . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ Henry, Lesley-Anne (23 June 2007).

"Sad sight of a superferry laid up due to soaring jet fuel bills" .

The Belfast Telegraph . Archived from the original on 2008-10-06.

^ Financial Accounting Standards Research Initiative: The Unit of Account Issue [ permanent dead link ] ^ M. Ismail Marcinkowski, Measures and Weights in the Islamic World. An English Translation of Professor Walther Hinz's Handbook "Islamische Maße und Gewichte" , with a foreword by Professor Bosworth, F.B.A. Kuala Lumpur, ISTAC, 2002, ISBN 983-9379-27-5 . This work is an annotated translation of a work in German by the late German orientalist Walther Hinz, published in the Handbuch der Orientalistik , erste Abteilung, Ergänzungsband I, Heft 1, Leiden, The Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1970.

Bibliography [ edit ] Tavernor, Robert (2007), Smoot's Ear: The Measure of Humanity , ISBN 0-300-12492-9 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Customary units of measurement .

CLDR – Unicode localization of currency, date, time, numbers A Dictionary of Units of Measurement Old units of measure Measures from Antiquity and the Bible Antiquity and the Bible at the Wayback Machine (archived May 10, 2008) Reasonover's Land Measures A Reference to Spanish and French land measures (and their English equivalents with conversion tables) used in North America The Unified Code for Units of Measure v t e Systems of measurement Current General International System of Units (SI) UK imperial system US customary units (USCS/USC) Chinese Hong Kong Specific Apothecaries' Avoirdupois Troy Astronomical Electrical English Engineering Units (US) Natural Atomic Geometrised Heaviside–Lorentz Planck Quantum chromodynamical Stoney Background Metric Overview Outline History Metrication UK/US Overview Comparison Foot–pound–second (FPS) Historic Metric metre–kilogram–second (MKS) metre–tonne–second (MTS) centimetre–gram–second (CGS) gravitational Europe Cornish Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch English Winchester Exchequer Estonian Finnish French Traditional Mesures usuelles German Greek Byzantine Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Ottoman Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Swiss Welsh Asia Afghan Cambodian Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Mongolian Myanmar Nepalese Omani Pakistani Philippine Pegu Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tatar Thai Vietnamese Africa Algerian Ethiopian Egyptian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somali South African Tunisian Tanzanian North and Central America Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexican Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman List articles Humorous Obsolete Unusual Other Absolute scale N-body Modulor v t e SI units Base units ampere candela kelvin kilogram metre mole second Derived units with special names becquerel coulomb degree Celsius farad gray henry hertz joule katal lumen lux newton ohm pascal radian siemens sievert steradian tesla volt watt weber Other accepted units astronomical unit dalton day decibel degree of arc electronvolt hectare hour litre minute minute and second of arc neper tonne See also Conversion of units Metric prefixes Historical definitions of the SI base units 2019 revision of the SI System of units of measurement Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5464bfd8b4‐w8nz5
Cached time: 20250815221007
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.436 seconds
Real time usage: 0.516 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2192/1000000
Revision size: 23320/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 86453/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2876/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 44216/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.281/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17174734/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  442.277      1 -total
 19.48%   86.134      1 Template:Reflist
 18.62%   82.365      5 Template:Navbox
 17.19%   76.007      1 Template:Lang
 16.10%   71.191      1 Template:Systems_of_measurement
 14.75%   65.234      3 Template:Cite_web
  9.12%   40.357      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.65%   38.236      1 Template:Short_description
  8.45%   37.367      1 Template:Ambox
  8.40%   37.166      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1241988:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815221007 and revision id 1306091969. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=System_of_units_of_measurement&oldid=1306091969 " Categories : Systems of units Measurement Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing French-language text Commons category link is locally defined Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 22:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents System of units of measurement 37 languages Add topic

