Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Career 3 Research 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Kathleen Carley 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American social scientist Kathleen Mary Carley Born 1956 Pueblo, Colorado Citizenship American Alma mater Harvard University (1984) MIT (1978) Known for Dynamic network analysis Scientific career Fields Social network analysis Computational sociology Telecommunication policy Biosecurity Institutions Carnegie Mellon University Doctoral advisor Harrison White Kathleen M. Carley is an American computational social scientist specializing in dynamic network analysis .

[ 1 ] She is a professor in the School of Computer Science in the Carnegie Mellon Institute for Software Research at Carnegie Mellon University and also holds appointments in the Tepper School of Business , the Heinz College , the Department of Engineering and Public Policy , and the Department of Social and Decision Sciences .

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] Kathleen Carley was born in Pueblo, Colorado in 1956.

[ 3 ] At High School her interest in social modeling was inspired by Isaac Asimov 's Foundation series .

Artificial intelligence was not a career path at that time and she was dissuaded from studying Mathematics because of gender stereotyping .

[ 4 ] Instead she studied for an S.B.

in economics and an S.B. in political science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1978. She received her Ph.D. in sociology from Harvard University in 1984.  Her Ph.D. advisor was Harrison White and her thesis was entitled Consensus Construction .

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] On leaving Harvard in 1984, Carley secured a position as assistant professor of Sociology and Information Systems at Carnegie Mellon University where she remains based. In 1990 she became associate professor of Sociology and Organizations, in 1998 Professor of Sociology, Organizations and IT, and in 2002 attained her current role as Professor of Computation, Organization and Society. Since 1998 she has also held appointments in other CMU schools and departments; the Department of Social and Decision Sciences, Heinz College, Tepper School of Business and Department of Engineering and Public Policy.

[ 2 ] Research [ edit ] Carley's research combines cognitive science , sociology and computer science to address complex social and organizational problems.  Methodologically she applies network science, machine learning, natural language processing, and agent based modeling to high-dimensional, large, and dynamic data. Her most notable research contribution was the establishment of dynamic network analysis (DNA) and the establishment of social cybersecurity. She has also contributed to research on computational social and organization theory, [ citation needed ] adaptation and evolution, text mining, and the impact of telecommunication technologies and policy on communication, information diffusion, disease contagion and response within and among groups particularly in disaster or crisis situations, and dynamic network methods.

[ citation needed ] She is the director of the Center for Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems, a university-wide interdisciplinary center that brings together network science , computer science , and organizational studies and is the director of the center for Informed Democracy and Social-cybersecurity (IDeaS) at CMU.

[ citation needed ] Carley is the founding co-editor and co- editor-in-chief of the journal Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory .

[ 5 ] She has co-edited several books in the computational organizations and dynamic network area.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Dynamic network analysis References [ edit ] ^ Roebuck, Karen (19 June 2004).

"CMU project targets terrorism" .

Pittsburgh Tribune-Review . Archived from the original on 2 September 2010 . Retrieved 8 April 2011 .

^ a b c "Vita" (PDF) .

Carnegie Mellon University . 2 February 2023. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 February 2023 .

^ Carley, K. M.; Zhiang Lin (1995). "Organizational designs suited to high performance under stress".

IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics .

25 (2): 221– 230.

doi : 10.1109/21.364841 .

S2CID 6171181 .

^ Edling, Christofer (Jan 31, 2009). Hedström, Peter; Wittrock, Björn (eds.).

We Always Know More Than We Can Say: Mathematical Sociologists on Mathematical Sociology .

Institut international de sociologie . World Congress. p. 358.

ISBN 978-90-04-16569-4 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ "Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory (Editorial Board)" . Archived from the original on 22 March 2013 . Retrieved 9 April 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Carnegie Mellon - Kathleen Carley "Assessing Terror Networks" by Kathleen M. Carley on YouTube Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus Google Scholar DBLP MathSciNet Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kathleen_Carley&oldid=1283599714 " Categories : Carnegie Mellon University faculty Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences alumni MIT School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences alumni American systems scientists Living people 1956 births American women sociologists American sociologists Women systems scientists American network scientists 20th-century American social scientists 20th-century American scientists 20th-century American women scientists 21st-century American social scientists 21st-century American women scientists Scientists from Colorado People from Pueblo, Colorado Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from January 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 14:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kathleen Carley 1 language Add topic

