Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Jewish tradition Toggle Jewish tradition subsection 2.1 Disputations 3 Practical bearing 4 See also 5 Further reading 6 References 7 Notes Toggle the table of contents Relative hour 5 languages Esperanto Français עברית Polski Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hebrew term ascribed to an hour of a 12-hour day and how it is to be reckoned This article is about the concept of relative hours in Jewish law. For relative hours as used in Ancient Rome, see Roman timekeeping .

The clock over the Jaffa Gate of Jerusalem in the 1910s. The face on the left shows 10:10 am in the European style that sets 0:00 at midnight and noon. The face on the right shows 4:00 in the Ottoman style , that sets 0:00 at sunset.

Part of a series on Jews and Judaism Etymology Who is a Jew?

Jewish studies Religion God in Judaism ( names ) Principles of faith Mitzvot ( 613 ) Halakha Shabbat Holidays Prayer Tzedakah Land of Israel Brit Bar and bat mitzvah Marriage Bereavement Baal teshuva Philosophy Ethics Kabbalah Messiah Claimants Customs Rites Synagogue Rabbi Texts Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Talmud Mishnah Gemara Rabbinic Midrash Tosefta Targum Beit Yosef Mishneh Torah Tur Shulchan Aruch Zohar History General Timeline Land of Israel Name "Judea" Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Persecution Leaders Modern historiography Historical population comparisons Ancient Israel Twelve Tribes of Israel Kingdom of Judah Kingdom of Israel Jerusalem ( in Judaism timeline ) Temple in Jerusalem ( First Second ) Assyrian captivity Babylonian captivity Second Temple period Yehud Medinata Maccabean Revolt Hasmonean dynasty Sanhedrin Schisms ( Pharisees , Sadducees , Essenes , Zealots , Sicarii ) Second Temple Judaism ( Hellenistic Judaism ) Jewish–Roman wars ( Great Revolt , Diaspora , Bar Kokhba ) Rabbinic period and Middle Ages Rabbinic Judaism History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire Christianity and Judaism ( Jews and Christmas ) Hinduism and Judaism Islamic–Jewish relations Middle Ages Golden Age Expulsion from Spain Modern era Haskalah Sabbateans Hasidism Jewish atheism Emancipation Old Yishuv Zionism Soviet Union The Holocaust Israel Arab–Israeli conflict Communities Ashkenazim Galician Litvak Mizrahim Sephardim Teimanim (Yemenite Jews) Beta Israel Gruzinim (Georgian Jews) Juhurim (Mountain Jews) Bukharim Italkim Romanyotim Cochinim Bene Israel Berber Crimean Karaites Krymchaks Kaifeng Jews Related groups Bnei Anusim Lemba Igbo Jews Samaritans Crypto-Jews Anusim Dönmeh Marranos Neofiti Xueta Mosaic Arabs Subbotniks Noahides Population Judaism by country Lists of Jews Diaspora Historical population by country Population by city Genetic studies Israel and Palestine Old Yishuv New Yishuv Israeli Jews Palestinian Jews Africa Algeria Angola Bilad-el-Sudan Botswana Cameroon Cape Verde Benin Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Ethiopia Beta Israel Eritrea Eswatini Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria ( Igbo ) Republic of the Congo São Tomé and Príncipe Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Uganda ( Abayudaya ) Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Bahrain Cambodia China Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kurdistan Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lebanon Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia South Korea Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Romaniote Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Italkim Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Moldova Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Soviet Union Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sephardim Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern America Canada United States Greenland Latin America and Caribbean Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Puerto Rico Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia Fiji Guam New Zealand Palau Denominations Orthodox Modern Haredi Hasidic Reform Conservative Karaite Reconstructionist Renewal Science Haymanot Humanistic Culture Customs Minyan Wedding Clothing Niddah Pidyon haben Kashrut Shidduch Zeved habat Conversion to Judaism Aliyah Hiloni Music Religious Secular Art Ancient Yiddish theatre Dance Humour Cuisine American Ashkenazi Bukharan Ethiopian Israeli Israelite Mizrahi Sephardic Literature Israeli Yiddish Judeo-Tat American Surnames Ashkenazi Mizrahi Sephardic Languages Hebrew Biblical Mishnaic Medieval Modern Bukharian Ghardaïa Sign Jewish Koine Greek Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Aramaic Judeo-Berber Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Georgian Judaeo-Iranian Judeo-Italian Judeo-Malayalam Judaeo-Spanish Judeo-Tat Knaanic Shassi Yeshivish Yevanic Yiddish Zarphatic Politics Jewish political movements Autonomism Bundism Feminism Leftism Secularism Territorialism World Agudath Israel Zionism General Green Labor Kahanism Maximalism Neo-Zionism Religious Revisionist Post-Zionism Category Portal v t e Relative hour ( Hebrew singular: shaʿah zǝmanit / שעה זמנית ; plural: shaʿot - zǝmaniyot / שעות זמניות ), sometimes called halachic hour , temporal hour , seasonal hour and variable hour , is a term used in rabbinic Jewish law that assigns 12 hours to each day and 12 hours to each night, all throughout the year. A relative hour has no fixed length in absolute time, but changes with the length of daylight each day - depending on summer (when the days are long and the nights are short), and in winter (when the days are short and the nights are long). Even so, in all seasons a day is always divided into 12 hours, and a night is always divided into 12 hours, which invariably makes for a longer hour or a shorter hour.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] At Mediterranean latitude, one hour can be about 45 minutes at the winter solstice , and 75 minutes at summer solstice .

[ 4 ] All of the hours mentioned by the Sages in either the Mishnah or Talmud , or in other rabbinic writings, refer strictly to relative hours.

[ 5 ] Another feature of this ancient practice is that, unlike the standard modern 12-hour clock that assigns 12 o'clock pm for noon time, in the ancient Jewish tradition noon time was always the sixth hour of the day, whereas the first hour began with the break of dawn according to many Halachic authorities, [ 6 ] and with sunrise according to others.

[ 7 ] Midnight (12:00 am local official clock time) was also the sixth hour of the night, which, depending on summer or winter, can come before or after 12:00 am local official clock time, whereas the first hour of the night always begins after sunset, when the first three stars appeared in the night sky.

During the Spring ( באחד בתקופת ניסן ‎) and Autumnal ( באחד בתקופת תשרי ‎) equinox (around 20 March and 23 September ), the length of a day and night are equal.

[ 8 ] However, even during the summer solstice and winter solstice when the length of the day and the length of the night are at their greatest disparity, both day and night are always divided into 12 hours.

History [ edit ] Temporal hours were common in many cultures. A division of day and night into twelve hours each was first recorded in Ancient Egypt . A similar division of day and night was later made in the Mediterranean basin from about Classical Greek Antiquity into twelve temporal hours each ( Ancient Greek : ὥραι καιρικαί , romanized : horai kairikai ).

[ 9 ] In Western culture they were adopted from Roman timekeeping and were adopted in the European Medieval era. They had particular relevance in the fixed daily schedule of the monastic orders . This division of time allowed the work of the day -such as eating, praying, or working -to always be performed at the same (temporal) hour, regardless of season ( Prayer of the Hours ).

[ 9 ] Jewish tradition [ edit ] The prevailing opinion is that each day begins at the rise of dawn (Heb.

עלות השחר ‎), [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] which is about 72 minutes before sunrise, [ 15 ] yet, for practical reasons in some biblically related commandments, some scholars begin counting the hours of the day from sunrise (Heb.

הנץ החמה ‎), [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] such as for the recital of Shema' which, as a first resort, must be recited when a person rises from his sleep in the morning, a time that is traditionally linked with sunrise, and continuing thereafter until the beginning of the 4th hour of the day, [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] or, for example, when burning leaven on the 14th day of the lunar month Nisan , which must be burnt in the 6th hour of the day when counting from sunrise. At this time, the sun is nearly at its apex.

[ 22 ] The commencement of nightfall is not as divisive in Jewish law: Rabbi Pinchas said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Pappa : One star is certainly day; two [stars] is a doubtful case; three [stars] is certainly night.

[ 23 ] The precise, intermediate time between day and night, or what is termed in Hebrew bayn ha-sh'meshot , has been discussed by Talmudic scholars in great detail. Some describe the time as when the evening sky turns a silverish-grey color. The same time is described by Moses Alashkar as "from the moment that the entire circle of the sun sets [below the horizon] until there appear [in the sky] three medium-sized stars." [ 24 ] [ 25 ] The duration of this time is generally held to be about 12 minutes, but which, with respect to the Sabbath day, is given a more stringent application, namely, 13.5 minutes after sunset.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Rabbeinu Tam , disputing, held the time of bayn ha-sh'meshot to be 58.5 minutes.

[ 31 ] A third opinion is that of Maimonides who puts the time of bayn ha-sh'meshot at the time it takes to walk 3 ⁄ 4 of a biblical mile, a time which Maimonides estimates at about 18 minutes (temporal hours), according to what they have understood from the words of Maimonides, namely, that a person traverses a biblical mile in 24 minutes.

[ 32 ] This was the custom of the cities of Yemen .

[ 32 ] Disputations [ edit ] In old times, the hour was detected by observation of the position of the sun, [ 33 ] or when the first three stars appeared in the night sky. During the first six hours of the day, the sun is seen in the eastern sky. At the sixth hour , the sun is always at its zenith in the sky, meaning, it is either directly overhead, or parallel (depending on the hemisphere ).

[ 34 ] Those persons living in the Northern Hemisphere , the sun at noon time will appear overhead slightly towards the south, whereas for those living in the Southern Hemisphere , the sun at noon time will appear overhead slightly towards the north (an exception being in the tropics , the sun can sometimes be directly overhead). From the 6th and a half hour to the 12th hour, the sun inclines towards the west, until it sets. The conclusion of a day at the end of twilight may slightly vary in minutes from place to place, depending on the elevation and the terrain.

[ 35 ] Typically, nightfall ushers in more quickly in the low-lying valleys, than it does on a high mountaintop.

[ 36 ] There are two major opinions how to calculate these times: The Magen Avraham ( Shulhan Arukh , Orach Chaim 58:1) holds that because one may do "daytime" activities between daybreak and nightfall, one calculates the day from daybreak ( מעלות השחר ‎) to nightfall, and divides that period into twelve parts. Although this is known as the opinion of the Magen Avraham, he only says it explicitly with regards to the Recital of the Shema because the time for that mitzvah begins at ʿalot hashachar ("break of dawn").  Nevertheless, this is the opinion of Tosafot, [ 37 ] the Rashba, [ 38 ] the Ritva, [ 39 ] the Ra'ah, [ 40 ] the Terumat ha-deshen, [ 41 ] the Bach, [ 42 ] the Eliyah Rabba, [ 43 ] and the Pri Chadash [ 44 ] regarding all of the times of the day. Usually this time is computed using daybreak as 72 minutes before sunrise - or more accurately using when the sun is 16.1 degrees below the horizon, as it is in Jerusalem at the equinox 72 minutes before sunrise - before sunrise, and nightfall as 72 minutes after sunset. However, the common practice in Jerusalem (following the Tucazinsky luach) is to compute it using 20 degrees (90 minutes at the equinox).

Another variation of this opinion [ 45 ] is to consider the day as beginning at daybreak ( מעלות השחר ‎), reckoning the "first hour" of the day with the rise of dawn ( Hebrew : עמוד השחר ), that is to say, approximately 72 minutes before sunrise, [ 46 ] and the end of the day commencing shortly after sunset when the first three medium-size stars have appeared in the night sky.

[ 47 ] From the moment of sunset when the sun is no longer visible until the appearance of the first three medium-size stars is a unit of time called evening twilight ( Hebrew : בין השמשות ). In the Talmud, twilight is estimated at being the time that it takes a person to walk three quarters of a biblical mile (i.e. 1,500 cubits, insofar that a biblical mile is equal to 2,000 cubits).

[ 48 ] According to Maran 's Shulhan Arukh , a man traverses a biblical mile in 18 minutes, [ 49 ] meaning, one is able to walk three quarters of a mile in 13½ minutes. According to Maimonides , a man walks a biblical mile in 24 minutes, meaning, three quarters of a mile is done in 18 minutes. In Jewish law, the short period of dusk or twilight (from the moment the sun has disappeared over the horizon until the appearance of the first three stars) is a space of time whose designation is doubtful, partly considered day and partly considered night. When the first medium-size star appears in the night sky, it is still considered day; when the second star appears, it is an ambiguous case. When the third star appears, it is the beginning of the first hour of the night. Between the break of dawn and the first three medium-size stars that appear in the night sky there are always 12 hours. This version of this opinion is followed by many Sephardic communities.  Nevertheless, Rabbi Yehosef Schwartz, [ 50 ] Rabbi Yechiel Michel Tucazinsky , [ 51 ] Rabbi Avraham Chaim Naeh , [ 52 ] Rabbi Yitzchok Yaakov Weiss , [ 53 ] Rabbi Aharon Kotler [ 54 ] and many others reject this opinion because it causes "midday" to be at a time when the sun is not at its highest point, and the Talmud [ 55 ] says explicitly that the sun is at its highest point at noon (Heb.

chatzot ). These poskim thus insist that even if one would rule according to the Geonim with regards to the emergence of stars, the time of the day are computed using tzeit kol ha-kokhavim in order to make midday when the sun is at its highest point.

The Vilna Gaon holds that although "daytime" activities can start as early as daybreak and end as late as nightfall, their proper time lechatchila (ab initio) is from sunrise to sunset, so one calculates the day from sunrise to sunset and divides that period into twelve parts.

[ 56 ] This is also the opinion of Rav Nisim Gaon, [ 57 ] Rav Saadya Gaon, [ 58 ] Rav Hai Gaon, [ 59 ] Rabbeinu Chananel, [ 60 ] Maimonides, [ 61 ] Rabbeinu Yonah, [ 60 ] and the Levush.

[ 62 ] In Roman times, these daylight hours were known as unequal hours .

In the Modern Age of astral science and of precise astronomical calculations, it is now possible to determine the length of the ever-changing hour by simple mathematics. To determine the length of each relative hour, one needs but simply know two variables: (a) the precise time of sunrise, and (b) the precise time of sunset. Since according to the first opinion, the day begins approximately 72 minutes before sunrise and ends approximately 72 minutes after sunset (and according to the variant understanding of this opinion, ends approximately 13½ or 18 minutes after sunset), or begins at sunrise and ends at sunrise according to the second opinion, by collecting the total number of minutes in any given day and dividing the total number of minutes by 12, the quotient that one is left with is the number of minutes to each hour. In summer months, when the days are long, the length of each hour during daytime can be quite long depending on one's latitude, whereas the length of each hour during nighttime can be quite short again depending on one's latitude. It should also be noted that according to those opinions that the 72 minutes are computed according to 16.1 degrees, the further one goes from the equator , the longer it will get, such that in northern latitudes it could become 2 hours or longer.

Practical bearing [ edit ] In Jewish Halacha , the practical bearing of this teaching is reflected in many halachic practices. For example, according to Jewish law, the morning recitation of Kriyat Shema must be made between slightly before sunrise and the end of the third hour of the day, a time that actually fluctuates on the standard 12-hour clock, depending on the time of year.

[ 63 ] Its application is also used in determining the time of the Morning Prayer , which must be recited between sunrise until the end of the fourth hour , [ 64 ] but post facto can be said until noon time, [ 65 ] and which times will vary if one were to rely solely on the dials of the standard 12-hour clock , depending on the seasons.

On the eve of Passover , chametz can only be eaten until the end of the fourth-hour of the day, and must be disposed of by the end of the fifth hour.

[ 66 ] In Jewish tradition, prayers were usually offered at the time of the daily whole-burnt offerings .

[ 67 ] The historian, Josephus , writing about the daily whole-burnt offering, says that it was offered twice each day, in the morning and about the ninth hour .

[ 68 ] The Mishnah , a compendium of Jewish oral laws compiled in the late 2nd-century CE, says of the morning daily offering that it was offered in the fourth hour , [ 69 ] but says of the late afternoon offering: "The daily whole-burnt offering was slaughtered at a half after the eighth hour , and offered up at a half after the ninth hour ." [ 70 ] Elsewhere, when describing the slaughter of the Passover offerings on the eve of Passover (the 14th day of the lunar month Nisan ), Josephus writes: "...their feast which is called the Passover, when they slay their sacrifices, from the ninth hour to the eleventh , etc." (roughly corresponding to 3 o'clock pm to 5 o'clock pm).

[ 71 ] Conversely, the Mishnah states that on the eve of Passover the daily whole-burnt offering was slaughtered at a half past the seventh hour , and offered up at a half past the eighth hour .

[ 70 ] See also [ edit ] Judaism portal Zmanim Lunar calendar Hebrew calendar Simana: free halachic location-based alarm clock app for Android Biblical and Talmudic units of measurement Roman timekeeping Alaturka time Traditional Chinese timekeeping Japanese clock Further reading [ edit ] Sar-Shalom, Rahamim (1984).

She'harim La'Luah Ha'ivry (Gates to the Hebrew Calendar) (in Hebrew). Tel-Aviv. p. 96 (Relative hours).

OCLC 854906532 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) References [ edit ] ^ Maimonides (1989). Jehoshua Blau (ed.).

R. Moses b. Maimon Responsa (in Hebrew). Vol. 1 (2 ed.). Jerusalem: Meḳize Nirdamim / Rubin Mass. pp. 251–255 ( responsum no. 134).

OCLC 78411726 .

^ Maimonides (1963).

Mishnah , with Maimonides' Commentary (in Hebrew). Vol. 1. Translated by Yosef Qafih . Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook . p. 33 ( Berakhot 1:5).

OCLC 233308346 .

^ Yaakov de Castro , `Erekh Leḥem ( Orach Chaim §233:2) ^ Laurence, Ray (2006).

Roman Pompeii: Space and Society . Routledge. pp.

104– 112.

ISBN 978-1-134-76899-8 . Retrieved 24 December 2019 .

^ Maimonides (1963).

Mishnah , with Maimonides' Commentary (in Hebrew). Vol. 1. Translated by Yosef Qafih . Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook . p. 33 ( Berakhot 1:5).

OCLC 233308346 .

Be apprised that all of the hours that are mentioned throughout all the Mishnah are none other than relative hours, and the word relative has the connotation of those hours wherein there are twelve in the daytime, as also at night.

^ Magen Avraham §58:1, §233:3 of R.

Avraham Gombiner ; Maimonides ' commentary on Mishnah Megillah 2:4; the Responsa Terumat HaDeshen , responsum # 1 of R.

Israel Isserlein ; the Levush §267 of R.

Mordecai Yoffe ; Minchat Kohen (Mevoh Shemesh 2:6) of R.

Abraham Cohen Pimentel , in the name of Tosefot Ha-Ramban ( Nachmanides ) and R.

Shlomo ben Aderet (Rashba); Bayit Chadash §431 of R.

Joel Sirkis ; Turei Zahav §433 of R.

David HaLevi Segal ; Pri Chadash §433 of R.

Hezekiah da Silva ; Eliyahu Rabbah 58:2 of R.

Elijah Spira ; Mizbe’ach Adamah 4a of R. Mordechai Chaim Meyuchas; Mikra'ei Kodesh 158b by R. Baruch Gigi; Mateh Yehuda §433 of R. Yehudah Ayash; the Responsa Hayim Sha'al 2:38 (70) of R.

Chaim Yosef David Azulai ; Tov Ayin 18:38 of R. Alter Yechiel Naiman; Chayei Adam 21:3, 27:1 of R.

Avraham Danzig ; Kitzur Shulhan Arukh 17:1 of R.

Shlomo Ganzfried , Chesed La'alafim 58:5 of R.

Eliezer Papo ; Shiltei ha-Gibborim 58:3 of Joshua Boaz ben Simon Baruch ; Rav Poalim (Orach Chaim 2:2); Shalmei Tzibbur 93c of R. Yisrael Ya'akov Algazi, among others. Rabbi Yechiel Michel Tukachinsky in Sefer Eretz Yisrael (p. 18:3) has written that the custom of the Land of Israel is to follow the Magen Avraham and only under extenuating circumstances may one rely on the Vilna Gaon.

^ The Vilna Gaon , as cited in Bi'urei ha-Gra ("Elucidations of the Gra") §459:2, but also the opinion of Rabbi Hai Gaon and many other authorities cited in the next section.

^ Jerusalem Talmud ( Berakhot 1:1) ^ a b Karlheinz Deußer: Temporaluhren: Die Suche nach mechanischen Uhren, die mit Temporalstunden liefen.

In: Jahresschrift der deutschen Gesellschaft für Chronometrie.

Band 51, 2012, S. 143–160; Jürgen Osing: Hieratische Papyri aus Tebtunis I (Carsten Niebuhr Institute of Ancient Eastern Studies Copenhagen) . Museum Tusculanum Press, Copenhagen 1998, ISBN 8-7728-9280-3 ; Rudolf Wendorff: Zeit und Kultur. Geschichte des Zeitbewusstseins in Europa . Westdeutscher Vlg, Wiesbaden 1980, ISBN 3-531-11515-4 ^ Babylonian Talmud , Berakhot 59b, Rashi s.v. שבתאי; Mishnah Berakhot 1:1 ^ Babylonian Talmud , Megillah 20a, Rashi , s.v. עד הנץ החמה ^ Abraham of Narbonne (1867).

Sefer ha-Eškol (in Hebrew). Vol. 1. Halberstadt: H. Meyer. p.

10 (Hil.

Tefillah ve-Ḳiryat Shema ).

OCLC 774954727 .

At sunrise, the principal part of the day begins, and [as a first resort] it is one's duty to pray when the sun comes out, as it says: 'They shall fear you while the sun endures' (Psalm 72:5). [...] Even though the break of dawn ( ʻamūd ha-shaḥar ) is considered day for all things, just as we say in chapter 2 of Megillah [20a], as a first resort, the principal part of day is reckoned from the moment the rays of the sun appear and the majority of people have risen [from their sleep] at that hour, for we call [that time] 'and when you rise up' (Deut. 6:7) ^ Maimonides (1963).

Mishnah , with Maimonides' Commentary (in Hebrew). Vol. 1. Translated by Yosef Qafih . Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook . p. 232 ( Megillah 2:4).

OCLC 233308346 .

We have reckoned the day from the rise of dawn, since it says in [the Book of] Ezra 'from the break of dawn until the stars came out' (Nehemiah 4:15 [21]). Now he called this [time] 'day', when he said of it, 'in the night they were unto us a guard, while the day [was spent in] labour' ^ Magen Avraham on Shulchan Aruch ( Orach Chayim §58:1) ^ Maimonides (1963).

Mishnah , with Maimonides' Commentary (in Hebrew). Vol. 1. Translated by Yosef Qafih . Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook . p. 32 ( Berakhot 1:1).

OCLC 233308346 .

^ Mordecai Yoffe , Levush Malkhus (Orach Chayim, sections 233:1, 266) ^ Tukatzinsky, Yechiel Michel (1928).

Sefer Bein ha-Shemashos (in Hebrew). Jerusalem. pp.

97 -98.

OCLC 233065543 .

The opinion of our Rabbi, the Vilna Gaon, as well as of many other poskim , is that in all the halachic matters touching on the hours [of the day], we reckon [the day] from sunrise until sunset, such as the latest time [one is required to recite] Kiryat Shema , [being] a quarter of the day (a third of the hours), and the latest time of the [morning] prayer, [being] a third of the day (four hours), and the latest time [permitted in] eating leaven on the eve of Passover, [being] a third of the day, and the burning of leaven [which follows] in another relative hour – all [hours being reckoned] from sunrise until sunset. ...The practice is to be stringent in accordance with the Vilna Gaon's method when it comes to the latest time [in which a person recites] Kiryat Shema , and [says] the [morning] prayer, and when it comes to eating and burning the leaven [on the eve of Passover].

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Chaim Yosef David Azulai , in Ḥayim Sha'al , is one exception to this rule, who wrote in Part II, section 38, item 70 that the hours three and four prescribed for the recital of the Shema and for the prayer begin from the break of dawn, rather than from sunrise. This view was also held by Rabbi Yosef Qafih .

^ Rabbeinu Chananel (1990). David Metsger (ed.).

Rabbeinu Ḥananel bar Ḥushiʼel's Commentary on the Talmud ( Berakhot ) (in Hebrew). Jerusalem: Mekhon "Lev Sameach". p. 53 ( Berakhot 26a).

OCLC 741094222 .

^ Maimonides , Mishneh Torah ( Hil. Kiryat Shema 1:10–13) ^ Shulchan Aruch ( Orach Chayim 58:1) ^ Babylonian Talmud , Pesahim 12b; Ahai of Shabha (1971).

Sheiltot of Rab Aḥai Gaon . Jerusalem: Makor Ltd. p. 31a (Pesach), column 122, section 74.

OCLC 762430858 .

, a facsimile, printed from the first Venice edition (MS. 1546) ^ Jerusalem Talmud ( Berakhot 1:1 [2b]) ^ de Castro, Yaakov (1718).

ʻErekh Leḥem (in Hebrew). Istanbul: Kushṭa. p.

9a ( Orach Chayim , section 260:2).

OCLC 762370388 .

(reprinted in 1988) ^ Al-ʻAdani, Saʻid ben Daṿid (2009). Zephaniah Sharʻabi (ed.).

Perush Rabenu Saʻid n. Daṿid al-ʻAdani ʻal Mishneh Torah leha-Rambam (Sefer Ahavah) (in Hebrew). Translated by Pinḥas ben Yosef Ḳoraḥ. Ḳiryat Sefer: Mekhon Marʻeh. p. 253.

OCLC 429339490 .

It is known that bayn ha-sh'meshot [= twilight] is a case of doubt whether it is day or night, and they treat it with stringency in every place, the estimation of which time being approximately one-third of an hour after sunset (18 minutes), being from the moment the sun has completely gone down [over the horizon] until the appearance of three stars, just as it has been explained in chapter 5 of Hilkot Shabbat (sect. 4).

^ Babylonian Talmud ( Shabbat 34b–35a); cf.

Moses Alashkar , Responsa ( responsum # 96), Sabbionetta, 1553; Gelis, Jacob (1968).

The Customs of the Land of Israel (מנהגי ארץ-ישראל) (in Hebrew). Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook . pp. 99-100 (§ 12).

OCLC 873519965 .

; Yaakov de Castro , Erekh Lehem ( Orach Chayim , section 260:2); Isaac of Corbeil ( Sefer Mitzvot Ḳatan ); Ibn Abi-Zimra, David (1882). Aharon Wolden (ed.).

The Responsa of the Radbaz (in Hebrew). Vol. 2. Warsaw.

OCLC 233235313 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) , s.v. part IV, responsum # 1353 (reprinted in Israel, n.d.) ^ Yosef, Ovadia (2002).

Halikhot ʻOlam (in Hebrew). Vol. 3. Jerusalem: Mekhon "Meʼor Yiśraʼel". p. 140.

OCLC 39937409 .

^ Yosef, Ovadia (2002).

Halikhot ʻOlam (in Hebrew). Vol. 5. Jerusalem: Mekhon "Meʼor Yiśraʼel". p. 59.

OCLC 39937409 .

^ Gelis, Jacob (1968).

The Customs of the Land of Israel (מנהגי ארץ-ישראל) (in Hebrew). Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook . p. 98 (§ 12).

OCLC 873519965 .

^ Yosef, Ovadia (2003).

Ḥazon ʻOvadyah (in Hebrew). Vol. 1. Jerusalem: Mekhon "Meʼor Yiśraʼel". pp. 264–ff.

^ Rabbeinu Tam (1811).

Sefer Ha-yashar (in Hebrew). Vienna. pp.

19b (section 181).

^ a b Al-ʻAdeni, Saʻīd ben David (2009). Pinhas Qorah (ed.).

Commentary of Rabbeinu Saʻīd ben David al-ʻAdeni (On the Mishneh Torah of Maimonides, Sefer Ahavah) (in Hebrew). Kiryat Sefer: Mekhon Mar'eh. p. 243 (note 25).

OCLC 762528287 .

^ Sefer Ravid ha-Zahav of Rabbi David Mishreqi (Mizrachi) , ed. Shimon Giat, Betar-Ilit 2002, Responsa Ravid Ha-Zahav , responsum # 13, s.v. ונהירנא (p. 182) ^ Babylonian Talmud , Pesahim 12b; 11b ^ Israel Meir Kagan , Mishnah Berura on Shulhan Arukh ( Orah Hayyim 261:2:23), otherwise known as the time it takes to walk "three quarters of a biblical mile." ^ In the Babylonian Talmud ( Shabbat 118b) we read: Rabbi Jose has said: “Let my portion be with those who usher in the Sabbath day [at its outset] in Tiberias , and with those who dismiss the Sabbath day [at its recess] in Sepphoris .” This has been explained by Aaron Mordechai Freedman (editor of the 1987 Soncino edition of Tractate Shabbath ): "In Tiberias, which was situated in a valley, the Sabbath commenced rather earlier, whilst in Sepphoris, which was on a mountain, it terminated rather later than elsewhere." (v.

Hebrew-English Edition of the Babylonian Talmud , Tractate Shabbath, Soncino edition, London 1987, s.v.

Shabbath 118b, note (b)3).

Freedman's description of twilight being, literally, an oscillating physical reality dependent upon one's location is supported by Rabbi Joseph ibn Migash (1077–1141) [ Responsa of R. Joseph ibn Migash , responsum # 45] and by Rabbi David ben Zimra (c. 1479–1573) [ Responsa of Rabbi David ben Zimra , book I, responsum # 76], as also by Rabbi Hayyim Eliezer, the son of Isaac ben Moses of Vienna (13th century), who also compiled a book called "Or Zarua" ( responsum # 186). Apparently, there is a local phenomenon relating to light emanating from fixed stars in the sky, and their becoming visible once a certain level of darkness has enveloped the land.

Rashi , however, differs in view, whose opinion is supported also by Rabbi Menachem Meiri (1249–1306) Langa's Edition, p. 460, and Rabbi Nissim ben Jacob (990–1062), and who all thought that twilight was a fixed time for all, but that the people of Tiberias and Sepphoris were merely stringent in their religious practices, the one group welcoming the Sabbath early, while the other departing from it as late as possible.

^ Tosefot and Tosefot Rash mi-Shantz Pesachim 11b and Tosefot Sanhedrin 41b.

^ Berakhot 2a ^ Berakhot 3a and 27a, ^ Berakhot 26 ^ Responsa 1 ^ OC 431:1 ^ 266 ^ Kuntres de-ve shimshei.

^ This is the opinion of Rabbi Nathan Adler (brought by Rabbi Yehosef Schwartz in Divrei Yosef 59b, who himself rejects this opinion), Ben Ish Hai (Year 1 Vayakehel 4:8), Rabbi Mordecai Karmi (Maamar Mordechai 233:2) and others.

^ Mishnah - with a Commentary of Rabbi Moses ben Maimon (ed.

Yosef Qafih ), vol. 1, Mossad Harav Kook: Jerusalem 1963, s.v.

Berakhot 1:5 (p. 33); Megillah 2:4 (p. 232) ^ Responsa of Rabbi David ben Zimra , Book 4, Warsaw 1882 (reprinted), s.v.

responsum # 1353 (282) ^ Babylonian Talmud , Shabbat 34b–35a; Chaim Yosef David Azulai , Birkei Yosef (Orah Hayyim, § 261:1), Levorno 1774, citing the author of Ginat Weradim , who wrote: "The world has it as a practice in all the Diaspora communities of Israel [to follow the opinion of] the Geonim " (i.e. with respect to the time of bayn ha-shemashot (twilight; nightfall), so that immediately following sunset begins the time known as bayn ha-shemashot , which is the time it takes to walk three quarters of a biblical mile). The opinion of Rabbi Chaim Azulai comes to counter a variant opinion that is also found in the Talmud ( Pesahim 94a), where it states that a man is able to walk four mil between sunset and nightfall, an opinion not as widely accepted.

^ Yosef Karo, Shulhan Arukh ( Orah Hayyim § 459:2) ^ Divrei Yosef 59b ^ Tukatzinsky, Yechiel Michel (1928).

Sefer Bein ha-Shemashos (in Hebrew). Jerusalem. pp.

97 -98.

OCLC 233065543 .

The opinion of our Rabbi, the Vilna Gaon, as well as of many other poskim , is that in all the halachic matters touching on the hours [of the day], we reckon [the day] from sunset until sunset, such as the latest time [one is required to recite] Kiryat Shema , [being] a quarter of the day (a third of the hours), and the latest time of the [morning] prayer, [being] a third of the day (four hours), and the latest time [permitted in] eating leaven on the eve of Passover, [being] a third of the day, and the burning of leaven in another relative hour – all [hours being reckoned] from sunrise until sunset. ...The practice is to be stringent in accordance with the Vilna Gaon's method when it comes to the latest time [in which a person recites] Kiryat Shema , and [says] the [morning] prayer, and when it comes to eating and burning the leaven [on the eve of Passover].

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Shiurei Tziyon, Siman 35.

^ Minchas Yitzchak, Volume 4, Siman 53 ^ Mishnas Rabbi Aharan, Volume 1, Siman 2.

^ Yoma 28b ^ "Zmanim Terms" . Kehillat Israel.

Archived from the original on 5 June 2015 . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

^ Brought in Shu"t Mahara"m Alshaker 96 ^ Siddur Rav Saadya Gaon page 26 ^ Brought it Mordechai Berakhot #90 ^ a b Beginning of 4th chapter of Berakhot.

^ Teshuva in Peer Hador 44 ^ OC 233:1 ^ Mishnah - with a Commentary of Rabbi Moses ben Maimon (ed.

Yosef Qafih ), vol. 1, Mossad Harav Kook: Jerusalem 1963, s.v.

Berakhot 1:5 (p. 33) ^ Yosef Karo, Shulhan Arukh ( Orah Hayyim § 89:1) ^ Mishnah, Berakhot 4:1 (Maimonides, Mishne Torah , Hil. Tefillah 3:1) ^ Mishnah ( Pesahim 1:4) ^ Rabbeinu Hananel's Commentary on Tractate Berakhot (ed. David Metzger), Jerusalem 1990, s.v.

Berakhot 26a (p. 51) ^ Josephus , Antiquities (xiv.iv.§ 3) ^ Mishnah, Eduyot 6:1 ^ a b The Mishnah (ed.

Herbert Danby ), Oxford University Press: Oxford 1977, s.v.

Pesahim 5:1, p. 141 ^ Josephus, Wars (vi.ix.§ 3) Notes [ edit ] v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Halakha (Jewish religious law) Ethics Chillul hashem (Desecration of God's name) Geneivat da'at (Theft of the mind) Gezel sheina (Theft of sleep) Kiddush hashem (Sanctification of God's name) Lashon hara (Derogatory information) Lifnei iver (Stumbling block in front of the blind) Noahide laws You shall not murder Yetzer hara Ritual purity Corpse uncleanness Handwashing Mikveh Niddah Ritual washing Modesty Negiah Yichud Mechitza Sexuality Forbidden relationships Gender separation Homosexuality Agrarian laws Sabbatical year Tithes Terumah First tithe Second tithe Poor tithe Terumat hamaaser Demai Orlah Bikkurim Sicaricon Hallah Kil'ayim Halakhic principles Aveira Bemeizid , beshogeg , and beones B'rov am hadrat melech Chumra Dina d'malkhuta dina De'oraita and derabanan One commandment leads to another Ikar v'tafel Marit ayin Neder Osek b'mitzvah patur min hamitzvah Pikuach nefesh Positive commandment Sfeka d'yoma Self-sacrifice Shinuy Shomea k'oneh Testimony Toch k'dei dibur Yad soledet bo Zmanim Relative hour Punishment Capital punishment Kareth Related boxes High Holidays Passover Shabbat Sukkot Kashrut Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Relative_hour&oldid=1303474675 " Categories : Timekeeping Time measurement systems Jewish law Time in astronomy Units of time Time in religion Jewish law and rituals Hidden categories: CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 06:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Relative hour 5 languages Add topic

