Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 France 1.2 England and Wales 1.3 United States 1.4 Australia 1.5 New Zealand 1.6 Scotland 1.7 India 2 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 2.1 Ireland 2.2 Australia 2.3 New Zealand 2.4 United States 2.5 Monaco 3 Saints and Blesseds 4 St. Vincent de Paul Charity Shop 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Society of Saint Vincent de Paul 15 languages العربية Cymraeg Deutsch Español Français Gaeilge Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lingála Nederlands Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian community service organization Society of Saint Vincent de Paul Blessed Frédéric Ozanam Named after St.

Vincent de Paul Founded April 23, 1833 ; 192 years ago ( 1833-04-23 ) [ 2 ] Founder Blessed Frédéric Ozanam [ 3 ] Mr. Emmanuel Bailly Focus Sanctification of members through service of the poor [ 5 ] Area served 155 countries [ 4 ] Members 800,000 [ 4 ] Superior General Fr. Bertin Sanon, R.S.V.

[ 1 ] Volunteers 1.5 million [ 4 ] Website ssvpglobal.org Remarks Slogan: serviens in spe The Society of Saint Vincent de Paul ( SVP or SVdP or SSVP ) is an international voluntary organization in the Catholic Church , founded in 1833 for the sanctification of its members by personal service of the poor. Started by Frédéric Ozanam and Emmanuel-Joseph Bailly de Surcy and named after Vincent de Paul , the organization is part of the global Vincentian Family of Catholic organizations.

Innumerable Catholic parishes have established "conferences", most of which affiliate with a diocesan council. Among its varied efforts to offer material help to the poor or needy, the Society also has thrift stores or " op shops " which sell donated goods at a low price and raise money for the poor.

[ 6 ] There are a great variety of outreach programs sponsored by the local conferences and councils, addressing local needs for social services.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] France [ edit ] The Society of St. Vincent de Paul was founded in 1833 to help impoverished people living in the slums of Paris, France.

[ 7 ] The primary figure behind the Society's founding was Blessed Frédéric Ozanam , a French lawyer, author, and professor in the Sorbonne . Frédéric collaborated with Emmanuel Bailly, editor of the Tribune Catholique , in reviving a student organization which had been suspended during the revolutionary activity of July 1830. Ozanam was 20 years old when he founded the Society.

[ 8 ] He was beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1997.

[ 9 ] Emmanuel Bailly was chosen as the first President.

The Society took Saint Vincent de Paul as its patron under the influence of Sister Rosalie Rendu , DC. Sister Rosalie, beatified in November 1999 by Pope John Paul II, was a member of the Daughters of Charity of St. Vincent de Paul , earlier known for her work with people in the slums of Paris. She guided Frédéric and his companions in their approach towards those in need.

[ 10 ] Blessed Rosalie Rendu, DC SVP gradually expanded outside Paris in the mid-19th century and received benefactors in places such as Tours where figures such as the Venerable Leo Dupont , known as the Holy Man of Tours , became collaborators.

[ 11 ] The Society is part of the Vincentian Family which also includes two congregations founded by St. Vincent de Paul – the Congregation of the Mission with Vincentian priests and brothers and the Ladies of Charity – along with the Sisters of Charity in the Setonian tradition and several others, including some religious groups that are part of the Anglican Communion like the Company of Mission Priests .

[ 10 ] [ 2 ] England and Wales [ edit ] Venerable Fr.

Ignatius Spencer from London came to know the Society during his visits to Paris. Parisianr Adolphe Baudon [ fr ] , who would assume the presidency of the society in 1847, visited London in 1842 and persuaded Spencer to write about the Society in the Catholic Magazine . Then in January 1844 M. Pagliano, a London restaurateur and recent convert to Catholicism, gathered together 13 Catholic men and the first English SVP conference was founded.

[ 12 ] Early initiatives included the formation of the Catholic Shoe Black Brigade, providing boys with gainful employment and the first home of "the Rescue Society" which under various names still offers child care in many dioceses.

[ 13 ] In 2013 there were more than 10,000 members in more than 1,000 Conferences in the United Kingdom, making over 500,000 recorded visits annually to more than 100,000 people.

[ 13 ] United States [ edit ] Old Cathedral of St. Louis, Missouri , 1834 The Society's first Conference in the United States was established in 1845 in St. Louis , Missouri, at the Basilica of St. Louis King of France , or "Old Cathedral".

Fr. John Timon, CM , had learned of the Society while visiting with his Vincentian superiors in Paris. From Dublin , Ireland, he brought to St. Louis copies of the SVP Rule. On 16 November 1845, Bishop Peter Richard Kenrick dedicated the new St. Vincent de Paul church on South Eighth Street and invited Timon to preach. Timon discussed the Society in his sermon, [ 14 ] in the presence of prominent laymen who took hold of the idea and held an organizational meeting on 20 November 1845. The Conference included Moses Linton, founder of the St. Louis Medical and Surgical Journal, and as chair Judge Bryan Mullanphy who would become mayor of St. Louis.

[ 15 ] Bishop Kenrick appointed Fr. Ambrose Heim as spiritual advisor to the Conference.

[ 16 ] Australia [ edit ] Gerald Ward was born in London in 1806 and was recruited for the Melbourne mission by the pioneering father, later bishop, Patrick Geoghegan . Ward was familiar with SVP from London and, observing the plight of the poor after the Victorian gold rush , established the Society in Australia in 1854. Ward served as its first president and helped establish the SVP orphanage in South Melbourne.

[ 17 ] In March 2023, Mark Gaetani was officially inducted as the 18th National Council President by Archbishop Christopher Prowse at St. Christopher's Cathedral, Manuka in Canberra, Australian Capital Territory , taking over from Claire Victory.

[ 18 ] New Zealand [ edit ] Fr. Chataigner, SM, established the first Conference in New Zealand in July 1867, but did not affiliate with the Council-General in Paris. The first to affiliate was the Wellington Conference founded in 1908 by Fr. Petitjean, SM, and Charles O'Neill, followed by other Conferences out of Wellington.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Scotland [ edit ] Charles O'Neill was born in Glasgow in 1828. He graduated as a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. Upon graduation he had joined the Society of St Vincent de Paul. He was secretary at Dumbarton in 1851. He led the St Vincent de Paul Society in the Western Districts of Scotland between 1859 and 1863. By 1863 he was president of the Superior Council of Glasgow and a member of the Council-General in Paris.

[ 21 ] India [ edit ] The Society was first introduced in India by the French Missionaries at Pondicherry during the Year 1852–53 as a non-aggregated Conference. The Society was officially started in India in 1863 when some conferences in Bombay were aggregated and the Bombay Particular Council was instituted. Then onwards the Society continued to grow in India . On 09.11.1953 the Superior Council of India was established and instituted with the Council General International. The Superior Council of India was renamed as National Council of India on 06.08.1973. The National Council of India has its Headquarters in Mumbai and the present President’s secretariat is at Chennai, Tamil Nadu with the election of Bro. S. Jude ZR Mangalraj as the 14th National President of India with effect from 28th February 2021.

The National Council of India is registered under the Income Tax Act 1961 with exemption under Sec 80G, FCRA under the ministry of Home Affairs and Societies Regn. Act and Bombay Public Trust Act 1950.

Activities [ edit ] The Society numbers about 800,000 members in some 140 countries worldwide, whose members operate through "conferences".

[ 4 ] A Conference may be based out of a church, school, community center, hospital, etc., and is composed of Catholic volunteers who pursue their own Christian growth in the service of the poor. Some Conferences exist without affiliating with any local Council, and so are not counted in statistics. Non-Catholics may join and the Society serves all regardless of their personal beliefs.

[ 4 ] Ireland [ edit ] The Society of St. Vincent de Paul was founded in Dublin on 16 December 1844.

[ 22 ] It is now the largest voluntary charitable organisation in Ireland, making it one of Ireland's best known and most widely supported organisations of social concern and action. It has over 11,500 volunteers, active in every county in Ireland.

[ 23 ] During its history it has helped people in need through a famine, a civil war, a war of independence, two world wars, and several economic recessions.

[ citation needed ] Australia [ edit ] SVP Opportunity Shop in Wagga Wagga, New South Wales St. Vincent de Paul Thrift Store in historic Anson Brown Building , Ann Arbor, MI In Australia, "Vinnies" workers and volunteers number about 39,000 in 2025, [ 24 ] down from 58,000 the decade before.

[ 25 ] Works include conferences, Special Works, and Vinnies op shops , [ 26 ] assisting over 1,800,000 people in Australia each year.

[ 24 ] In 1996, Ozcare was established as a special work of the society. It provides aged care and disability centres and services.

[ 27 ] In 2018, the St Vincent de Paul Society Queensland was named as one of the Queensland Greats by Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk in a ceremony at the Queensland Art Gallery on 8 June 2018.

[ 28 ] New Zealand [ edit ] In New Zealand, SVP operates in 23 regions with over 50 shops which serve as centres for welfare service, including food banks and food trucks. Most Catholic schools have Young Vinnies who help with fundraising and with training for dealing directly with the poor. The work is varied, following the Vinnie motto: "No act of charity is foreign to the society." [ 29 ] United States [ edit ] The national headquarters is in St. Louis. Membership in the United States in 2015 exceeded 97,000 in 4,400 communities. Expenditures to people in poverty were $473,821,563. Programs include visits to homes, prisons, and hospitals, housing assistance, disaster relief, job training and placement, food pantries, dining halls, clothing, transportation and utility costs, care for the elderly, and medicine.

[ 30 ] Revenue is raised through a large network of thrift stores.

[ 31 ] One of the working companies is Aurora Glass Foundry that recycles scrap glass and turns it into various decorative glass products for sale.

[ 32 ] Monaco [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The first Conference of the Society of Saint Vincent de Paul in Monaco was created in 1876.
The Conference of the immaculate Conception of Monaco-City whose commemorative plaque is on the Place de la Visitation, thanks among others to Monsieur Thheuret, Apostolic Protonotary in Monaco and to Mr Gastaldi, Mayor of Monaco. Mr. Theuret was appointed first Honorary President. The Vice-President of Honor being the Marquis de la Riva, first Chambellan of the Sovereign Prince.

The first active President was Lieutenant Plati. The Sovereign Prince, Prince Charles III, was one of the first benefactors. At the time, the Immaculate Conception Conference was attached to the Particular Council of the Nice Conferences.

St. Vincent de Paul Society in Monaco is located on 32 Rue Grimaldi, in the Condamine neighbourhood.

Saints and Blesseds [ edit ] Saints Pier Giorgio Frassati (6 April 1901 – 4 July 1925), mountaineer, and also a member of the Third Order of Saint Dominic, to be canonized on 3 August 2025 Gianna Beretta Molla (4 October 1922 – 28 April 1962), doctor and mother, canonized on 16 May 2004 Blesseds Antoine-Frédéric Ozanam (23 April 1813 – 8 September 1853), founder of the Society, beatified on 22 August 1997 Alcide-Vital (Jean-Joseph) Lataste (5 September 1832 – 10 March 1869), priest of the Order of Preachers and member of the Society, beatified on 3 June 2012 Contardo Ferrini (5 April 1859 – 17 October 1902), jurist, legal scholar, and also a Franciscan Tertiary, beatified on 13 April 1947 Manuel Luque Ramos and 4 Companions (died 22 July and 5 August 1936), Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War, beatified on 18 November 2023 Ceferino Giménez Malla (26 August 1861 – 9 August 1936), Romani layperson martyred during the Spanish Civil War, beatified on 4 May 1997 Maria Jorda Botella (26 January 1905 – 26 September 1936), member of the Society martyred during the Spanish Civil War, beatified on 11 March 2001 Josef Mayr-Nusser (27 December 1910 – 24 February 1945), "Martyr of the First Commandment", killed by the Nazis because of refusal to take the Hitler Oath and to be drafted as a Nazi soldier, beatified on 18 March 2017 St. Vincent de Paul Charity Shop [ edit ] The St. Vincent de Paul Society runs charity shops in many countries including Australia, New Zealand, the United States, Ireland, and Canada. These shops are organized by local chapters in St. Louis , [ 33 ] Cincinnati area with 7, [ 34 ] Omaha, Nebraska , [ 35 ] Dayton, Ohio , [ 36 ] Des Moines, Iowa , [ 37 ] Florida, [ 31 ] California, [ 31 ] Pennsylvania with 24, [ 31 ] Western Oregon , [ 31 ] Georgia , [ 31 ] Arizona , [ 38 ] Idaho , [ 39 ] and Western Washington .

[ 40 ] Items from clothing to automobiles are sold for a small price, often with home pick-up for large items. Money, and many times donated items, are distributed to the poor.

[ 41 ] References [ edit ] ^ Office, Vincentian Family (2 June 2022).

"Religious of St. Vincent de Paul named their Superior General and Council for the next six-year period" .

FAMVIN NewsEN .

^ a b c "International Associations of the Faithful", Pontifical Council for the Laity ^ " "Origins", International Confederation Society-of-Saint-Vincent-de-Paul" . Archived from the original on 24 June 2017 . Retrieved 10 February 2015 .

^ a b c d e "Annual Report, 2022-2023" (PDF) .

International Confederation of the Society of St Vincent de Paul . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ "International Confederation of the Society of St Vincent de Paul" .

^ Years, SVDP USA | Providing Assistance to Those in Need for Over 150.

"Assistance/Services" .

www.svdpusa.org . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "History – St Vincent de Paul Society – Good Works" .

www.vinnies.org.au . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

^ Stroup, Herbert Hewitt. 1985 Social welfare pioneers Rowman and Littlefield ISBN 0-88229-212-9 page 185 ^ "Blessed Frédéric Ozanam" .

Franciscan Media . 7 September 2016. Archived from the original on 30 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 May 2017 .

^ a b "Society of Saint Vincent de Paul – Vincentian Encyclopedia" .

famvin.org . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

^ Joan Carroll Cruz, OCDS, "Saintly Men of Modern Times" (2003) ISBN 1-931709-77-7 page 195 ^ "Other Key Vincentian Figures | St Vincent de Paul Society" .

svp.org.uk . Archived from the original on 28 October 2014 . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

^ a b "Growth of the Society in England & Wales | St Vincent de Paul Society" .

svp.org.uk . Archived from the original on 19 November 2016 . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

^ Faherty, William Barnaby (2001).

The St. Louis Irish: An Unmatched Celtic Community . Missouri History Museum.

ISBN 9781883982393 .

^ "History" . SVDP USA . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

^ "Society of St. Vincent de Paul USA – Vincentian Encyclopedia" .

famvin.org . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

^ Slattery, Kevin (2004).

"An Enduring Legacy: Fr Gerald Ward" (PDF) .

St Vincent de Paul Society . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 October 2019 .

^ St Vincent de Paul Society elects new national leader , Catholic Voice, Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Canberra and Goulburn , 2023-03-09 ^ "History" .

St Vincent de Paul Wellington Area . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

^ Society of St. Vincent de Paul New Zealand, 1867–1933 / compiled by D.N. (Des) Ryan.

^ Foley, C. J. "O'Neill, Charles Gordon (1828–1900)".

Australian Dictionary of Biography . Canberra: National Centre of Biography, Australian National University.

^ Holland, Kitty; Correspondent, Social Affairs.

"St Vincent de Paul plaque unveiled for 175th anniversary in Ireland" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 27 September 2020 .

{{ cite news }} : |last2= has generic name ( help ) ^ "SVP Ireland" .

^ a b "FAQ | St Vincent de Paul Society - Vinnies | Vinnies" .

www.vinnies.org.au . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ "Membership How many Conference members and volunteers does the Society have" . Retrieved 2 October 2016 .

^ "General – Who does the Society help?" . Retrieved 2 October 2016 .

^ "Ozcare - Aged Care, Home Care, Respite Care, and NDIS Services Queensland" .

Ozcare . Retrieved 27 April 2022 .

^ "Congratulations to the 2018 Queensland Greats" .

Queensland Greats Awards .

Queensland Government . 20 July 2018 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 .

^ Generally, you can look at the national page https://www.svdp.org.nz/ , specific areas, such as Wellington Area will give you a good indication of what type of work is done in New Zealand http://vinnies-wellington.org.nz/ ^ "Home" . SVDP USA . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

^ a b c d e f "Find Store" . Society of St. Vincent De Paul. Archived from the original on 31 May 2017 . Retrieved 28 May 2017 .

^ Aurora Glass Foundry ^ "Locations | Society of St. Vincent de Paul of St. Louis" .

svdpstlouis.org . Retrieved 28 May 2017 .

^ "Find Us" .

Society of St. Vincent de Paul, Cincinnati Chapter . Retrieved 28 May 2017 .

^ "Thrift Stores – Omaha Society of Saint Vincent De Paul" .

svdpomaha.com . Retrieved 28 May 2017 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "COMMUNITY STORES – St. Vincent de Paul Dayton" .

St. Vincent de Paul Dayton . Archived from the original on 2 October 2017 . Retrieved 28 May 2017 .

^ "Our Stores – SVdP Des Moines" .

SVdP Des Moines . Retrieved 28 May 2017 .

^ "Thrift Stores, Dining, and Program Locations – St. Vincent de Paul" .

www.stvincentdepaul.net . Retrieved 28 May 2017 .

^ "St. Vincent de Paul Society of North Idaho" .

stvincentdepaulcda.org . Retrieved 31 August 2022 .

^ Dorpat, Paul (3 April 2015).

"On a mission in 1926: St. Vincent de Paul" .

The Seattle Times . Retrieved 28 December 2023 .

^ Hunt, Judy.

"Retail Thrift Stores – St. Vincent de Paul Society of Lane Co, Inc" .

www.svdp.us . Archived from the original on 6 May 2017 . Retrieved 28 May 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Society of Saint Vincent de Paul .

International Confederation Society of Saint-Vincent-de-Paul History of Society SSVP Canada SVP – Ireland SVP – England & Wales St Vincent de Paul Society Australia National Council of the United States Society of St. Vincent de Paul National Council of New Zealand St Vincent de Paul Society Society of Saint Vincent, National Council Of Belgium in ODIS – Online Database for Intermediary Structures Archived 28 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine Archives of the Society of Saint Vincent, National Council Of Belgium in ODIS – Online Database for Intermediary Structures Archived 28 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine v t e Catholic laity Organizations of lay members of the Catholic Church who are neither in holy orders nor members of religious institutes Personal ordinariates , prelatures , and apostolic administrations Military ordinariates Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Opus Dei Anglican Use : Chair of Saint Peter , Our Lady of the Southern Cross , Our Lady of Walsingham Saint John Mary Vianney Third orders Order of Augustinian Recollects Order of Saint Augustine Oblates of Saint Benedict Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites Order of Saint Dominic Order of Saint Francis Secular Franciscan Order Order of Mercy Order of Minims Order Secular of the Most Holy Trinity Order of Saint Norbert Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel Association of Salesian Cooperators Order of Servites Confraternities Archconfraternities Archconfraternity of the Holy Family Archconfraternity of the Most Precious Blood Types Confraternities of the Cord Confraternity of Penitents Flagellant confraternities Purgatorial society Individual Confraternity of Christian Doctrine Confraternity of Catholic Saints Confraternity of the Rosary Bona Mors Confraternity Children of Mary of the Sacred Heart Hospitalité Notre Dame de Lourdes Illustrious Brotherhood of Our Blessed Lady Penitentes Penitential Brotherhood of the Holy Eucharist Society of the Holy Name Ven. Arc. Misericordia di Florence RVISSM International associations of the faithful Catenian Association Chemin Neuf Community Christian Life Community Christian Life Movement Cooperators of Opus Dei Couples for Christ Cursillo Communion and Liberation Emmanuel Community FIMCAP Focolare Movement Heralds of the Gospel International Alliance of Catholic Knights International Catholic Conference of Scouting International Federation of Catholic Universities International Kolping Society International Union of Catholic Esperantists Lay Claretian Movement L'Arche Legion of Mary Militia Christi Militia of the Immaculata Neocatechumenal Way Pax Romana Priests for Life Regnum Christi Sant'Egidio Community SIGNIS Schoenstatt Movement Teams of Our Lady Teresian Association UIGSE Union of Catholic Apostolate Other associations of the faithful Apostolate for Family Consecration Association of Vatican Lay Workers Catholic Charismatic Renewal ( Canção Nova ) ( Shalom Catholic Community ) Catholic Christian Outreach Catholic Worker Movement Fellowship of Catholic University Students Madonna House Maryknoll Lay Missioners NET Ministries Pope's Worldwide Prayer Network Queen of Angels Foundation Saint Paul's Outreach Society of Saint Vincent de Paul Movements Catholic Marian movements and societies Catholic Action Azione Cattolica Catholic Women's League Catholic Worker Movement World Movement of Christian Workers Young Christian Workers Christian Family Movement Courage International El Shaddai Family Rosary Crusade Fidesco International Notre-Dame de Chrétienté Theology on Tap Voice of the Faithful Young Men's Institute We Are Church See also Catholic catechesis Catholic Congress Catholic Extension Catholic higher education Catholic youth work Catholic campus ministry Dicastery for the Laity, Family and Life Lay Centre at Foyer Unitas Lists of Catholics Pontifical Council for the Laity Taizé Community Universal call to holiness Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities Home Missions CNEWA Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul Catholic Church portal Index v t e Associations of the Christian faithful International associations of the faithful L'Arche Catholic Integrated Community (KIG) Chemin Neuf Community (CCN) Christian Life Community (CVX) Christian Life Movement (CLM) Communion and Liberation (CL) Community of Sant'Egidio Community of the Beatitudes Cooperators of Opus Dei Couples for Christ (CFC) Cursillo (OMCC) Emmanuel Community Fimcap Focolare Movement Heralds of the Gospel (EP) International Alliance of Catholic Knights (IACK) International Catholic Conference of Scouting (ICCS) International Catholic Migration Commission (ICMC) International Federation of Catholic Universities (IFCU) International Kolping Society (IKS) International Union of Catholic Esperantists (IKUE) International Union of Guides and Scouts of Europe (UIGSE-FSE) Jesus Youth (JY) Lay Claretian Movement (MSC) Legion of Mary Light-Life Movement (RŚŻ) Militia Immaculatae (M.I.) Regnum Christi Schoenstatt Apostolic Movement SIGNIS Society of Saint Vincent de Paul (SSVP) St Benedict Patron of Europe Association (ASBPE) Teams of Our Lady (END) Teresian Association (T.A.) Union of Catholic Apostolate (UAC) World Movement of Christian Workers (WMCW) Other associations of the faithful Apostolate for Family Consecration Association of Vatican Lay Workers Brotherhood of Hope (BH) Catholic Charismatic Renewal Catholic Christian Outreach Catholic Worker Movement Fellowship of Catholic University Students Franciscan Brothers of Peace Franciscan Brothers of the Eucharist Madonna House NET Ministries Pope's Worldwide Prayer Network Queen of Angels Foundation Saint Paul's Outreach (SPO) Catholicism portal Index v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Charitable giving and practices Main topics Alms Altruism Charity (practice) Compassion Donation Empathy Fundraising Humanity (virtue) Philanthropy Volunteering Types of charitable organizations Charitable trust / Registered charity Foundation Private Crowdfunding Mutual-benefit nonprofit corporation Non-governmental organization International Nonprofit organization Public-benefit nonprofit corporation Service club Social enterprise Religious corporation Voluntary association Charity and religion Charity (Christian virtue) Dāna Tithe Tzedakah Sadaqah Zakat Charity evaluation Aid effectiveness Animal Charity Evaluators Candid Charity assessment Charity Navigator CharityWatch Distributional cost-effectiveness analysis GiveWell Giving Multiplier Giving What We Can GreatNonprofits Further topics Alternative giving Benefit concert Caffè sospeso Charity fraud Charity / thrift / op shop Click-to-donate site Drive Donor-advised fund Donor intent Earning to give Effective altruism Psychological barriers Ethics of philanthropy List of charitable foundations wealthiest Master of Nonprofit Organizations Matching funds Telethon Visiting the sick Voluntary sector Volunteer grant Wall of kindness Warm-glow giving Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Society_of_Saint_Vincent_de_Paul&oldid=1304603209 " Categories : Religious organizations established in 1833 International volunteer organizations International charities 1833 establishments in France Catholic lay organisations Charity shops Mutual organizations Former members of Fimcap Welfare and service organizations Queensland Greats Poverty-related organizations Vincentian Family Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 errors: generic name All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles needing additional references from June 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 01:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Society of Saint Vincent de Paul 15 languages Add topic

