Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Services 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents AMS Redfern Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Aboriginal Medical Service ) Indigenous Australian community-controlled health service in Sydney For the Northern Territory organisation, see Aboriginal Medical Services Alliance Northern Territory .

Aboriginal Medical Services Redfern , known as AMS Redfern , formerly the Aboriginal Medical Service ( AMS ) is an Aboriginal Australian health service in the Sydney suburb of Redfern . Established around 1971, it was the first Aboriginal community-controlled health service in Australia. It became a key Indigenous Australian community organisation, from which most Aboriginal medical services around the State of New South Wales have stemmed.

Many Aboriginal community-controlled health services (ACCHSs) were subsequently founded across Australia, following the AMS model.

History [ edit ] At the time of the foundation of the AMS, there was no universal health care in Australia, such as Medicare provides today.

[ 1 ] Inadequate and overcrowded housing and poor nutrition were causing health problems among Aboriginal people that were rare in the mainstream community, and the issue was compounded by the reluctance of Aboriginal people to access mainstream health services for fear of racism, or because of mistrust or an inability to pay.

[ 2 ] The foundation of the AMS was driven by Mum (Shirl) Smith , Dulcie Flower , Ken Brindle and Chicka and Elsa Dixon .

[ 3 ] It was set up by Gordon Briscoe , Dr.

Fred Hollows , Dr Archie Kalokerinos, Dulcie Flower, and others, who were all concerned with the serious health problems of Aboriginal Australians in Sydney.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Its growth was encouraged by Redfern parish priest Fr Ted Kennedy . The Sisters of Mercy donated the property in which the Aboriginal Medical Service had been established to the Redfern Aboriginal community in 1978.

[ citation needed ] Architect Col James , who did much work pro bono for various Aboriginal organisations, especially the Aboriginal Housing Company , also did work for the AMS.

[ 6 ] Mum Shirl was the first field officer. Hollows recruited medical students, doctors and volunteers.

[ 1 ] Founders also included Paul Coe , Dulcie Flower, John Russell, and Ross McKenna. Aboriginal journalist John Newfong was the inaugural director, and Andrew Refshauge the chief medical practitioner.

[ 2 ] Naomi Mayers joined as secretary in 1972, later becoming CEO .

[ 1 ] Inspired by the success of the Aboriginal Legal Service in providing free services to the Aboriginal community, the group applied for a government grant, and opened the service in a shopfront in Regent Street, Redfern. Its structure mirrored the Aboriginal Legal Service, with prominent community members acting as field officers and white professionals donating their time. The service was controlled by Aboriginal people.

[ 2 ] Its popularity was so great that it soon became unable to meet the demand for services.

[ 1 ] While the New South Wales Department of Aboriginal Affairs appeared committed to the service at first, the organisation struggled for secure funding during its first five years of operation. The department regularly delayed its assessment of funding applications, acquittals and payments, forcing the organisation to operate on bank overdrafts and donations from the community. The centre was staffed by volunteers, and doctors brought their own equipment to use. Despite this, the AMS provided all services free, with the option to donate if the patient felt able.

[ 2 ] The struggle for funds continued for around 15 years.

[ 7 ] The service employed a holistic approach to health care from the beginning. Aboriginal health issues were viewed within the paradigm of Indigenous people's social, economic and political status in Australian society, and it was considered necessary to address this disadvantage in order to improve Aboriginal health. The underlying agenda of the service was political in that it sought to enable Aboriginal people to control their own destinies.

[ 2 ] [ 8 ] The AMS, in association with Sol Bellear , Paul Coe, Mum Shirl, and Kaye Edwards, set up a breakfast program for children in a park in Newtown , serving food from a caravan borrowed from the Wayside Chapel .

[ 7 ] In 1977 the service moved to newly renovated premises in Turner Street, Redfern. A variety of specialist clinics were offered, as well as a general practice and dental clinic.

[ 2 ] Dulcie Flower developed the first Aboriginal health workers (AHWs) course in 1984 at Redfern, and the AMS soon afterwards started running post-graduate course in mental health care. These later moved to educational institutions.

[ 1 ] At some time before 2012, the Aboriginal Medical Service changed its name to AMS Redfern.

[ 1 ] The Aboriginal Medical Service inspired Aboriginal communities across the country to establish their own medical services, and by 2008 there were over 60 Aboriginal-controlled health services in the state of New South Wales .

[ 2 ] By 2012, there were 150 Aboriginal community-controlled health services (ACCHSs), following the AMS model, in urban, regional and remote Australia.

[ 1 ] In 2012, Naomi Mayers was CEO of the organisation. By this time, AMS had grown into a multidisciplinary health service, comprising a broad range of services and clinics. Apart from general medical, these included dental clinics, public health programs, and outreach services. It was also operating as a teaching practice, employing registrars and providing short-term placements for medical and nursing students from the University of Sydney . A number of hospitals and other organisations also collaborated with AMS.

[ 1 ] The modern centre was designed by Merrima company, and built on the donated land adjacent to the St Vincent's Roman Catholic community including the church, presbytery, convent and school built around 1887.

[ citation needed ] On 26 November 2022, the AMS held a gala dinner to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the AMS.

[ 9 ] Services [ edit ] As of 2022 [update] , AMS Redfern, registered as Aboriginal Medical Service Cooperative Limited, describes itself as a "multi-functional non-for-profit organisation that delivers a broad range of services and community programs".

[ 10 ] The joint CEOs are LaVerne Bellear and Aunty Dulcie Flower.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Marles, Elizabeth; Frame, Cara; Royce, Martin (June 2012).

"The Aboriginal Medical Service Redfern: Improving access to primary care for over 40 years" .

Australian Family Physician .

41 (6) . Retrieved 26 November 2022 – via RACGP .

^ a b c d e f g Zoe Pollock (2008).

"Aboriginal Medical Service" .

Dictionary of Sydney . Dictionary of Sydney Trust . Retrieved 9 October 2015 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0) ^ Marlow, Karina (6 July 2016).

"The Redfern Aboriginal Medical Service celebrates 45 years" .

National Indigenous Television .

Special Broadcasting Service . Retrieved 28 June 2023 .

^ Pollock, Zoe (2008).

"Aboriginal Medical Service" .

Dictionary of Sydney .

State Library of New South Wales . Retrieved 28 June 2023 .

^ Khoury, Peter (1 July 2015).

"Beyond the Biomedical Paradigm: The Formation and Development of Indigenous Community-Controlled Health Organizations in Australia" .

International Journal of Health Services .

45 (3): 471– 494.

doi : 10.1177/0020731415584557 .

ISSN 0020-7314 .

^ Moore, Clover (25 February 2013).

"Item 3.3. The late Colin Leslie James AM - Condolences: minute by the Lord Mayor" (PDF) .

City of Sydney . Retrieved 25 January 2025 .

^ a b "Our history & future" .

Aboriginal Medical Services Redfern . 2 August 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2022 .

^ Foley, Gary (1991) Redfern Aboriginal Medical Service 1971-1991 : twenty years of community service .

Aboriginal Medical Service Co-operative, Redfern, New South Wales.

^ a b "AMS Redfern - 50th Anniversary Gala Dinner, Sydney, Sat 26th Nov 2022, 6:30 pm - 11:59 pm AEDT" .

Humanitix . 26 November 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2022 .

^ "Aboriginal Medical Services Redfern" .

Aboriginal Medical Services Redfern . 26 August 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Foley, Gary (1991).

Redfern Aboriginal Medical Service 1971-1991 : twenty years of community service . Aboriginal Medical Service Cooperative Ltd – via Victoria University, Melbourne Research Repository.

PDF Contains a detailed account of the early years.

"Redfern Aboriginal Medical Service: 20 Years On" .

Aboriginal and Islander Health Worker Journal .

15 (4): 4– 8. July–August 1991.

ISSN 1037-3403 – via Informit.

External links [ edit ] Aboriginal Medical Services Redfern Photos of the 30th Anniversary of the Aboriginal Medical Service at Redfern v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=AMS_Redfern&oldid=1300611597 " Categories : Indigenous health organisations based in Australia 1971 establishments in Australia Aboriginal organisations in New South Wales Redfern, New South Wales Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements Official website not in Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 10:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents AMS Redfern Add languages Add topic

