Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Almanac 3 Exhibitions Toggle Exhibitions subsection 3.1 First exhibition 3.2 Second exhibition 3.3 Other shows 4 Members 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Der Blaue Reiter 50 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of expressionist artists "The Blue Rider" redirects here. For the Zachary Cale album, see Blue Rider (album) .

Wassily Kandinsky , cover of Der Blaue Reiter almanac, c.

1912 Der Blaue Reiter ( German : The Blue Rider ) was a group of artists and a designation by Wassily Kandinsky and Franz Marc for their exhibition and publication activities, in which both artists acted as sole editors in the almanac of the same name (first published in mid-May 1912). The editorial team organized two exhibitions in Munich in 1911 and 1912 to demonstrate their art-theoretical ideas based on the works of art exhibited. Traveling exhibitions in German and other European cities followed.

The Blue Rider disbanded at the start of World War I in 1914.

The artists associated with Der Blaue Reiter were important pioneers of modern art of the 20th century; they formed a loose network of relationships, but not an art group in the narrower sense like Die Brücke (The Bridge) in Dresden . The work of the affiliated artists is assigned to German Expressionism .

History [ edit ] Wassily Kandinsky , The Blue Rider , 1903 The forerunner of The Blue Rider was the Neue Künstlervereinigung München (N.K.V.M: New Artists' Association Munich), instigated by Marianne von Werefkin , Alexej von Jawlensky , Adolf Erbslöh and German entrepreneur, art collector, aviation pioneer and musician Oscar Wittenstein [ de ] . The N.K.V.M was co-founded in 1909 and Kandinsky (as its first chairman) organized the exhibitions of 1909 and 1910. Even before the first exhibition, Kandinsky introduced the so-called "four square meter clause" into the statutes of the N.K.V.M due to a difference of opinion with the painter Charles Johann Palmié ; this clause would give Kandinsky the lever to leave the N.K.V.M in 1911.

There were repeated disputes among the conservative forces in the N.K.V.M, which flared up due to Kandinsky's increasingly abstract painting. In December 1911, Kandinsky submitted Composition V for the association's third exhibition, but the jury rejected the painting.

[ 1 ] In response, Kandinsky, along with Münter, Marc, and others, formed a rival group and quickly organised a parallel exhibition at the same venue, the Thannhauser Gallery, in rooms adjacent to the official show. This breakaway group adopted the name Der Blaue Reiter.

Years later, Kandinsky recalled anticipating the controversy and having already prepared extensive material for the new group's exhibition: "Our halls were close to the rooms of the NKVM exhibition. It was a sensation. Since I anticipated the 'noise' in good time, I had prepared a wealth of exhibition material for the BR [Blaue Reiter]. So the two exhibitions took place simultaneously. (…) Revenge was sweet!".

[ 1 ] The exhibition was officially titled the First Exhibition of the Editorial Board of Der Blaue Reiter , reflecting Kandinsky and Marc's plans to publish an art almanac under the same name.

[ 1 ] Kandinsky resigned as chairmanship of the N.K.V.M. on 10 January 1911 but remained in the association as a simple member. His successor was Adolf Erbslöh . In June, Kandinsky developed plans for his activities outside of the N.K.V.M. He intended to publish a "kind of almanac" which could be called Die Kette ( The Chain ). On 19 June, he pitched his idea to Marc and won him over by offering him the co-editing of the book.

[ citation needed ] Franz Marc , Blue Horse I , 1911 The name of the movement is the title of a painting that Kandinsky created in 1903, but it is unclear whether it is the origin of the name of the movement as Professor Klaus Lankheit learned that the title of the painting had been overwritten.

[ 2 ] Kandinsky wrote 20 years later that the name is derived from Marc's enthusiasm for horses and Kandinsky's love of riders, combined with a shared love of the color blue.

[ 2 ] For Kandinsky, blue was the color of spirituality; the darker the blue, the more it awakened human desire for the eternal (as he wrote in his 1911 book On the Spiritual in Art ).

Within the group, artistic approaches and aims varied from artist to artist; however, the artists shared a common desire to express spiritual truths through their art. They believed in the promotion of modern art; the connection between visual art and music; the spiritual and symbolic associations of color; and a spontaneous, intuitive approach to painting. Members were interested in European medieval art and primitivism , as well as the contemporary, non-figurative art scene in France . As a result of their encounters with Cubist , Fauvist and Rayonist ideas, they moved towards abstraction.

[ citation needed ] Der Blaue Reiter organized exhibitions in 1911 and 1912 that toured Germany. They also published an almanac featuring contemporary, primitive and folk art , along with children's paintings. In 1913, they exhibited in the first German Herbstsalon.

[ citation needed ] The group was disrupted by the outbreak of the First World War in 1914.

Franz Marc and August Macke were killed in combat.

Wassily Kandinsky returned to Russia, and Marianne von Werefkin and Alexej von Jawlensky fled to Switzerland. There were also differences in opinion within the group. As a result, Der Blaue Reiter was short-lived, lasting for only three years from 1911 to 1914.

[ citation needed ] In 1923, Kandinsky , Feininger , Klee and Alexej von Jawlensky formed the group Die Blaue Vier ( The Blue Four ) at the instigation of painter and art dealer Galka Scheyer . Scheyer organized Blue Four exhibitions in the United States from 1924 onward.

An extensive collection of paintings by Der Blaue Reiter is exhibited in the Städtische Galerie in the Lenbachhaus in Munich.

[ citation needed ] Almanac [ edit ] Franz Marc , The Tower of Blue Horses , 1913 (missing since 1945) Conceived in June 1911, Der Blaue Reiter Almanach ( The Blue Rider Almanac ) was published in early 1912 by Piper in an edition that sold approximately 1100 copies; on 11 May, Franz Marc received the first print. The volume was edited by Kandinsky and Marc; its costs were underwritten by the industrialist and art collector Bernhard Koehler, a relative of Macke. It contained reproductions of more than 140 artworks, and 14 major articles. A second volume was planned, but the start of World War I prevented it. Instead, a second edition of the original was printed in 1914, again by Piper.

[ 3 ] The contents of the Almanac included: Marc's essay "Spiritual Treasures," illustrated with children's drawings, German woodcuts, Chinese paintings, and Pablo Picasso 's Woman with Mandolin at the Piano [ 4 ] an article by French critic Roger Allard on Cubism Arnold Schoenberg 's article "The Relationship to the Text", and a facsimile of his song "Herzgewächse" facsimiles of song settings by Alban Berg and Anton Webern Thomas de Hartmann 's essay "Anarchy in Music" an article by Leonid Sabaneyev about Alexander Scriabin an article by Erwin von Busse on Robert Delaunay , illustrated with a print of his The Window on the City an article by Vladimir Burliuk on contemporary Russian art Macke's essay "Masks" Kandinsky's essay "On the Question of Form" Kandinsky's "On Stage Composition" Kandinsky's The Yellow Sound .

The art reproduced in the Almanac marked a dramatic turn away from a Eurocentric and conventional orientation. The selection was dominated by primitive, folk and children's art, with pieces from the South Pacific and Africa, Japanese drawings, medieval German woodcuts and sculpture, Egyptian puppets, Russian folk art, and Bavarian religious art painted on glass. The five works by Van Gogh , Cézanne , and Gauguin were outnumbered by seven from Henri Rousseau and thirteen from child artists.

[ 5 ] Exhibitions [ edit ] 100th-anniversary postage stamp, Germany (2012) First exhibition [ edit ] On December 18, 1911, the First exhibition of the editorial board of Der Blaue Reiter ( Erste Ausstellung der Redaktion Der Blaue Reiter ) opened at the Heinrich Thannhauser's Moderne Galerie in Munich, running through the first days of 1912. 43 works by 14 artists were shown: paintings by Henri Rousseau , Albert Bloch , David Burliuk , Wladimir Burliuk , Heinrich Campendonk , Robert Delaunay , Elisabeth Epstein , Eugen von Kahler , Wassily Kandinsky , August Macke , Franz Marc , Gabriele Münter , Jean Bloé Niestlé and Arnold Schoenberg , and an illustrated catalogue edited.

[ 6 ] From January 1912 through July 1914, the exhibition toured Europe with venues in Cologne, Berlin, Bremen, Hagen, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Budapest, Oslo, Helsinki, Trondheim and Göteborg.

[ 7 ] Second exhibition [ edit ] From February 12 through April 2, 1912, the Second exhibition of the editorial board of Der Blaue Reiter ( Zweite Ausstellung der Redaktion Der Blaue Reiter ) showed works in black-and-white at the New Art Gallery of Hans Goltz (Neue Kunst Hans Goltz) in Munich.

[ 8 ] Other shows [ edit ] The artists of Der Blaue Reiter also participated in these other exhibitions: 1912 Sonderbund westdeutscher Kunstfreunde und Künstler exhibition, held in Cologne Erster Deutscher Herbstsalon (organised by Herwarth Walden and his gallery, Der Sturm ), held in 1913 in Berlin Members [ edit ] Albert Bloch David Burliuk Heinrich Campendonk Clotilde von Derp Lyonel Feininger Maria Franck-Marc Natalia Goncharova Alexej von Jawlensky Wassily Kandinsky Paul Klee Alfred Kubin August Macke Franz Marc Gabriele Münter Arnold Schoenberg Marianne von Werefkin Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Ricci, Benedetta (2020-09-04).

"Shows That Made Contemporary Art History" .

Artland Magazine . Retrieved 2025-02-07 .

^ a b Vezin, 1992, p. 124 ^ Katharina Erling: Der Almanach Der Blaue Reiter , in: Hopfengart (2000, pp. 188-239 ^ Peter Nicholls, Modernisms: A Literary Guide , Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 1995; p. 141.

^ George Heard Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880–1940 , New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1993; pp. 215-16.

^ Catalogue, reproduced in Hoberg & Friedel (1999), pp. 364-365.

^ Ortrud Westheider et alt.: Die Tournee der ersten Ausstellung des Blauen Reiters , in: Christine Hopfengart (2000), pp. 49-82 ^ Catalogue?

References [ edit ] John E. Bowlt, Rose-Carol Washton Long.

The Life of Vasilii Kandinsky in Russian art: a study of "On the spiritual in art" by Wassily Kandinsky . Pub l. Newtonville, Mass. USA. 1980.

ISBN 0-89250-131-6 ISBN 0-89250-132-4 Wassily Kandinsky, M. T. Sadler (Translator) Concerning the Spiritual in Art . Dover Publ. (Paperback). 80 pp.

ISBN 0-486-23411-8 . or: Lightning Source Inc. Publ. (Paperback).

ISBN 1-4191-1377-1 Shearer West (1996).

The Bullfinch Guide to Art . UK: Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 0-8212-2137-X .

Hoberg, Annegret, & Friedel, Helmut (ed.): Der Blaue Reiter und das Neue Bild, 1909-1912 , Prestel, München, London & New York 1999 ISBN 3-7913-2065-3 Hopfengart, Christine: Der Blaue Reiter , DuMont, Cologne 2000 ISBN 3-7701-5310-3 Vezin, Annette; Vezin, Luc (1992).

Kandinsky and the Blue Rider . Terrail.

ISBN 978-2-87939-043-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Der Blaue Reiter .

Media related to Der Blaue Reiter at Wikimedia Commons Collection: "Expressionism–Der Blaue Reiter" from the University of Michigan Museum of Art v t e Der Blaue Reiter Leaders Wassily Kandinsky Franz Marc Artists Albert Bloch David Burliuk Heinrich Campendonk Robert Delaunay Lyonel Feininger Natalia Goncharova Alexej von Jawlensky Paul Klee Alfred Kubin August Macke Gabriele Münter Arnold Schoenberg Marianne von Werefkin See also Die Brücke Expressionism Der Blaue Reiter (painting) v t e Expressionism Early Expressionists El Greco Matthias Grünewald Edvard Munch École de Paris Marc Chagall Yitzhak Frenkel Frenel Abraham Mintchine Amedeo Modigliani Jules Pascin Chaïm Soutine Paintings Blue Horse I Der Blaue Reiter Carcass of Beef Pierrot Les Platanes à Céret The Scream Expressionist architecture Erich Mendelsohn Bruno Taut German expressionist cinema Fritz Lang F. W. Murnau Robert Wiene From Caligari to Hitler Expressionist dance Pina Bausch Rudolf von Laban Mary Wigman Expressionist literature Ștefan Baciu Uri Zvi Greenberg Der Blaue Reiter Wassily Kandinsky Franz Marc Egon Schiele Die Brücke Fritz Bleyl Erich Heckel Ernst Ludwig Kirchner Karl Schmidt-Rottluff Expressionist music Alban Berg Paul Hindemith Marij Kogoj Arnold Schoenberg Anton Webern Expressionist sculpture Ernst Barlach Erich Heckel Influenced American Figurative Expressionism Boston Expressionism Neo-expressionism Expressionism (theatre) v t e Post-Impressionism 19th-century movements Neo-Impressionism Divisionism Pointillism Cloisonnism Les Nabis Synthetism Symbolism Art Nouveau Artists Cuno Amiet Charles Angrand Émile Bernard Edvard Munch Pierre Bonnard Marius Borgeaud Paul Cézanne Henri-Edmond Cross Maurice Denis Georges Dufrénoy Paul Gauguin Hippolyte Petitjean Paul Ranson Odilon Redon Henri Rousseau René Schützenberger Paul Sérusier Georges Seurat Paul Signac Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec Charles Laval Georges Lemmen Maximilien Luce Vincent van Gogh Théo van Rysselberghe Félix Vallotton Édouard Vuillard 20th-century movements Fauvism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Expressionism Cubism Artists Georges Braque Charles Camoin André Derain Raoul Dufy Henri Matisse Albert Gleizes Ernst Ludwig Kirchner Karl Schmidt-Rottluff Wassily Kandinsky Sonia Lewitska Franz Marc Jean Metzinger Henry Ottmann Francis Picabia Pablo Picasso Robert Antoine Pinchon Henriette Tirman Jean Marchand Othon Friesz Exhibitions Artistes Indépendants Les XX Volpini Exhibition Le Barc de Boutteville La Libre Esthétique Ambroise Vollard Salon d'Automne Salon des Indépendants Salon des Cent Salon des Tuileries Critics Félix Fénéon Albert Aurier Related Impressionism Modernism Modern art Secessionism v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Wassily Kandinsky List of paintings Paintings The Blue Rider (1903) Das Bunte Leben (1907) Landscape with Red Spots (1913) Composition VI (1913) Composition VII (1913) Improvisation No. 30 (Cannons) (1911–1913) Ein Zentrum (A Centre) (1922) Auf Weiss II (Sur blanc II) (1923) Three Elements (1925) Upward (1929) Composition X (1939) Simple Complexity (1939) Theater The Yellow Sound (1912) Related Aleksey Ivanovich Kandinsky (grandson) Gabriele Münter (partner) Neue Künstlervereinigung München Der Blaue Reiter Institute of Artistic Culture Bibliothèque Kandinsky Kandinsky Prize Wassily Chair v t e Franz Marc List of works Paintings Hut in Dachau Moors (1902) Indersdorf (1904) Two Women on the Hillside (1906) Horses in Landscape (1911) Blue Horse I (1911) Blue Horses (1911) Fox (1911) Yellow Cow (1911) Little Blue Horse (1912) Fate of the Animals (1913) The Tower of Blue Horses (1913) The Foxes (1913) Museums Franz Marc Museum Related Marie Schnür (first wife) Maria Marc (second wife) Der Blaue Reiter Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Der_Blaue_Reiter&oldid=1301142988 " Categories : German artist groups and collectives German art movements History of Munich Culture in Munich 1911 establishments in Germany 1914 disestablishments in Germany Wassily Kandinsky Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 08:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Der Blaue Reiter 50 languages Add topic

