Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 In medieval writing 3 Types and examples 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Trope (literature) 21 languages Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Español Français ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Română Русский Саха тыла Српски / srpski Татарча / tatarça Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Use of figurative language for artistic effect This article is about the literary trope. For other uses, see Trope (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e A literary trope is an artistic effect realized with figurative language – word, phrase, image – such as a rhetorical figure .

[ 1 ] In editorial practice, a trope is "a substitution of a word or phrase by a less literal word or phrase".

[ 2 ] Semantic change has expanded the definition of the literary term trope to also describe a writer's usage of commonly recurring or overused literary techniques and rhetorical devices (characters and situations), [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] motifs , and clichés in a work of creative literature.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Origins [ edit ] The term trope derives from the Greek τρόπος ( tropos ), 'a turn, a change', [ 8 ] related to the root of the verb τρέπειν ( trepein ), 'to turn, to direct, to alter, to change'; [ 6 ] this means that the term is used metaphorically to denote, among other things, metaphorical language. Tropes and their classification were an important field in classical rhetoric . The study of tropes has been taken up again in modern criticism, especially in deconstruction .

[ 9 ] Tropological criticism (not to be confused with tropological reading , a type of biblical exegesis ) is the historical study of tropes, which aims to "define the dominant tropes of an epoch" and to "find those tropes in literary and non-literary texts", an interdisciplinary investigation of which Michel Foucault was an "important exemplar".

[ 9 ] In medieval writing [ edit ] A specialized use is the medieval amplification of texts from the liturgy, such as in the Kyrie Eleison ( Kyrie, / magnae Deus potentia, / liberator hominis, / transgressoris mandati, / eleison ). The most important example of such a trope is the Quem quaeritis?

, an amplification before the Introit of the Easter Sunday service and the source for liturgical drama .

[ 4 ] [ 10 ] This particular practice came to an end with the Tridentine Mass , the unification of the liturgy in 1570 promulgated by Pope Pius V .

[ 9 ] Types and examples [ edit ] Rhetoricians have analyzed a variety of "twists and turns" used in poetry and literature and have provided a list of labels for these poetic devices. These include Animorphism –  The fictional trope of a human transforming into an animal, in a bid to overcome challenges.

Analogy – A comparison by showing how two seemingly different entities are alike, along with illustrating a larger point due to their commonalities.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Emphasis – The use of an expression or term in a narrower and more precise sense than usual to accentuate a certain sense.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Hyperbole – The use of exaggeration to create a strong impression.

Irony – Creating a trope through implying the opposite of the standard meaning, such as describing a bad situation as "good times".

Litotes – A figure of speech and form of verbal irony in which understatement is used to emphasize a point by stating a negative to further affirm a positive, often incorporating double negatives for effect.

Metaphor – An explanation of an object or idea through juxtaposition of disparate things with a similar characteristic, such as describing a courageous person as having a "heart of a lion".

Allegory – A sustained metaphor continued through whole sentences or even through a whole discourse. For example, "The ship of state has sailed through rougher storms than the tempest of these lobbyists." Catachresis – A metaphor that is or can be a stretch for an audience to catch on to. Catachreses can be subjective; some people may find a metaphor to be too much while others may find it perfectly reasonable.

[ 2 ] Metonymy – A trope through proximity or correspondence. For example, referring to actions of the U.S. president as "actions of the White House".

Antonomasia – A kind of metonymy in which an epithet or phrase takes the place of a proper name.

Simile – A form of speech that draws an explicit comparison (in contrast to metaphors) of one thing and another using the words "as" or "like" to bring vividness to its description.

Synecdoche – A literary device, related to metonymy and metaphor, which creates a play on words by referring to something with a related concept. For example, referring to the whole with the name of a part, such as "hired hands" for workers; a part with the name of the whole, such as "the law" for police officers; the general with the specific, such as "bread" for food; the specific with the general, such as "cat" for a lion; or an object with its substance, such as "bricks and mortar" for a building.

Oxymoron – The use of two opposite situations or things in one sentence to prove a point.

[ 2 ] Pun or paronomasia – A form of word play that exploits multiple meanings of a term, or of similar-sounding words.

Antanaclasis – The stylistic trope of repeating a single word, but with a different meaning each time; antanaclasis is a common type of pun , and like other kinds of pun, it is often found in slogans.

For a longer list, see Figure of speech: Tropes .

Kenneth Burke has called metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche and irony the "four master tropes" [ 17 ] , due to their frequency in everyday discourse.

These tropes can be used to represent common recurring themes throughout creative works and, in a modern setting, relationships and character interactions. They can also be used to denote recurring figures of speech and situations.

[ 18 ] Whilst most of the various forms of phrasing described above are in common usage, most of the terms themselves are not, in particular antanaclasis, litotes, metonymy, synecdoche and catachresis.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Look up trope in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Linguistics portal Fantasy tropes Invariance principle Literary topos Meme Motif-Index of Folk-Literature Scheme (linguistics) Stereotype Tropological reading TV Tropes References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Miller (1990).

Tropes, Parables, and Performatives . Duke University Press. p.

9 .

ISBN 9780822311119 .

^ a b c Lundberg, Christian O.; Keith, William M. (10 November 2017).

The essential guide to rhetoric . Bedford/St. Martin's.

ISBN 9781319094195 .

OCLC 1016051800 .

^ "Definition of trope" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 6 October 2022 .

^ a b Cuddon, J. A.; Preston, C. E. (1998).

"Trope" .

The Penguin Dictionary of Literary Terms and Literary Theory (4th ed.). London: Penguin. p.

948 .

ISBN 9780140513639 .

^ "What is a Trope?" . 22 January 2023 . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

^ a b "trope" .

Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary .

Springfield, Massachusetts : Merriam-Webster . 2009 . Retrieved 16 October 2009 .

^ "trope (revised entry)".

Oxford English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . 2014.

^ Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert.

"τάβλα , τροπέω , τρόπος" .

An Intermediate Greek-English Lexicon . Perseus Digital Library.

Archived from the original on 31 March 2024.

^ a b c Childers, Joseph; Hentzi, Gary (1995).

"Trope" .

The Columbia Dictionary of Modern Literary and Cultural Criticism . New York: Columbia UP. p.

309 .

ISBN 9780231072434 .

^ Cuddon, J. A.; Preston, C. E. (1998).

"Quem quaeritis trope" .

The Penguin Dictionary of Literary Terms and Literary Theory (4th ed.). London: Penguin. p.

721 .

ISBN 9780140513639 .

^ "When & How to write Tropes" .

LiteraryTerms.net . 6 October 2015.

^ "Analogy: Definition and Examples" .

LiteraryTerms.net . 19 July 2015.

^ Ball, Cheryl E. (2012). "Assessing Scholarly Multimedia: A Rhetorical Genre Studies Approach".

Technical Communication Quarterly .

21 (1): 61– 77.

doi : 10.1080/10572252.2012.626390 .

S2CID 143663366 .

^ "What is emphasis? - Answer" . 20 June 2021.

^ Vegge, Ivar (2008).

2 Corinthians, a Letter about Reconciliation: A Psychagogical, Epistolographical, and Rhetorical Analysis . Mohr Siebeck.

ISBN 9783161493027 .

^ "Definition of emphasis - What it is, Meaning and Concept - I want to know everything - 2022" .

^ Burke, Kenneth (1969).

A Grammar of Motives . Berkeley: University of California Press.

^ D'Angelo, Frank J. (September 1992). "The four master tropes: Analogues of development".

Rhetoric Review .

11 (1): 91– 107.

doi : 10.1080/07350199209388989 .

ISSN 0735-0198 .

Sources [ edit ] Baldrick, Chris . 2008.

Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199208272 Corbett, Edward P. J.

and Connors, Robert J. 1999.

Style and Statement . New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0195115430 Kennedy, X.J.

et al. 2006.

The Longman Dictionary of Literary Terms: Vocabulary for the Informed Reader . New York: Pearson, Longman.

ISBN 032133194X Forsyth, Mark . 2014.

The Elements of Eloquence . New York: Berkley Publishing Group / Penguin Publishing.

ISBN 9780425276181 Quinn, Edward. 1999.

A Dictionary of Literary and Thematic Terms . New York: Checkmark Books.

ISBN 0816043949 "Silva Rhetorica" .

Rhetoric.BYU.edu .

"What is a Trope?" .

Oregon State Guide to Literary Terms . 22 January 2023.

v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude v t e Figures of speech Schemes Alliteration Anadiplosis Anaphora Antimetabole Antithesis Aposiopesis Assonance Asyndeton Chiasmus Climax Anti Consonance Epanadiplosis Epiphrase Epistrophe Epizeuxis Hendiadys Homeoteleuton Hypallage Hyperbaton Hysteron proteron Isocolon Parallelism Polyptoton Polysyndeton Spoonerism Symploce Tmesis Zeugma Tropes Allegory Allusion Antiphrasis Antonomasia Aphorism Apostrophe Catachresis Ecphonesis Ekphrasis Epanorthosis Hyperbole Adynaton Dysphemism Euphemism Meiosis Innuendo Irony Apophasis Sarcasm Litotes Metaphor Metonymy Oxymoron Onomatopoeia Personification Pleonasm Procatalepsis Pun Antanaclasis Rhetorical question Simile Synecdoche Tautology v t e Appropriation in the arts By field Music Bootleg recording Chopped and screwed Contrafact list Contrafactum Cover version DJ mix Interpolation Medley Music mashup Music plagiarism Musical quotation Nightcore Parody music Pasticcio Plunderphonics Potpourri Quodlibet Remix Riddim Sampling Sound collage Standard Tribute act Trope Variation Vaporwave Literature / theatre Assemblage Cut-up technique Flarf poetry Found poetry Jukebox musical Trope Verbatim theatre Visual arts Collage Combine painting Photographic mosaic Readymades of Marcel Duchamp Swipe By source material Mona Lisa Michelangelo's David Michelangelo's Pietà Statue of Liberty Cinema / television / video Abridged series Anime music video Collage film Found footage Literal music video Parody film Re-cut trailer Remake Shot-for-shot Supercut TV format Vidding Video mashup YouTube Poop Other arts In-joke Internet meme Joke theft Parody advertisement Revivalism (architecture) Video game modding General concepts Intertextual figures Allusion Calque Parody Pastiche Plagiarism Quotation Translation Adaptation Film Literary Theatre Other concepts After (art) Assemblage (art) Bricolage Citation Détournement Found object Homage Imitation in art Mashup Reprise Satire Source criticism in the arts Related artistic concepts Aesthetic interpretation Anti-art Archetypal literary criticism Artistic inspiration " The Death of the Author " Divine inspiration Afflatus Genius (literature) Muses Fan labor Fan fiction Genre Genre studies Originality Simulacrum Western canon Standard blocks and forms Archetype Formula fiction Genre fiction Jazz standard Plot device Stock character Story structure Epoch-marking works L.H.O.O.Q.

(1919) " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " (1939) Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010) Theorization Dada De Copia Rerum Diegesis Dionysian imitatio Mimesis Nachahmung Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree The Pictures Generation Pop art Postmodernism Russian formalism Related non- artistic concepts Academic dishonesty Appropriation in sociology Articulation in sociology Cultural appropriation History of printing Information society Intellectual property Copyright infringement Derivative work Fair use Meme Open source Participatory culture Pirate politics Recontextualisation Remix culture v t e Stock characters List Archetype By ethics and morality Heroes Classic hero Action hero Christ figure Chosen One Everyman Folk hero Knight-errant Legacy hero Mythological king Paladin Superhero Youngest son Antihero Byronic hero Man alone Tragic hero Other Cyberhero Super soldier Space marine Rogues Lovable rogue Gentleman detective Jack Trickster Tricky slave Zanni (servants, clowns: Harlequin , Brighella , Scapino , Pulcinella and Pierrot ) Outlaw Bad boy Gentleman thief Pirate Air pirate Space pirate Other Good cop/bad cop Rake Villains Antivillains False hero The mole Double agent Evil twin Terrorist Social Darwinist Dark lord Mad scientist Supervillain Monsters Bug-eyed monster Evil clown Killer robot Killer toy Monster girl Skeleton Slime Swamp monster Vampires Zombie Nazi zombies Zombie animal Other Alazon Archenemy Folk devil Igor Masked villain Miser Vecchio (wealthy old men, Pantalone and Il Dottore ) Il Capitano (self styled captain, braggart) By sex and gender Feminine Love interest Bishōjo Blonde stereotype Farmer's daughter Girl next door Hooker with a heart of gold Ingénue Loosu ponnu Magical girlfriend Catgirl Monster girl Manic Pixie Dream Girl Vixen Hag Cat lady Crone Fairy godmother La Ruffiana Loathly lady Hawksian woman Dragon Lady Femme fatale Tsundere Woman warrior Jungle girl Magical girl Virago Strong female character Queen bee Princesse lointaine Southern belle Valley girl Yamato nadeshiko LGBT Class S Laotong Lady-in-waiting Columbina Mammy stereotype Geek girl Gamer girl Damsel in distress Final girl Princess and dragon Masculine Harlequin Pierrot Scaramouche Father figure Wise old man Elderly martial arts master Young American mappillai Himbo Ivan the Fool Jack Jock Little Johnny Nice guy Nice Jewish boy Superfluous man Prince Charming Bishōnen Knight-errant Primitive Feral child Noble savage Caveman Mountain man LGBT Seme and uke Otokonoko Bad boy Pachuco Black knight Others Adolescent clique Barbarian Clown Dragonslayer Donor Fool Identity formation Imaginary friend Innamorati ("The Lovers") Little green men Magical Negro Mole people Pop icon Redshirt Shoulder angel Sidekick Straight man Tokenism Town drunk Tragic mulatto Truck-kun Village idiot White savior v t e Literary composition General topics Characterization Description Exposition Fiction writing Literature Writer Writer's block Techniques / devices Linguistic contrast Literary contrast Cliché Idiom Trope Methods Writing process Prewriting Assemblage Cut-up technique Diegesis Mimesis Pastiche Plagiarism Features Writing style Writer's voice Grammatical mood Register Rhetorical modes Stylistics Tone Forms Creative nonfiction Essay Joke Novel Poetry Screenplay Short story Beyond the arts Articulation (sociological) Composition studies Technical writing Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trope_(literature)&oldid=1296208452 " Categories : Figures of speech Rhetoric Literary concepts Narrative units Literary motifs Tropes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2024 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Articles containing Japanese-language text This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 15:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trope (literature) 21 languages Add topic

