Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Factual background 2 Decision of Supreme Court Toggle Decision of Supreme Court subsection 2.1 Majority opinion 2.2 Dissent 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents United States v. Willow River Power Co.

Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1945 United States Supreme Court case United States v. Willow River Power Co.

Supreme Court of the United States Argued February 8–9, 1945 Decided March 26, 1945 Full case name United States v. Willow River Power Co.

Citations 324 U.S.

499 ( more ) 65 S. Ct. 761; 89 L. Ed.r 1101 Case history Prior 101 Ct. Cls. 222 (reversed) Court membership Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone Associate Justices Owen Roberts · Hugo Black Stanley F. Reed · Felix Frankfurter William O. Douglas · Frank Murphy Robert H. Jackson · Wiley B. Rutledge Case opinions Majority Jackson, joined by Black, Reed, Frankfurter, Douglas, Murphy, Rutledge Dissent Roberts, joined by Stone Laws applied U.S. Const. amend. V United States v. Willow River Power Co.

, 324 U.S. 499 (1945), is a 1945 decision of the U.S. Supreme Court involving the question whether the United States was liable under the Fifth Amendment for a " taking " of private property for a public purpose when it built a dam on navigable waters that raised the water level upstream to lessen the head of water at a power company’s dam, thereby decreasing the production of power by the company’s hydroelectric turbines . The Court’s opinion is notable because it considers whether the courts will provide a remedy because a property right has been invaded, or whether a property right exists because the courts will enforce it.

[ 1 ] This question has been compared with the dilemma found in Plato 's dialogue Euthyphro .

[ 2 ] Factual background [ edit ] The Mississippi River , a navigable stream, is joined by the St. Croix River , another navigable stream, slightly above Red Wing, Minnesota . Farther up the St. Croix, the Willow River , a non-navigable stream, flowed into the St. Croix, but some years ago a dam was built blocking off the former mouth of the Willow. A channel was dug above that dam, connecting the Willow to the St. Croix, and the channel was also dammed. A mill was built to exploit the head of water created by the two dams. Subsequently, the Willow River Power Company acquired the land adjacent to these dams and it built a hydroelectric facility near them. The spillway or tailrace below the power’s company’s turbines exited into the St. Croix River. (See map.) The United States then built the Red Wing Dam on the Mississippi River. The dam raised the water level of the Mississippi above Red Wing and also that of the St. Croix. The effect was to decrease the available head of water at the hydroelectric plant by three feet, decreasing the power output from the turbines and requiring the power company to purchase electric power from other sources. The economic loss to the power company was $25,000. The power company sued the United States for a taking and was awarded $25,000. The United States appealed to the Supreme Court.

[ 3 ] Decision of Supreme Court [ edit ] Majority opinion [ edit ] The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Jackson , reversed.  The Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution requires just compensation when private property is taken for public use.  It thus "undertakes to redistribute certain economic losses inflicted by public improvements so that they will fall upon the public, rather than wholly upon those who happen to lie in the path of the project." The Fifth Amendment does not, however, "socialize all losses, but those only which result from a taking of property." Other damages that result from government conduct are absorbed by the public, if at all, only when Congress passes a law providing for compensation. In this case, no such law exists, so that unless this case represents an instance of a "taking" of "property," the power company is without redress for its $25,000 loss.

[ 4 ] The Court then stated the issue before it as follows: [N]ot all economic interests are "property rights;" only those economic advantages are "rights" which have the law back of them, and only when they are so recognized may courts compel others to forbear from interfering with them or to compensate for their invasion. The law long has recognized that the right of ownership in land may carry with it a legal right to enjoy some benefits from adjacent waters. But that a closed catalogue of abstract and absolute "property rights" in water hovers over a given piece of shore land good against all the world is not, in this day, a permissible assumption. We cannot start the process of decision by calling such a claim as we have here a "property right;" whether it is a property right is really the question to be answered. Such economic uses are rights only when they are legally protected interests.

[ 5 ] After considering precedents governing rights to a head of water when the tailrace was in a navigable stream or a non-navigable stream, the Court concluded that no prior case had dealt with precisely the situation (present here) where the top of the tailrace was at a non-navigable stream and its base was at a navigable stream. Accordingly, there was no recognized legal right to have water flow away from a tailrace into a navigable stream. The Court therefore ruled: We hold that claimant's interest or advantage in the high water level of the St. Croix River as a run-off for tail waters to maintain its power head is not a right protected by law, and that the award below based exclusively on the loss in value thereof must be reversed.

[ 6 ] Dissent [ edit ] Justice Roberts (joined by the Chief Justice) dissented on the ground that state law recognized a property interest in having a head of water undisturbed.

See also [ edit ] List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 324 References [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: United States v. Willow River Power Company ^ The initial use of this question in property law analysis has been attributed to Professor Myres S. McDougal of the Yale Law School . See Richard H. Stern , Scope-of-Protection Problems With Patents and Copyrights on Methods of Doing Business Archived 2016-05-18 at the Wayback Machine , 10 Fordham Intell. Prop., Media & Ent.

L.J. 105, 128 n.100 (1999) (referring to "Professor Myres McDougal’s famous question, 'Do we protect it because it’s a property right, or is it a property right because we protect it?'").

^ Hodgson, Geoffrey M. (2015).

"Much of the 'economics of property rights' devalues property and legal rights" .

Journal of Institutional Economics .

11 (4): 686.

doi : 10.1017/S1744137414000630 .

hdl : 2299/18849 .

In Plato's dialogue Euthyphro , Socrates asks Euthyphro: 'Is the pious loved by the gods because it is pious, or is it pious because it is loved by the gods?' ... This dilemma can be converted into matters of state and law: 'Does a state make a law because it is a customary rule, or does law become a customary rule because it is approved by the state?' ^ United States v. Willow River Power Co.

, 324 U.S.

499, 501 (1945).

^ 324 U.S. at 502.

^ 324 U.S. at 503.

^ 324 U.S. at 511.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_v._Willow_River_Power_Co.&oldid=1175152169 " Categories : United States Supreme Court cases 1945 in United States case law Takings Clause case law United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use mdy dates from September 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 13 September 2023, at 03:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States v. Willow River Power Co.

Add languages Add topic

