Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 References Toggle the table of contents List of philosophy awards Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This list of philosophy awards is an index to articles about notable awards related to philosophy . The list shows the country of the organization giving the award. Many of the awards are not limited to people from this country.

This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

Country Award Sponsor Given for International Avicenna Prize UNESCO Individuals and groups in the field of ethics in science [ 1 ] United States Barwise Prize American Philosophical Association Significant and sustained contributions to areas relevant to philosophy and computing [ 2 ] United States Berggruen Prize Berggruen Institute Thinkers whose ideas have helped us find direction, wisdom, and improved self-understanding in a world being rapidly transformed by profound social, technological, political, cultural, and economic change [ 3 ] Belgium Cardinal Mercier Prize for International Philosophy Université catholique de Louvain Contribution to international philosophy [ 4 ] [ 5 ] United States Cecil Hemley Memorial Award Poetry Society of America Lyric poem that addresses a philosophical or epistemological concern [ 6 ] Europe E. W. Beth Dissertation Prize Association for Logic, Language and Information Outstanding PhD theses in the fields of Logic, Language, and Information [ 7 ] Germany Elisabeth of Bohemia Prize Bielefeld University Internationally recognized philosopher for outstanding services to research on women in the history of philosophy [ 8 ] Portugal Fernando Gil International Prize for the Philosophy of Science Government of Portugal Work of particular excellence in the domain of philosophy of science , whether regarding general epistemological problems or particular scientific areas Germany Friedrich Nietzsche Prize Saxony-Anhalt German-language essayistic or philosophical work Belgium Golden Eurydice Award International Forum for Biophilosophy Outstanding contribution, or contributions over a period, in the field of biophilosophy United States Hempel Award Philosophy of Science Association Lifetime achievement in the philosophy of science Norway Holberg Prize Norway Outstanding scholars for work in the arts, humanities, social sciences, law and theology, either within one of these fields or through interdisciplinary work United States John Fisher award American Society for Aesthetics Original essay in aesthetics Germany Karl Jaspers Prize City of Heidelberg , Heidelberg University Scientific work of international significance supported by philosophical spirit United States Kluge Prize John W. Kluge Center at the Library of Congress Deep intellectual accomplishment in the human sciences Japan Kyoto Prize in Arts and Philosophy Inamori Foundation Lifetime achievements in the arts and philosophy Switzerland Lakatos Award Latsis Foundation Outstanding contribution to the philosophy of science, widely interpreted Germany Meister Eckhart Prize Identity Foundation Thinkers who produce high-quality work on the subject of identity United States Monograph prize American Society for Aesthetics Outstanding monograph in the philosophy of art or aesthetics United States Nicholas Rescher Prize for Systematic Philosophy University of Pittsburgh Philosophers who have addressed the historical “big questions” of the field in ways that nevertheless command the respect of specialists France Jean Nicod Prize French National Centre for Scientific Research Leading philosopher of mind or philosophically oriented cognitive scientist United States Philosopher's Annual Philosopher's Annual Ten best articles published in philosophy each year Sweden Rolf Schock Prizes Swedish Royal Academies Logic and Philosophy Germany Sigmund Freud Prize Deutsche Akademie für Sprache und Dichtung Scientific prose United Kingdom Sir Henry Jones Memorial Prize University of Glasgow Moral and political philosophy Canada Symposium Book Award Symposium: Canadian Journal of Continental Philosophy Books on continental philosophy Czech Republic The VIZE 97 Prize Dagmar and Václav Havel Foundation VIZE 97 People who through their work cross the traditional framework of scientific knowledge, contribute to the understanding of science as an integral part of general culture, and in an unconventional way deal with the fundamental questions of knowledge, being and human existence United States Weizenbaum Award International Society for Ethics and Information Technology Individual who has “made a significant contribution to the field of information and computer ethics, through his or her research, service, and vision References [ edit ] ^ "Avicenna Prize for Ethics in Science - Ministry of Science Research and Technology" .

Ministry of Science Research and Technology . Retrieved 2017-10-21 .

^ The Barwise Prize website at the IACAP ^ "The Berggruen Prize" .

The Berggruen Institute . Retrieved 12 April 2017 .

^ "About Fulton J. Sheen - Catholic inspirational tv VHS, DVD, Audio recordings of Life is Worth Living Series" . Archived from the original on 2009-03-22 . Retrieved 2009-11-05 .

^ "CUA School of Philosophy" . Archived from the original on 2008-05-20 . Retrieved 2009-01-17 .

^ "Poetry Society of America Awards Guidelines" . Archived from the original on 2008-05-02 . Retrieved 2008-05-02 .

"PSA Annual Awards Guidelines" Web page at the Web site of the Poetry Society of America, accessed December 18 , 2006 ^ FoLLI Publications on Logic, Language and Information .

^ "Erster Preis zu Ehren einer Philosophin: Prof. Dr. Ulrike Detmers stiftet Philosophinnen-Preis zum 400. Geburtstag von Elisabeth von Böhmen Herford an das Center for the History of Women Philosophers and Scientists der Universität Paderborn" . Retrieved 2019-01-28 .

v t e Phaleristics Auxiliary science of history and numismatics about orders , decorations , and medals Distinctions ( Lists ) By conferee Founts of honour * States and their national/public/official authorities Dynasties heads of currently or formerly sovereign royal families Private Ecclesiastical Organisations Commercial ( Self-styled order ) By type Orders Order of chivalry Military order Order of merit Royal family order Titles ( Styles , Post-nominal ) By function Grand master Chancellor Treasurer Assessor Bailiff Prior Chaplain Master of ceremonies Grand Cross / Grand Cordon Commander Officer Hospitaller Knight / Dame Postulant Squire Page Jurisdictions Charter Bailiwick Chapter Commandery Obedience Grand Lodge Lodge Others, by field Military ( List ) List of highest Campaign medal Law enforcement Civilian ( List ) Society Peace Intellectual freedom Human rights Law Humanitarianism Politics Volunteer Culture Architecture Art Film History Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Theatre Science Religion-related Ecclesiastical Sports Scouting Beauty By insignia ( Named after people ) For wearing (decorations) Formal Chelengk Collar Livery collar Grand Cross / Grand Cordon with sash Medal Necklet Medal bar Medal ribbon Robe of honour Tiraz Other Rosette Award pin Lapel pin Collar pin Tie pin Badge Heraldic Pilgrim Championship belt Embroidered patch Epaulette Ribbon Ring Championship ring Button Campaign Service Shoulder mark Tie clip Prizes Booby prize Wooden spoon Deal toy Plaquette Prize book Prize money Prize of war War trophy Human trophy Rosette Trophy Acrylic Participation Prizes known as the Nobel of a field Ceremonies and events Accolade Vigil Feoffment Passage fee Festival Vow Collar day Related organisations Family history society Fraternity Confraternity Fraternal order Fraternities and sororities Secret society Guild Syndicate Learned society Fellowship Honor society Hereditary society Club Gentlemen's club International Commission for Orders of Chivalry Magical organization Religious order Related concepts Chivalry Numismatics Heraldry Vexillology Service flag Battle honour Campaign streamer Nobility Order of precedence Taonga Honorary degree Devotional medal Awareness ribbon Code of conduct Code of honor High society * = Direct or indirect reference to fount of honour is the accepted criterion for official distinctions Category:Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Awards NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐755bc7b865‐lnfzf
Cached time: 20250815135740
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.301 seconds
Real time usage: 0.390 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 841/1000000
Revision size: 7429/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 96032/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 287/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 30831/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.183/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5023615/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  307.488      1 -total
 41.22%  126.760     10 Template:Navbox
 39.41%  121.175      1 Template:Reflist
 34.30%  105.463      6 Template:Cite_web
 31.01%   95.366      1 Template:Phaleristics
 22.28%   68.503      1 Template:Short_description
 10.45%   32.125      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.21%   25.255      3 Template:Main_other
  7.67%   23.593      1 Template:SDcat
  5.65%   17.383      1 Template:Dynamic_list Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:62693406:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815135740 and revision id 1247771255. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_philosophy_awards&oldid=1247771255 " Categories : Philosophy awards Lists of awards Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Dynamic lists This page was last edited on 25 September 2024, at 22:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of philosophy awards Add languages Add topic

