Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ski resort 2 Types 3 Facilities and amenities 4 Environmental effects Toggle Environmental effects subsection 4.1 Primary (direct) impact of resort development 4.2 Secondary (indirect) impact of resort development 4.3 Mitigation efforts 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Ski resort 35 languages العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Resort developed for skiing, snowboarding, and other winter sports "Ski station" redirects here. For the railway station at Ski in Norway, see Ski Station .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ski resorts in the world by country A ski resort is a resort developed for skiing , snowboarding , and other winter sports . In Europe, most ski resorts are towns or villages in or adjacent to a ski area –a mountainous area with pistes (ski trails) and a ski lift system. In North America , it is more common for ski areas to exist well away from towns, so ski resorts usually are destination resorts , often purpose-built and self-contained, where skiing is the main activity.

Ski resort [ edit ] Map of world ski resorts Ski resorts are located in both hemispheres, on all continents except Antarctica . They typically are located on mountains , as they require a large slope. They also need to receive sufficient snow (at least in combination with artificial snowmaking , unless the resort uses dry ski slopes ).

High concentrations of ski resorts are located in the Alps , Scandinavia , western and eastern North America , and Japan . There are also ski resorts in the Andes , scattered across central Asia , and in Australia and New Zealand .

Extreme locations of non-indoor (at least one ski lift outside) ski resorts include: The most northern ski resort near Tromsø , Norway The most southern ski resort near Ushuaia , Argentina The ski resort closest to the equator from the north, near Lijiang , China .

The ski resort closest to the equator from the south, near Mahlasela , Lesotho .

Types [ edit ] Mzaar Kfardebian Ski Resort in Lebanon The ski industry has identified advancing generations of ski resorts: [ 1 ] [ 2 ] First generation Developed around a well-established summer resort or village (e.g.

Davos , St. Moritz , Kitzbühel , Chamonix , Cortina d'Ampezzo , Megève , Val Gardena ).

Second generation Created from a non-tourist village or pasture (e.g.

St Anton am Arlberg , Lech , Courchevel , L'Alpe d'Huez , Aspen/Snowmass , Breckenridge Ski Resort ).

Third generation or integrated Designed from scratch on virgin territory to be a purpose-built ski resort, all the amenities and services nearby (e.g.

Sestriere , Flaine , La Plagne , Isola 2000 ).

Fourth generation or village resorts Created from a virgin territory or around an existing village, but more concerned with traditional uses (e.g.

Valmeinier , Valmorel , Shahdag Mountain Resort ).

The term ski station is also used, particularly in Europe, for a skiing facility which is not located in or near a town or village. A ski resort which is also open for summer activities is often referred to as a mountain resort .

Facilities and amenities [ edit ] This image of Zauchensee , Austria, shows the pistes, served by a gondola lift, detachable chairlift and a funicular. There is a snow fence to prevent snowdrift; and avalanche towers and avalanche barriers to mitigate the risk of avalanches Jasná ski resort in Slovakia Cerro Catedral Ski Resort, Argentina Ski resorts can also be situated on a volcano like this one on Etna in Sicily Gambarie , a ski resort above the Strait of Messina Ski areas have marked paths for skiing known as runs, trails or pistes . Ski areas typically have one or more chairlifts for moving skiers rapidly to the top of hills, and to interconnect the various trails.

Rope tows can also be used on short slopes (usually beginner hills or bunny slopes). Larger ski areas may use gondola lifts or aerial tramways for transportation across longer distances within the ski area. Resorts post their trail map illustrating the location of lifts, trails, services and the ski area boundary, and during the ski season issue a daily snow conditions report listing open trails, operating lifts and weather status.

Ski areas usually have at least a basic first aid facility, and some kind of ski patrol service to ensure that injured skiers are rescued.  The ski patrol is usually responsible for rule enforcement, marking hazards , closing individual runs or areas as conditions require, and removing (dismissing) dangerous participants from the area.

The typical ski area base includes a ticket office, ski lodge , ski school , equipment rental/repair shop, restaurant/bar, shopping, shuttle bus stop and parking.

[ 3 ] Some ski resorts offer lodging options on the slopes themselves, with ski-in and ski-out access allowing guests to ski right up to the door.  Ski resorts often have other activities, such as snowmobiling , sledding , horse-drawn sleds , dog-sledding , ice skating , indoor or outdoor swimming and hot tubbing , game rooms, and local forms of entertainment, such as clubs, cinema, theaters and cabarets .

Après-ski (French for after skiing ) is a term for entertainment, nightlife or social events that occur specifically at ski resorts.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] These add to the enjoyment of resort-goers and provide something to do besides skiing and snowboarding . The culture originated in the Alps, where it is most popular and where skiers often stop at bars on their last run of the day while still wearing all their ski gear.

[ 6 ] Though the word "ski" is a derivation of the Old Norse skíð via Norwegian , the choice of French is likely attributed to the early popularity of such activities in the French Alps , with which it was then linked.

[ 7 ] Environmental effects [ edit ] See also: Environmental impact of tourism and Vegetation and slope stability As rising temperatures, receding glaciers and declining snowfall affect the environment, resort development and operations also have an environmental impact on land, lakes, streams, and wildlife.

[ 8 ] Amenities and infrastructure such as concrete buildings, ski lifts, access roads, parking lots, and railways have contributed to the urbanization of mountainous zones.

Primary (direct) impact of resort development [ edit ] In recent years, the use of snow cannons by many ski resorts has increased to compensate for reduced levels of snowfall.

[ 9 ] In order to sustain good quality snow coverage, snowmaking requires large amounts of water and sometimes the creation of artificial lakes . Snow cannons also introduce a noise element.

Secondary (indirect) impact of resort development [ edit ] The required infrastructure can affect erosion through the increased area of impervious surfaces , redirecting the flow of water runoff .

Mitigation efforts [ edit ] Many resorts are taking steps to reduce their energy and water consumption and waste production, increase recycling, and restore habitats. Initiatives aimed at addressing environmental concerns include: Alpine Convention Snowsports Industries America (SIA) ClimateUnited NSAA Sustainable Slopes Initiative National Forest Foundation Ski Conservation Fund Ceres Business for Innovative Climate and Energy Policy (BICEP) Network FESI Winter Sports Sustainability Network (WSN) Protect Our Winters (POW) Gallery [ edit ] Roccaraso , Italy Levi , Finland Valle Nevado , Chile Małe Ciche , Poland Furano Ski Resort , Japan Mount Hermon Ski Resort , Israel Rusutsu Resort , Japan Perisher Ski Resort , Australia Sierra Nevada Ski Station , Spain Shahdag Mountain Resort , Azerbaijan Telluride Ski Resort , United States Jackson Hole Mountain Resort , United States See also [ edit ] List of ski areas and resorts Private ski area (North America) References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ski resorts .

^ Heller, Mark F., ed. (1979).

The Skier's Encyclopedia . Paddington Press. pp.

15– 18, 140– 145, 157– 159.

ISBN 9780448224282 .

^ Knaffou, R. (1978).

Les Stations intégrées de sports d'hiver dans les Alpes françaises (in French). Paris: Masson.

ISBN 9782225494123 .

^ Berry, I. William (1984).

The Great North American Ski Book . Scribners. pp.

72– 73.

ISBN 0-684-18207-6 .

^ "après-ski" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 26 November 2012 .

^ Flower, Raymond (1976).

The History of Skiing and Other Winter Sports . Methuen. pp.

132– 141.

ISBN 0-458-92780-5 .

^ Lund, Morton (March 2007).

"Tea Dance To Disco: Après-Ski Through the Ages" .

Skiing Heritage Journal .

19 (1): 6– 12 . Retrieved 26 November 2012 .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"ski (n.)" .

Etymology Online . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ Chivers, John (December 2010) [1994].

Effects of the Skiing Industry on the Environment (PDF) (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 Aug 2016.

^ Gerretsen, Isabelle (2023) How climate change threatens to close ski resorts BBC v t e Skiing and snowboarding History of skiing Glossary of skiing and snowboarding terms Nordic skiing Competitive Cross-country skiing Paralympic Ski jumping Ski flying Nordic combined Endurance Ski marathon Ski orienteering Ski touring Recreational Cross-country skiing Backcountry skiing Roller skiing Skijoring Alpine skiing Olympic disciplines Slalom Giant slalom Super-G Downhill Combined Other disciplines Extreme skiing Glade skiing Heliskiing Para-alpine skiing Speed skiing Other skiing Biathlon Indoor skiing Night skiing Ski archery Para biathlon Ski mountaineering Telemark skiing Freestyle skiing Aerial skiing Big air Freeriding Freeskiing Half-pipe skiing Mogul Ski ballet Ski cross Slopestyle Snowboarding Alpine Backcountry Big air Freeriding Freestyle Half-pipe Para snowboard Slopestyle Snowboard cross Snowboard racing Technique / learning Carved turn Jump turn Parallel turn Pivot turn Snowplough Stem christie Ski school Ski simulator Skate skiing Equipment Bindings Boots Helmet Monoski Poles Skins Skis List of ski brands Snowboard Suit Wax Resort amenities Dry ski slope Half-pipe Superpipe Piste Ski area Ski tunnel Snow grooming Snowmaking Trail Ski lifts Aerial tramway Chairlift detachable Funicular Funifor Funitel Gondola lift bicable tricable Hybrid lift Surface lift Category:Skiing Category:Snowboarding v t e Tourism Types Accessible Adventure Agritourism Alternative Astrotourism Atomic Backpacking Beachgoing Bicycle touring Birth Business Crime Culinary Enotourism Cultural Archaeological Film Literary Bookstore Tolkien Music Pop-culture Dark Disaster Holocaust War Domestic Ecotourism Shark Experiential Extreme Fashion Garden Genealogy Heritage Identity Geotourism Industrial Instagram tourism International Volunteering Jungle Justice LGBT Medical MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) Nautical Orphanage Recreational drug Red Religious Christian Halal Kosher Pilgrimage Rural Science Sensory Sleep Slum Smart Space Lunar Sports Sustainable Urban Virtual Visiting friends and relatives Wellness Wildlife Safari Scuba Yoga Hospitality industry Bed and breakfast Boutique hotel Convention center Cruise ship Destination spa Front desk Guest house Guest ranch Heuhotel Homestay Hospitality management studies Hostel Hotel Manager Inn Motel Pension Referral chain Resort Hotel Island Seaside Ski Town Restaurant Terminology College tour Convention (meeting) Destination marketing organization Escorted tour Excursion Factory tour Gift shop Grand Tour Holiday Honeymoon Hypermobility Journey planner Package tour Passport Perpetual traveler Road trip Roadside attraction Souvenir Staycation Tour bus service Tour guide Tour operator Tourism geography Tourism minister Tourism region Tourist attraction Tourist gateway Tourist trap Touron Transport Travel Travel agency Travel behavior Travel document Travel insurance Travel medicine Travel survey Travel technology Travel visa Travel warning Vacation Visitor center Travel literature Guide book Outdoor literature Tourism journals Travel magazines Wikivoyage Trade associations American Bus Association American Hotel and Lodging Association American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute BEST Education Network Caribbean Tourism Organization European Travel Commission Historical Archive on Tourism Life Beyond Tourism Musement Pacific Asia Travel Association South-East Asian Tourism Organisation Tourism Radio Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report World Federation of Travel Journalists and Writers World Tourism Organization World Tourism rankings World Travel and Tourism Council World Travel Monitor Trade fairs and events Akwaaba African Travel Market Arabian Travel Market Cruise of the Kings Festival del Viaggio FITUR ITB Berlin World Tourism Day Issues Heritage commodification Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism Impacts of tourism Leakage effect Overtourism Tourism improvement district Tourist tax Lists Adjectival tourisms Attractions Bibliography Casino hotels Casinos Cities by international visitors Convention and exhibition centers Cruise lines Hotels Largest Motels Passenger airlines UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists World Heritage Sites by country Category Authority control databases National Germany Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐hhl8m
Cached time: 20250814215818
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.485 seconds
Real time usage: 0.637 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1418/1000000
Revision size: 11322/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 77272/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1158/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 63918/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.293/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13736191/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  501.052      1 -total
 23.89%  119.717      1 Template:Reflist
 18.00%   90.197      5 Template:Navbox
 17.59%   88.152      6 Template:Lang
 17.20%   86.157      1 Template:Skiing
 16.99%   85.114      4 Template:Cite_book
 10.92%   54.723      1 Template:Short_description
  9.00%   45.086      1 Template:More_footnotes_needed
  8.10%   40.607      1 Template:Ambox
  5.81%   29.102      1 Template:Commons Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:179821:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215818 and revision id 1286251939. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ski_resort&oldid=1286251939 " Categories : Ski areas and resorts Resorts by type Hidden categories: Articles containing Spanish-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 18:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ski resort 35 languages Add topic

