Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Range and scope of diving medicine Toggle Range and scope of diving medicine subsection 1.1 Scope of knowledge for diving medicine 1.2 Scope of knowledge for hyperbaric medicine 2 Diagnostics Toggle Diagnostics subsection 2.1 Decompression sickness 2.2 Pulmonary barotrauma and arterial gas embolism 2.3 Nitrogen narcosis 2.4 High-pressure nervous syndrome 2.5 Oxygen toxicity 3 Treatments Toggle Treatments subsection 3.1 Oxygen therapy 3.2 Recompression and hyperbaric oxygen therapy 4 Medical examination for fitness to dive 5 Education and registration of practitioners Toggle Education and registration of practitioners subsection 5.1 Education 5.1.1 National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology 5.1.2 NOAA/UHMS Physicians Training Course in Diving Medicine 5.1.3 Fellowship in Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine 5.1.4 ECHM-EDTC Educational and Training Standards 5.1.5 Gesellschaft für Tauch- und Überdruckmedizin e. V.

5.1.6 Schweizerische Gesellschaft für Unterwasser- und Hyperbarmedizin 5.1.7 Österreichische Gesellschaft für Tauch- und Hyperbarmedizin 5.2 Registration 6 Training of divers and support staff in relevant first aid Toggle Training of divers and support staff in relevant first aid subsection 6.1 Divers 6.1.1 Recreational divers 6.1.2 Professional divers 6.2 Diver medic 7 Ethical and medicolegal issues 8 Long-term effects of underwater diving Toggle Long-term effects of underwater diving subsection 8.1 Pulmonary function 8.2 Vision 8.3 Skeletal system 8.4 Hearing loss 8.5 Cardiovascular 8.6 Central nervous system 9 History of diving medical research Toggle History of diving medical research subsection 9.1 Timeline 9.2 Notable researchers 10 Research organisations 11 See also 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Diving medicine 12 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی 한국어 Italiano עברית پنجابی Română Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Diagnosis, treatment and prevention of disorders caused by underwater diving A recompression chamber is used to treat some diving disorders.

Diving Medicine Physician Occupation Names Physician Occupation type Specialty Activity sectors Medicine Description Education required Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.) Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (M.B.B.S./MBChB) Fields of employment Hospitals, clinics Diving medicine , also called undersea and hyperbaric medicine (UHB), is the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of conditions caused by humans entering the undersea environment. It includes the effects on the body of pressure on gases, the diagnosis and treatment of conditions caused by marine hazards and how aspects of a diver's fitness to dive affect the diver's safety. Diving medical practitioners are also expected to be competent in the examination of divers and potential divers to determine fitness to dive .

Hyperbaric medicine is a corollary field associated with diving, since recompression in a hyperbaric chamber is used as a treatment for two of the most significant diving-related illnesses, decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism .

Diving medicine deals with medical research on issues of diving, the prevention of diving disorders, treatment of diving accidents and diving fitness. The field includes the effect of breathing gases and their contaminants under high pressure on the human body and the relationship between the state of physical and psychological health of the diver and safety.

In diving accidents it is common for multiple disorders to occur together and interact with each other, both causatively and as complications.

Diving medicine is a branch of occupational medicine and sports medicine, and at first aid level, an important part of diver education.

Range and scope of diving medicine [ edit ] Further information: Diving disorders , List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders , and List of diving hazards and precautions The scope of diving medicine must necessarily include conditions that are specifically connected with the activity of diving, and not found in other contexts, but this categorization excludes almost everything, leaving only deep water blackout, isobaric counterdiffusion and high pressure nervous syndrome. A more useful grouping is conditions that are associated with exposure to variations of ambient pressure. These conditions are largely shared by aviation and space medicine. Further conditions associated with diving and other aquatic and outdoor activities are commonly included in books which are aimed at the diver, rather than the specialist medical practitioner, as they are useful background to diver first aid training.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The scope of knowledge necessary for a practitioner of diving medicine includes the medical conditions associated with diving and their treatment, physics and physiology relating to the underwater and pressurised environment, the standard operating procedures and equipment used by divers which can influence the development and management of these conditions, and the specialised equipment used for treatment.

[ 3 ] Scope of knowledge for diving medicine [ edit ] The ECHM-EDTC Educational and Training Standards for Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine (2011) specify the following scope of knowledge for Diving Medicine: [ 3 ] Physiology and pathology of diving and hyperbaric exposure.

Human physiology of underwater diving Hyperbaric physics Diving related physiology Hyperbaric pathophysiology of immersion Pathophysiology of decompression A brief introduction to acute dysbaric disorders Chronic dysbaric disorders Hyperbaric oxygen therapy basis – Physiology and pathology Oxygen toxicity Pressure and inert gas effects Nitrogen narcosis High pressure neurological syndrome Medication under pressure Non-dysbaric diving pathologies Diving technology and safety Basic safety planning Compressed air work Diving procedures Wet bells and stages Scuba diving on air and mixed gas Surface supplied diving Standard diving (copper helmet) Rebreather diving (semi-closed and closed circuit) Other diving procedures Characteristics of various divers Diving equipment as used to c.50m and chambers Diving tables and computers Regulations and standards for diving Saturation diving Saturation mode Physiology of deep exposure Compression At depth in a living chamber Bell excursions Fitness to dive Fitness to dive criteria and contraindications for divers, compressed air workers and HBOT chamber personnel Fitness to dive assessment Fitness to dive standards (professional and recreational) Diving accidents Diving incidents and accidents Emergency medical support with no chamber on site Barotrauma : ENT ; dental; cutaneous , conjunctival , etc.

Physical injuries Decompression illness Pathophysiological basis and mechanisms of DCI Differential diagnosis of decompression illness Management of decompression incidents at the surface Immediate management, recompression tables and strategies Rehabilitation of disabled divers Diving accident investigation Clinical HBO Recompression chambers Scope of knowledge for hyperbaric medicine [ edit ] The ECHM-EDTC Educational and Training Standards for Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine (2011) specify the following scope of knowledge for Hyperbaric Medicine additional to that for Diving medicine: [ 3 ] Physiology and pathology of diving and hyperbaric exposure.

HBO-Basics – effects of hyperbaric oxygen – physiology and pathology Clinical HBO Chamber technique (multiplace, monoplace, transport chambers, wet recompression) Mandatory indications HBO Recommended indications HBO Experimental and anecdotal indications HBO Data collection / statistics / evaluation HBO General basic treatment (nursing) HBO Diagnostic, monitoring and therapeutic devices in chambers Risk assessment, incidents monitoring and safety plan in HBO chambers HBO Safety regulations Diagnostics [ edit ] Main article: List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders The signs and symptoms of diving disorders may present during a dive, on surfacing, or up to several hours after a dive.

Divers have to breathe a gas which is at the same pressure as their surroundings, which can be much greater than on the surface. The ambient pressure underwater increases by 1 standard atmosphere (100 kPa) for every 10 metres (33 ft) of depth.

[ 4 ] The principal conditions are: decompression illness (which covers decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism ); nitrogen narcosis ; high pressure nervous syndrome ; oxygen toxicity ; and pulmonary barotrauma (burst lung). Although some of these may occur in other settings, they are of particular concern during diving activities.

[ 4 ] The disorders are caused by breathing gas at the high pressures encountered at depth, and divers will often breathe a gas mixture different from air to mitigate these effects.

Nitrox , which contains more oxygen and less nitrogen is commonly used as a breathing gas to reduce the risk of decompression sickness at recreational depths (up to about 40 metres (130 ft)).

Helium may be added to reduce the amount of nitrogen and oxygen in the gas mixture when diving deeper, to reduce the effects of narcosis and to avoid the risk of oxygen toxicity. This is complicated at depths beyond about 150 metres (500 ft), because a helium–oxygen mixture ( heliox ) then causes high pressure nervous syndrome.

[ 4 ] More exotic mixtures such as hydreliox , a hydrogen–helium–oxygen mixture, are used at extreme depths to counteract this.

[ 5 ] Decompression sickness [ edit ] Main article: Decompression sickness Decompression sickness (DCS) occurs when gas, which has been breathed under high pressure and dissolved into the body tissues , forms bubbles as the pressure is reduced on ascent from a dive. The results may range from pain in the joints where the bubbles form to blockage of an artery leading to damage to the nervous system , paralysis or death. While bubbles can form anywhere in the body, DCS is most frequently observed in the shoulders, elbows, knees, and ankles. Joint pain occurs in about 90% of DCS cases reported to the U.S. Navy , with neurological symptoms and skin manifestations each present in 10% to 15% of cases.

Pulmonary DCS is very rare in divers.

[ 6 ] Pulmonary barotrauma and arterial gas embolism [ edit ] If the breathing gas in a diver's lungs cannot freely escape during an ascent, the lungs may be expanded beyond their compliance, and the lung tissues may rupture, causing pulmonary barotrauma (PBT). The gas may then enter the arterial circulation producing arterial gas embolism (AGE), with effects similar to severe decompression sickness .

[ 7 ] Gas bubbles within the arterial circulation can block the supply of blood to any part of the body, including the brain, and can therefore manifest a vast variety of symptoms.

Nitrogen narcosis [ edit ] Main article: Nitrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis is caused by the pressure of dissolved gas in the body and produces temporary impairment to the nervous system . This results in alteration to thought processes and a decrease in the diver's ability to make judgements or calculations. It can also decrease motor skills , and worsen performance in tasks requiring manual dexterity . As depth increases, so does the pressure and hence the severity of the narcosis. The effects may vary widely from individual to individual, and from day to day for the same diver. Because of the perception-altering effects of narcosis, a diver may not be aware of the symptoms, but studies have shown that impairment occurs nevertheless. The narcotic effects dissipate without lasting effect as the pressure decreases during ascent.

[ 8 ] High-pressure nervous syndrome [ edit ] Main article: High-pressure nervous syndrome Helium is the least narcotic of all gases, and divers may use breathing mixtures containing a proportion of helium for dives exceeding about 40 metres (130 ft) deep. In the 1960s it was expected that helium narcosis would begin to become apparent at depths of 300 metres (1,000 ft). However, it was found that different symptoms, such as tremors , occurred at shallower depths around 150 metres (500 ft). This became known as high-pressure nervous syndrome, and its effects are found to result from both the absolute depth and the speed of descent. Although the effects vary from person to person, they are stable and reproducible for the individual.

[ 9 ] [ medical citation needed ] Oxygen toxicity [ edit ] Main article: Oxygen toxicity Although oxygen is essential to life, in concentrations significantly greater than normal it becomes toxic , overcoming the body's natural defences ( antioxidants ), and causing cell death in any part of the body. The lungs and brain are particularly affected by high partial pressures of oxygen, such as are encountered in diving. The body can tolerate partial pressures of oxygen around 0.5 bars (50 kPa; 7.3 psi) indefinitely, and up to 1.4 bars (140 kPa; 20 psi) for many hours, but higher partial pressures rapidly increase the chance of the most dangerous effect of oxygen toxicity , a convulsion resembling an epileptic seizure .

[ 10 ] Susceptibility to oxygen toxicity varies dramatically from person to person, and to a smaller extent from day to day for the same diver.

[ 11 ] Prior to convulsion, several symptoms may be present – most distinctly that of an aura .

Treatments [ edit ] Treatment of diving disorders depends on the specific disorder or combination of disorders, but two treatments are commonly associated with first aid and definitive treatment where diving is involved. These are first aid oxygen administration at high concentration, which is seldom contraindicated, and generally recommended as a default option in diving accidents where there is any significant probability of hypoxia , [ 12 ] and hyperbaric oxygen therapy, which is the definitive treatment for most conditions of decompression illness .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Oxygen therapy [ edit ] Main article: Oxygen therapy The administration of oxygen as a medical intervention is common in diving medicine, both for first aid and for longer term treatment.

[ 14 ] Normobaric oxygen administration at the highest available concentration is frequently used as first aid for any diving injury that may involve inert gas bubble formation in the tissues. There is epidemiological support for its use from a statistical study of cases recorded in a long term database.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Recompression and hyperbaric oxygen therapy [ edit ] Main article: Hyperbaric medicine Recompression treatment in a hyperbaric chamber was initially used as a life-saving tool to treat decompression sickness in caisson workers and divers who stayed too long at depth and developed decompression sickness. In the 21st century, it is a highly specialized treatment modality found to be effective for treating many conditions where the administration of oxygen under pressure is beneficial.

[ 18 ] Hyperbaric oxygen treatment is generally preferred when effective, as it is usually a more efficient and lower risk method of reducing symptoms of decompression illness, but in some cases recompression to pressures where oxygen toxicity is unacceptable may be required to eliminate the bubbles in the tissues in severe cases of decompression illness.

[ 14 ] Availability of recompression treatment is limited. Some countries have no facilities at all, and in others which have facilities, such as the US, some hospitals do not make them available for emergency treatment.

[ 19 ] Medical examination for fitness to dive [ edit ] Main article: Fitness to dive Fitness to dive, (or medical fitness to dive), is the medical and physical suitability of a person to function safely in the underwater environment using underwater diving equipment and procedures. Depending on the circumstances it may be established by a signed statement by the diver that he or she does not suffer from any of the listed disqualifying conditions and is able to manage the ordinary physical requirements of diving, to a detailed medical examination by a physician registered as a medical examiner of divers following a procedural checklist, and a legal document of fitness to dive issued by the medical examiner.

The most important medical examination is the one before starting diving, as the diver can be screened to prevent exposure when a dangerous condition exists and a baseline established. The other important medicals are after some significant illness, where medical intervention is needed and has to be done by a doctor who is competent in diving medicine, and can not be done by prescriptive rules.

[ 20 ] Psychological factors can affect fitness to dive, particularly where they affect response to emergencies, or risk taking behaviour. The use of medical and recreational drugs, can also influence fitness to dive, both for physiological and behavioural reasons. In some cases prescription drug use may have a net positive effect, when effectively treating an underlying condition, but frequently the side effects of effective medication may have undesirable influences on the fitness of diver, and most cases of recreational drug use result in an impaired fitness to dive, and a significantly increased risk of sub-optimal response to emergencies.

Education and registration of practitioners [ edit ] Specialist training in underwater and hyperbaric medicine is available from several institutions, and registration is possible both with professional associations and governmental registries.

Education [ edit ] National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology [ edit ] Main article: National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology The National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology (NBDHMT), formally known as the National Association of Diving Technicians, is a non-profit organization for the education and certification of qualified personnel in the fields of diving and hyperbaric medicine in the US.

[ 21 ] The Diver Medic Technician (DMT) program is designed to meet the specific medical care needs of commercial, professional and scientific divers that often work in geographic isolation.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] DMT's are specifically trained for the various diving hazards found at remote work sites.

[ 22 ] The curriculum covers a wide range of topics from barotrauma to treatment of decompression sickness .

[ 24 ] The Certified Hyperbaric Technologist (CHT) program is tailored to meet the specific safety and operational needs for biomedical devices within the department, and the necessary knowledge and skills to administer clinical treatment.

[ 25 ] The curriculum covers a wide range of topics including hyperbaric chamber operations to transcutaneous oxygen monitoring.

[ 26 ] The Certified Hyperbaric Registered Nurse (CHRN) program is a subspecialty for registered nurses , [ 27 ] sometimes referred to as baromedical nurses.

NOAA/UHMS Physicians Training Course in Diving Medicine [ edit ] This course has been presented since 1977, and has been influenced by internationally accepted training objectives recommended by the Diving Medical Advisory Committee, the European Diving Technology Committee, and the European Committee for Hyperbaric Medicine.  The course is designed for qualified medical practitioners, but may be useful to others who work in the field of diving safety and operations.

[ 28 ] The course is to train physicians to recognize and treat diving medical emergencies. Subject matter includes: [ 28 ] Basic physics and physiology of the hyperbaric environment: the laws and principles; the differences between hyperbaric and hypobaric pressure; hyperbaric gases and their effects under pressure; links between the physiological effects of the hyperbaric environment and the pathology of the disease Basic decompression theory : historical development to current concepts factors affecting decompression safety including acceptable risks and thermal issues distinguish decompression sickness from barotrauma and arterial gas embolism ; Dive computer theories and types, and comparison to dive tables Introduction to commercial diving and comparison to recreational and technical diving , including differences in procedures, equipment , and diver categories The clinical application of hyperbaric oxygen therapy and the treatment tables used; Participation in surface-supplied diving operation and hyperbaric chamber operations; Components, types, operational and safety hazards associated with hyperbaric chambers; Diving-related conditions resulting from the short and long-term effects of diving , flying after diving, altitude, thermal conditions, age and gender Neurologic assessment on a diver with signs and/or symptoms of DCI Medical and fitness standards for diving, including: contraindications for both commercial and recreational divers differences in medical standards for recreational versus occupational diving communities legal implications for approving and denying fitness to dive in an occupational setting approaches for determining the safety of prescription and OTC medications used by divers Fellowship in Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine [ edit ] The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) and the American Osteopathic Association (AOA) offer 12-month programs in undersea and hyperbaric medicine associated with ACGME or AOA accredited programs in emergency medicine, family medicine, internal medicine, occupational medicine, preventive medicine, or anesthesiology.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] ECHM-EDTC Educational and Training Standards [ edit ] The standard drawn up jointly by the European Committee for Hyperbaric Medicine and the European Diving Technical Committee defines job descriptions for several levels of diving and hyperbaric physician: Education and assessment to these standards may be provided by institutions of higher education under the leadership of a Level 3 Hyperbaric Medicine Expert as defined below. Certificates of competence may be issued by a nationally accredited institution or an internationally acknowledged agency, and periodic recertification is required.

[ 3 ] Level 1.

Medical Examiner of Divers (MED) minimum 28 teaching hours.

The MED must be competent to perform the assessments of medical fitness to dive of occupational and recreational divers and compressed air workers, except the assessment of medical fitness to resume diving after major decompression incidents.

Level 2D.

Diving Medicine Physician (DMP) minimum 80 teaching hours.

A DMP must be competent to perform the initial and all other assessments of medical fitness to dive of working and recreational divers or compressed air workers, and manage diving accidents and advise diving contractors and others on diving medicine and physiology (with the backup of a diving medical expert or consultant).

A DMP should have knowledge in relevant aspects of occupational health, but is not required to be a certified specialist in occupational medicine.

A DMP should have certified skills and basic practical experience in assessment of medical fitness to dive, management of diving accidents, safety planning for professional diving operations, advanced life support, acute trauma care and general wound care.

Level 2H.

Hyperbaric Medicine Physician (HMP) minimum 120 teaching hours An HMP will be responsible for hyperbaric treatment sessions (with the backup of a hyperbaric medicine expert or consultant) An HMP should have appropriate experience in anaesthesia and intensive care in order to manage the HBO patients, but is not required to be a certified specialist in anaesthesia and intensive care.

An HMP must be competent to assess and manage clinical patients for hyperbaric oxygen therapy treatment Level 3.

Hyperbaric medicine expert or consultant (hyperbaric and diving medicine) is a physician who has been assessed as competent to: manage a hyperbaric facility (HBO centre) or the medical and physiological aspects of complex diving activities.

manage research programs on diving medicine.

supervise a team of HBO doctors and personnel, health professionals and others.

teach relevant aspects of hyperbaric medicine and physiology to all members of staff.

Gesellschaft für Tauch- und Überdruckmedizin e. V.

[ edit ] Society for Diving and Hyperbaric medicine German standards for education and assessment of diving medical practitioners are similar to the ECHM-EDTC Standards and are controlled by the Gesellschaft für Tauch- und Überdruckmedizin e. V. They include Medical Examiner of Divers, Diving Medicine Physician, Hyperbaric Medicine Physician, Chief Hyperbaric Medicine Physician and Hyperbaric Medicine Consultant.

[ 32 ] Schweizerische Gesellschaft für Unterwasser- und Hyperbarmedizin [ edit ] Swiss Society for underwater and hyperbaric medicine .

Swiss standards for education and assessment of diving medical practitioners are controlled by the Schweizerische Gesellschaft für Unterwasser- und Hyperbarmedizin . They include Medical Examiner of Divers, Diving Medicine Physician and Hyperbaric Medicine Physician.

[ 33 ] Österreichische Gesellschaft für Tauch- und Hyperbarmedizin [ edit ] Austrian Society for Diving and Hyperbaric medicine .

Austrian standards for education and assessment of diving medical practitioners are controlled by the Österreichische Gesellschaft für Tauch- und Hyperbarmedizin They include Medical Examiner of Divers, Diving Medicine Physician, Hyperbaric Medicine Physician, Chief Hyperbaric Medicine Physician and Hyperbaric Medicine Consultant.

[ 34 ] Registration [ edit ] The American Medical Association recognises the sub-speciality Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine held by someone who is already Board Certified in some other speciality.

[ 35 ] The South African Department of Employment and Labour registers two levels of Diving Medical Practitioner . Level 1 is qualified to conduct annual examinations and certification of medical fitness to dive, on commercial divers (equivalent to ECHM-EDTC Level 1. Medical Examiner of Divers), and Level 2 is qualified to provide medical advice to a diving contractor and hyperbaric treatment for diving injuries [ 36 ] (equivalent to ECHM-EDTC Level 2D Diving Medicine Physician) Australia has a four tier system: In 2007 there was no recognised equivalence with the European standard.

[ 37 ] GPs completing the first tier four- to five-day course on how to examine divers for 'fitness to dive' can then add their names to the SPUMS Diving Doctors List GPs completing the second tier two-week diving medicine courses provided by the Royal Australian Navy and the Royal Adelaide Hospital, or the two-week course in Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine provided by the ANZ Hyperbaric Medicine Group, qualify to do commercial-diving medicals.

The third tier is the SPUMS Diploma in Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine. The candidate must attend a two-week course, write a dissertation related to DHM and have the equivalent of six months' full-time experience working in a hyperbaric medicine unit.

The fourth tier is the Certificate in Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine from the ANZ College of Anaesthetists.

Training of divers and support staff in relevant first aid [ edit ] Divers [ edit ] A basic knowledge understanding of the causes, symptoms and first aid treatment of diving related disorders is part of the basic training for most recreational and professional divers, both to help the diver avoid the disorders, and to allow appropriate action in case of an incident resulting in injury.

[ 36 ] Recreational divers [ edit ] A recreational diver has the same duty of care to other divers as any ordinary member of the public, and therefore there is no obligation to train recreational divers in first aid or other medical skills. Nevertheless, first aid training is recommended by most, if not all, recreational diver training agencies.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Recreational diving instructors and divemasters, on the other hand, are to a greater or lesser extent responsible for the safety of divers under their guidance, and therefore are generally required to be trained and certified to some level of rescue and first aid competence, as defined in the relevant training standards of the certifying body. In many cases this includes certification in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and first aid oxygen administration for diving accidents.

Professional divers [ edit ] Professional divers usually operate as members of a team with a duty of care for other members of the team. Divers are expected to act as standby divers for other members of the team and the duties of a standby diver include rescue attempts if the working diver gets into difficulties. Consequently, professional divers are generally required to be trained in rescue procedures appropriate to the modes of diving they are certified in, and to administer first aid in emergencies. The specific training, competence and registration for these skills varies, and may be specified by state or national legislation or by industry codes of practice.

[ 36 ] [ 41 ] Diving supervisors have a similar duty of care, and as they are responsible for operational planning and safety, generally are also expected to manage emergency procedures, including the first aid that may be required. The level of first aid training, competence and certification will generally take this into account.

In South Africa, registered commercial and scientific divers must hold current certification in first aid at the national Level 1, with additional training in oxygen administration for diving accidents, and registered diving supervisors must hold Level 2 first aid certification.

[ 36 ] Offshore diving contractors frequently follow the IMCA recommendations.

Diver medic [ edit ] A diver medic or diving medical technician is a member of a dive team who is trained in advanced first aid.

[ 42 ] A diver medic recognised by IMCA must be capable of administering first aid and emergency treatment, and carrying out the directions of a physician, and be familiar with diving procedures and compression chamber operation. The diver medic must also be able to assist the diving supervisor with decompression procedures, and provide treatment in a hyperbaric chamber in an emergency. The diver medic must hold, at a minimum, a valid certificate of medical fitness to operate in a pressurized environment, and a certificate of medical fitness to dive.

[ 43 ] Training standards for diver medic are described in the IMCA Scheme for Recognition of Diver Medic Training.

[ 43 ] Ethical and medicolegal issues [ edit ] Experimental work on human subjects is often ethically and/or legally impracticable. Tests where the endpoint is symptomatic decompression sickness are difficult to authorise and this makes the accumulation of adequate and statistically valid data difficult. The precautionary principle may be applied in the absence of information allowing a realistic assessment of risk. Analysis of investigations into accidents is useful when reliable results are available, which is less often than would be desirable, but privacy concerns prevent a large mount of information potentially useful to the general diving population from being made available to researchers.

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2020 ) Long-term effects of underwater diving [ edit ] Diving and other hyperbaric exposure has a well established connection with several acute conditions such as decompression illness and barotrauma. Recovery depends on the severity of the injury and the treatment, and is often complete. The possible long term health effects of diving are less known, particularly in cases where no clinical symptoms were recorded over the diver's career.

Dysbaric osteonecrosis has long been associated with hyperbaric exposure requiring staged decompression , and has become a notifiable industrial disease .

[ 44 ] Other conditions that affect quality of life associated with long term diving that have not been conclusively connected to the activity include persistent neurological 
abnormalities, reductions to lung function, accelerated hearing loss and accelerated cataract development.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Subclinical effects can occur without immediately noticeable presentations of decompression sickness, as is shown by dysbaric osteronecrosis and hearing deficiencies developing over the longer term in professional divers. Recreational divers may also be at risk for long term development of symptoms affecting the lungs, eyes, ears, and central nervous system.

[ 46 ] Decompression illness has been studied since the condition was recognised, and as the methodology has improved, shortcomings in earlier studies have become apparent. One of the problems of much medical research on diving disorders is the lack of a control group to determine baseline function. Another is that there are few standardised techniques for diagnosis consistently used by the researchers at different centres, making comparisons of dubious validity.

[ 46 ] Besides osteonecrosis and hearing losses, there is no substantial consensus about what the long term risks actually are, but the medical literature and anecdotal evidence both suggest that there are potential chronic long-term detrimental effects of diving.

[ 47 ] However evidence that recreational diving has a measurable effect on life expectancy is inconclusive.

[ 47 ] Pulmonary function [ edit ] In some cases, long term lung function change has been recorded after a single deep saturation dive.

[ 44 ] Thorsen et al 1990 compared observations of saturation divers  with matched controls, and found changes consistent with small airways dysfunction which suggested cumulative long term effects of diving exposure on lung function. The change in vital capacity was not considered to have a large effect on the diver's health, but shows that divers may develop some air flow obstruction by narrowing of the airways. The general tendency of reduction in pulmonary diffusion capacity with age may be increased in divers. These changes are associated with a decrease in exercise tolerance.

[ 46 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Vision [ edit ] See also: Oxygen toxicity § Ocular toxicity , and Cataract § Hyperbaric oxygen therapy Exposure to hyperbaric oxygen may increase the risk of permanent changes to the lens of the eye, such as cataracts. The presence of nuclear cataracts and reversible myopic shift has been attributed to oxidative damage to the lens proteins. Myopic shifts are usually reversible and resolve within days to months, but cataracts are permanent and if sufficiently advanced will require lens replacement surgery . This is hypothesized to be an effect of lifetime accumulated exposure to oxygen.

[ 45 ] Skeletal system [ edit ] Dysbaric osteonecrosis (DON) has long been recognised as a long term health effect of diving and compressed air work . Survey results for these populations show variable incidence of DON. There seems to be a threshold of inert gas load or decompression stress needed to induce the condition, but the actual values remain obscure.

[ 44 ] Hearing loss [ edit ] There is evidence that deafness is more prevalent in divers, with loss at most frequencies compared to non-divers of the same age. Some divers are known to have hearing loss caused by acute barotraume, but there is also evidence of general hearing deterioration occurring faster than in non-divers, particularly in professional divers, probably due to high air flow noise levels in helmets and during chamber compression, and from noisy tools. Divers appear to be at greater risk for long term cochlear-vestibular damage and associated high frequency hearing loss.

[ 46 ] Cardiovascular [ edit ] A survey in 2017 of 768 former divers revealed that high blood pressure was more likely to be reported by divers who did not take a dive-free day after 3 days of strenuous diving. Divers with more than 150 professional dives per year or more than 2000 air dives per year were more likely to experience myocardial infarction or angina than divers with fewer than 50 professional dives per year, and less than 2000 air dives. They reached the conclusion that male former divers are more likely to experience these symptoms than the general population, but did not claim this to be specifically caused by diving, as it could have been a consequence of the associated strenuous physical activity.

[ 50 ] Central nervous system [ edit ] A 1991 study on saturation divers indicated significantly higher deficits in the central nervous system th the control group in the time span of one to seven years since their last deep dive. The symptoms included difficulties with attentional control (mental concentration) and paraesthesia in the feet and hands, abnormalities associated with lumbar spinal cord and more abnormal electroencephalograms than the control group. These abnormalities were correlated with deep diving, air diving, and saturation diving, and a history of decompression sickness.

[ 51 ] However, though neurological effects are routinely observed during deep diving, and transient neurological effects occur in some divers after deep dives, more recent (2011) long term epidemiological studies give conflicting and inconclusive results, and more research is needed to resolve this issue.

[ 52 ] Hemelryck et al (2014) conclude that while accident-free scuba diving may have some long term effects on short term memory, there is insufficient evidence to assume that general cognitive  functions are affected.

[ 53 ] History of diving medical research [ edit ] See also: History of decompression research and development Timeline [ edit ] November 1992: The first examination for certification in Undersea Medicine by the American Board of Preventive Medicine.

[ 35 ] November 1999: The first examination for Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine qualification.

[ 35 ] Notable researchers [ edit ] Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Thomas E. Berghage Paul Bert George F. Bond Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann Carl Edmonds William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills F.J. Keays Christian J. Lambertsen Joseph B. MacInnis Simon Mitchell Richard E. Moon František Novomeský John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Richard D. Vann James Vorosmarti R.M. Wong Robert D. Workman Research organisations [ edit ] Defence and Civil Institute of Environmental Medicine Further information: DRDC Toronto DCIEM is a combined military and civilian research organisation to research the operational needs of the Canadian Forces in all environments.

[ citation needed ] Divers Alert Network Main article: Divers Alert Network The Divers Alert Network (DAN) is an international non-profit organization with regional branches supported by donations , grants , and membership dues, for assisting divers in need. The DAN Research department conducts significant medical research on recreational scuba diving safety, and the DAN Medicine Department provides support for divers worldwide to find answers to their diving medical questions.

[ 54 ] Diving Diseases Research Centre The Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) is a British hyperbaric medical organisation located near Derriford Hospital in Plymouth , Devon. It is a registered charity and was established in 1980 to research the effects of diving on human physiology .

The main objective of DDRC is research into diving medicine. The Centre is also an education and training base providing diving medical, clinical and hyperbaric courses.

Diving Medical Advisory Council Main article: Diving Medical Advisory Council DMAC is an independent committee with the purpose of providing advice about medical and safety aspects of commercial diving. They publish guidance notes about various aspects of diving and diving medical practice, and run a scheme for approval of courses in diving medicine.

[ 55 ] European Committee for Hyperbaric Medicine The ECHM is an organisation to study and define indications for hyperbaric therapy, research and therapy protocols, standards for therapeutic and technical procedures, equipment and personnel, and related cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness criteria.
It is a representative body with the European health authorities, and works toward cooperation among scientific organizations involved in the field of Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine.

[ 56 ] Membership of the committee includes doctors practicing diving medicine in Northern Europe, representatives of relevant health authorities, medical representatives from relevant navies, and a diving safety officer nominated by the International Marine Contractors Association.

European Underwater and Baromedical Society Main article: European Underwater and Baromedical Society The European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) is a primary source of information for diving and hyperbaric medicine physiology worldwide. The organization was initially formed as the European Underwater and Biomedical Society in 1971.

[ 57 ] Southern African Underswater and Hyperbaric Medical Association SAUHMA is a voluntary association recognised as a Special Interest group by the Group Council of the South African Medical Association.

[ 58 ] South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Main article: South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society The South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) is a primary source of information for diving and hyperbaric medicine physiology worldwide. The organisation supports the study of all aspects of underwater and hyperbaric medicine, provides information on underwater and hyperbaric medicine, publishes a medical journal and holds an annual conference.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] SPUMS offers a post-graduate Diploma of Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine.

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Main article: Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society The Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) is a primary source of information for diving and hyperbaric medicine physiology worldwide.

US Navy Experimental Diving Unit Main article: United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit The functions of the Navy Experimental Diving Unit are to test and evaluate diving, hyperbaric, and other life-support systems and procedures, and to conduct research and development in biomedical and environmental physiology . NEDU also provides technical recommendations to the Naval Sea Systems Command to support operational requirements of the US armed forces.

[ 61 ] See also [ edit ] Underwater diving portal George F. Bond – US Navy physician and diving medicine and saturation diving researcher Rubicon Foundation – Non-profit organization for promoting research and information access for underwater diving Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society – US based organisation for research and education in hyperbaric physiology and medicine.

Edward D. Thalmann – American hyperbaric medicine specialist and decompression researcher References [ edit ] ^ Neuman, Tom S.; Thom, Stephen R., eds. (2008).

Physiology and Medicine of Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy .

doi : 10.1016/B978-1-4160-3406-3.X5001-X .

ISBN 978-1-4160-3406-3 .

^ "Training Objectives for a Diving Medicine Physician" (PDF) (Revision 1 ed.). DMAC. 2013 . Retrieved 21 July 2025 .

^ a b c d Educational and Training Standards for Physicians in Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine (PDF) , Joint Educational Subcommittee of the European Committee for Hyperbaric Medicine (ECHM) and the European Diving Technical Committee (EDTC), 2011 , retrieved 30 March 2013 ^ a b c Brubakk, Alf O; Neuman, Tom S, eds. (2003). "9: Pressure Effects".

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Revised ed.). United States: Saunders Ltd. pp.

265– 418.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

^ Abraini, JH; Gardette-Chauffour, MC; Martinez, E; Rostain, JC; Lemaire, C (1994). "Psychophysiological reactions in humans during an open sea dive to 500 m with a hydrogen-helium-oxygen mixture".

Journal of Applied Physiology .

76 (3): 1113– 8.

doi : 10.1152/jappl.1994.76.3.1113 .

eISSN 1522-1601 .

ISSN 8750-7587 .

PMID 8005852 .

^ Powell, Mark (2008).

Deco for Divers . Southend-on-Sea: Aquapress. p. 70.

ISBN 978-1-905492-07-7 .

^ Neuman, Tom S (2003). "10.5: Arterial Gas Embolism and Pulmonary Barotrauma". In Brubakk, Alf O; Neuman, Tom S (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th ed.). United States: Saunders Ltd. pp.

557– 8.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

^ Bennett, Peter B; Rostain, Jean Claude (2003). "9.2: Inert Gas Narcosis". In Brubakk, Alf O; Neuman, Tom S (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th ed.). United States: Saunders Ltd. p. 301.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

^ Stanciu, Tamara; Mihai Diaconu; Mircea Degeratu (May 2013).

"Monitoriztuion and evaluation of HPNS (High Pressure Nervous Syndrome)" (PDF) .

Annals of the Oradea university . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 January 2016 . Retrieved 15 September 2015 .

^ Clark, James M; Thom, Stephen R (2003). "9.4: Oxygen under pressure". In Brubakk, Alf O; Neuman, Tom S (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th ed.). United States: Saunders Ltd. pp.

358– 360.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

^ Clark, James M; Thom, Stephen R (2003). "9.4: Oxygen under pressure". In Brubakk, Alf O; Neuman, Tom S (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th ed.). United States: Saunders Ltd. p. 376.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

^ Denoble, Peter (Fall 2010).

"Oxygen as definitive treatment" .

Alert Diver Online . Diver Alert Network. Archived from the original on 24 August 2015 . Retrieved 15 September 2015 .

^ Bove, Alfred A. (April 2013).

"Decompression sickness" .

MSD Manual, Professional version . Merck . Retrieved 15 September 2015 .

^ a b c US Navy (2006).

US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved 15 June 2008 .

^ Longphre, JM; Denoble, PJ; Moon, RE; Vann, RD; Freiberger, JJ (2007). "First aid normobaric oxygen for the treatment of recreational diving injuries".

Undersea & Hyperbaric Medicine .

34 (1): 43– 49.

PMID 17393938 .

S2CID 3236557 .

^ "Emergency Oxygen for Scuba Diving Injuries" . Divers Alert Network. Archived from the original on 20 April 2020 . Retrieved 1 October 2018 .

^ "Oxygen First Aid for Scuba Diving Injuries" . Divers Alert Network Europe. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020 . Retrieved 1 October 2018 .

^ Ernest S Campbell, MD, FACS.

"HBO...Indications, contraindications, links references" . Scuba-doc.com . Retrieved 16 March 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Stewart, Ashley (6 September 2023).

"Hyperbaric Chambers Are Turning Away Divers. Will There Be One Nearby When You Need It?" .

gue.com . Retrieved 7 October 2023 .

^ Williams, G.; Elliott, DH.; Walker, R.; Gorman, DF.; Haller, V. (2001). "Fitness to dive: Panel discussion with audience participation".

Journal of the South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society .

31 (3).

^ "National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology" . NBDHMT . Retrieved 14 June 2009 .

^ a b "Diver Medic Technician Training and Certification" . NBDHMT. Archived from the original on 25 February 2009 . Retrieved 14 June 2009 .

^ Clarke, Dick (1985). "All about the DMT".

Pressure, Newsletter of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society .

14 (6): 2.

ISSN 0889-0242 .

^ "Diver Medic Technician Resource Manual" . NBDHMT. Archived from the original on 15 June 2009 . Retrieved 14 June 2009 .

^ "Certified Hyperbaric Technologist Training and Certification" . NBDHMT. Archived from the original on 22 February 2009 . Retrieved 14 June 2009 .

^ "Certified Hyperbaric Technician Resource Manual" (PDF) . NBDHMT. Archived from the original on 28 February 2013 . Retrieved 14 June 2009 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Josefsen, L; Woodward, C; Lewis, D; Hodge, J; Camporesi, EM (1997). "The nursing role in hyperbaric medicine".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine (Annual Meeting Abstract) .

^ a b Staff (2011).

"Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Society" . Retrieved 30 March 2013 .

^ "Basic Standards for Fellowship Training in Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine" (PDF) . American Osteopathic Conjoint Committee of Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ Stolp, Bret W; Taekman, Jeffery M; Hobbs, Gene W (2007). "Simulation, ACGME and the hyperbaric fellowship".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

^ "Home" . American Osteopathic Association. 2012 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ staff.

"Gesellschaft für Tauch- und Überdruckmedizin" (in German). Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .

^ staff (2005).

"Swiss Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Society" (in German). Lengnau: SUHMS Secretariat . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .

^ staff.

"Weiterbildungsordnung der ÖGTH für tauch- & hyperbarmedizinische Qualifikationen von Ärzten" (in German) . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .

^ a b c Knight, John (June 2000). "Certification in diving and hyperbaric medicine in America and Australia".

SPUMS Journal .

30 (2).

^ a b c d "Diving Regulations 2009 of the South African Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993", Government Notice R41, Government Gazette (#32907), 29 January 2010 ^ Davis, Michael (September 2007). "The Editor's offering: Diving medicine education".

Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine .

37 (3).

^ Staff, National Association of Underwater Instructors, Scuba rescue diver specialty, http://www.naui.org/specialty_courses.aspx#040 Archived 28 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Staff, British Sub-Aqua Club, First Aid for Divers, http://www.bsac.com/page.asp?section=3606&sectionTitle=First+Aid+for+Divers ^ CMAS Rescue diver training standard, http://www.cmas.org/technique/rescue-diver-training-programme ^ The Diving Medical Advisory Committee DMAC, November 2001, Provision of First Aid and the Training of Divers, Supervisors and Members of Dive Teams in First Aid, DMAC 11 Rev. 1, ^ "International Marine Contractors Association" . Retrieved 3 April 2013 .

^ a b Staff (December 1999).

IMCA Scheme for Recognition of Diver Medic Training – Guidance for Training Establishments (PDF) . International Marine Contractors Association . Retrieved 3 April 2013 .

^ a b c d Macdiarmid, Jennie I; Ross, John A S; Taylor, Claire L; Watt, Stephen J; Adie, Wendy; Osman, Liesl M; Godden, David; Murray, Alison D; Crawford, John R; Lawson, Andrew (2004).

Co-ordinated investigation into the possible long term health effects of diving at work (PDF) .

Research report 230 Examination of the long term health impact of diving: The ELTHI diving study (Report). Health and Safety Executive.

ISBN 0-7176-2848-5 .

^ a b Bennett, Michael H.; Cooper, Jeffrey S. (21 June 2022).

"Hyperbaric Cataracts" .

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov . StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID 29261974 . Retrieved 30 July 2022 .

^ a b c d "Long Term Effects of Sport Diving" .

scuba-doc.com . 5 April 2019 . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ a b "Scuba Diving and Life Expectancy" .

www.dansa.org . 7 September 2018 . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ Tetzlaff, Kay; Thomas, Paul S. (2017).

"Short- and long-term effects of diving on pulmonary function" .

European Respiratory Review .

26 (143): 160097.

doi : 10.1183/16000617.0097-2016 .

PMC 9489140 .

PMID 28356403 .

^ Thorsen, E; Segadal, K; Kambestad, B; Gulsvik, A (August 1990).

"Divers lung function: Small airways disease?" .

Br J Ind Med .

47 (8): 519– 523.

doi : 10.1136/oem.47.8.519 .

PMC 1035223 .

PMID 2393630 .

^ Åsmul, K.; Irgens, Å; Grønning, M.; Møllerløkken, A. (July 2017).

"Diving and long-term cardiovascular health" .

Occupational Medicine .

67 (5): 371– 376.

doi : 10.1093/occmed/kqx049 .

PMC 5927085 .

PMID 28525588 .

^ Todnem, K.; Nyland, H.; Skeidsvoll, H; Svihus, R.; Rinck, P.; Kambestad, B.K.; Riise, T.; Aarli, J.A. (April 1991).

"Neurological long term consequences of deep diving" .

Br J Ind Med .

48 (4): 258– 66.

doi : 10.1136/oem.48.4.258 .

PMC 1035367 .

PMID 2025592 .

^ Grønning, M.; Aarli, J.A. (15 May 2011). "Neurological effects of deep diving".

J Neurol Sci .

304 ( 1– 2): 17– 21.

doi : 10.1016/j.jns.2011.01.021 .

PMID 21377169 .

^ Hemelryck, W; Germonpré, P.; Papadopoulou, V; Rozloznik, M.; Balestra, C. (December 2014).

"Long term effects of recreational SCUBA diving on higher cognitive function" (PDF) .

Scand J Med Sci Sports .

24 (6): 928– 34.

doi : 10.1111/sms.12100 .

PMID 23902533 .

^ Vann RD (2007). Moon RE, Piantadosi CA, Camporesi EM (eds.). "The History of Divers Alert Network (DAN) and DAN Research".

Dr. Peter Bennett Symposium Proceedings. Held May 1, 2004. Durham, N.C .

^ "Diving Medical Advisory Committee" . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ "European Committee for Hyperbaric Medicine" . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ Elliott, David (2011). "The foundations for today's future".

Diving Hyperb Med .

41 (3): 118– 20.

PMID 21948494 .

^ "South African Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Association home page" . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ Knight, John (1996). "Twenty five years of SPUMS 1971–1996".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

26 (2).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society.

"South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Home Page" . Retrieved 15 June 2008 .

^ NEDU.

"Navy Experimental Diving Unit" . Navy Experimental Diving Unit. Archived from the original on 10 April 2005 . Retrieved 9 September 2008 .

Further reading [ edit ] Brubakk, A. O.; Neuman, T. S. (2003).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Rev. ed.). United States: Saunders Ltd. p. 800.

ISBN 978-0702025716 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Diving medicine .

Scubadoc's Diving Medicine Online Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) SCUBA Diving and Asthma infos scuba diving restrictions Edmonds; Thomas; McKenzie & Pennefather (2010).

Diving Medicine for Scuba Divers (3rd ed.). Carl Edmonds. Archived from the original on 27 November 2010.

– free download of complete text v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal v t e Medicine Specialties and subspecialties Surgery Cardiac surgery Cardiothoracic surgery Endocrine surgery Eye surgery General surgery Colorectal surgery Digestive system surgery Neurosurgery Oral and maxillofacial surgery Orthopedic surgery Hand surgery Otolaryngology ENT Pediatric surgery Plastic surgery Reproductive surgery Surgical oncology Transplant surgery Trauma surgery Urology Andrology Vascular surgery Internal medicine Allergy / Immunology Angiology Cardiology Interventional Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hepatology Geriatrics Hematology Hospital medicine Infectious diseases Nephrology Oncology Pulmonology Rheumatology Obstetrics and gynaecology Gynaecology Gynecologic oncology Maternal–fetal medicine Obstetrics Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Urogynecology Diagnostic Radiology Interventional radiology Neuroradiology Nuclear medicine Pathology Anatomical Clinical pathology Clinical chemistry Cytopathology Medical microbiology Transfusion medicine Other Addiction medicine Adolescent medicine Anesthesiology Obstetric anesthesiology Neurosurgical anesthesiology Aviation medicine Dermatology Disaster medicine Diving medicine Emergency medicine Mass gathering medicine Evolutionary medicine Family medicine / General practice Hospital medicine Intensive care medicine Medical genetics Narcology Neurology Clinical neurophysiology Occupational medicine Ophthalmology Oral medicine Pain management Palliative care Pediatrics Neonatology Phlebology Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) Preventive medicine Prison healthcare Psychiatry Addiction psychiatry Radiation oncology Reproductive medicine Sexual medicine Venereology Sleep medicine Sports medicine Transplantation medicine Tropical medicine Travel medicine Medical education Medical school Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery Bachelor of Medical Sciences Master of Medicine Master of Surgery Doctor of Medicine Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine MD–PhD Medical Scientist Training Program Related topics Allied health Molecular oncology Nanomedicine Personalized medicine Public health Rural health Therapy Veterinary medicine Physician Chief physician History of medicine Category Commons Wikiproject Portal Outline v t e Emergency medical services Paramedicine Basic life support Advanced life support People Certified first responder Combat medic Emergency care assistant Emergency medical dispatcher Emergency medical responder Emergency medical technician Advanced emergency medical technician Paramedic Emergency physician Medical director Vehicles Air medical services Ambulance history Ambulance bus Blood bike Combination car Light horse field ambulance Motorcycle ambulance Nontransporting EMS vehicle Water ambulance Casualty lifting and movement Kendrick extrication device Litter Spinal board Scoop stretcher Spinal precautions Stretcher Vacuum mattress Weevac 6 Other Ambulance station Rescue squad Search and rescue Related fields Aviation medicine Critical emergency medicine Diving medicine Emergency medicine Military medicine Wilderness medicine Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5xcr2
Cached time: 20250817060457
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.271 seconds
Real time usage: 1.486 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8477/1000000
Revision size: 65743/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 669197/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12754/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 260809/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.687/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27127325/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1051.799      1 -total
 38.00%  399.697      1 Template:Reflist
 14.23%  149.723      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 13.91%  146.318      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 10.88%  114.404     27 Template:Cite_web
 10.62%  111.704     11 Template:Cite_book
  9.93%  104.433     18 Template:Cite_journal
  9.57%  100.650      4 Template:Annotated_link
  9.12%   95.961     38 Template:Navbox
  4.16%   43.762      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1256713:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817060457 and revision id 1303475718. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diving_medicine&oldid=1303475718 " Categories : Underwater diving medicine Military medicine Medical specialties Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from September 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Articles to be expanded from July 2020 All articles to be expanded Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 06:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diving medicine 12 languages Add topic

