Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Example 2 More sophisticated example 3 See also 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Odometry 12 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Use of data from motion sensors to estimate change of its position over time This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Odometry" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article except the lede may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Five digit odometer of a Citroën Acadiane, 1986 Odometry is the use of data from motion sensors to estimate change in position over time. It is used in robotics by some legged or wheeled robots to estimate their position relative to a starting location. This method is sensitive to errors due to the integration of velocity measurements over time to give position estimates. Rapid and accurate data collection, instrument calibration , and processing are required in most cases for odometry to be used effectively.

The word odometry is composed of the Greek words odos (meaning  "route") and metron (meaning "measure").

Example [ edit ] Suppose a robot has rotary encoders on its wheels or on its legged joints. It drives forward for some time and then would like to know how far it has traveled. It can measure how far the wheels have rotated, and if it knows the circumference of its wheels, compute the distance.

Train operations are also frequent users of odometrics. Typically, a train gets an absolute position by passing over stationary sensors in the tracks, while odometry is used to calculate relative position while the train is between the sensors.

More sophisticated example [ edit ] Suppose a simple robot has two wheels, both capable of moving forward or in reverse, positioned parallel to each other and equidistant from the robot's center. Additionally, each motor has a rotary encoder, allowing determination of whether either wheel has traveled one "unit" forward or reverse along the floor. This unit is defined as the ratio of the wheel's circumference to the encoder's resolution.

If the left wheel were to move forward one unit while the right wheel remained stationary, then the right wheel acts as a pivot, and the left wheel traces a circular arc in the clockwise direction. Since one's unit of distance is usually tiny, one can approximate by assuming that this arc is a line. Thus, the original position of the left wheel, the final position of the left wheel, and the position of the right wheel form a triangle, which one can call A .

Also, the original position of the center, the final position of the center, and the position of the right wheel form a triangle which one can call B . Since the center of the robot is equidistant to either wheel, and as they share the angle formed at the right wheel, triangles A and B are similar triangles . In this situation, the magnitude of the change of position of the center of the robot is one half of a unit. The angle of this change can be determined using the law of sines .

See also [ edit ] Dead reckoning Visual odometry External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Odometry .

"Using a PID-based Technique For Competitive Odometry and Dead-Reckoning" . Seattle Robotics . Retrieved 2016-04-17 .

Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Odometry&oldid=1234883259 " Category : Robot control Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from September 2022 All articles needing rewrite Articles with multiple maintenance issues Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 July 2024, at 16:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Odometry 12 languages Add topic

