Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Divisions of morphology 3 Morphology and classification 4 3D cell morphology: classification 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Morphology (biology) 68 languages Afrikaans العربية Arpetan अवधी Azərbaycanca বাংলা Banjar Башҡортса भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of external forms and structures of organisms This article is about the term in biology. For other uses, see Morphology .

Morphology of a male skeleton shrimp, Caprella mutica In biology , morphology is the study of the form and structure of organisms and their specific structural features.

[ 1 ] This includes aspects of the outward appearance (shape, structure, color, pattern, size), as well as the form and structure of internal parts like bones and organs , i.e., anatomy . This is in contrast to physiology , which deals primarily with function. Morphology is a branch of life science dealing with the study of the overall  structure of an organism or taxon and its component parts.

History [ edit ] The etymology of the word "morphology" is from the Ancient Greek μορφή ( morphḗ ), meaning "form", and λόγος ( lógos ), meaning "word, study, research".

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] While the concept of form in biology, opposed to function , dates back to Aristotle (see Aristotle's biology ), the field of morphology was developed by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1790) and independently by the German anatomist and physiologist Karl Friedrich Burdach (1800).

[ 4 ] Among other important theorists of morphology are Lorenz Oken , Georges Cuvier , Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire , Richard Owen , Carl Gegenbaur and Ernst Haeckel .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In 1830, Cuvier and Saint-Hilaire engaged in a famous debate , which is said to exemplify the two major deviations in biological thinking at the time – whether animal structure was due to function or evolution.

[ 7 ] Divisions of morphology [ edit ] Comparative morphology is an analysis of the patterns of the locus of structures within the body plan of an organism, and forms the basis of taxonomical categorization.

Functional morphology is the study of the relationship between the structure and function of morphological features.

Experimental morphology is the study of the effects of external factors upon the morphology of organisms under experimental conditions, such as the effect of genetic mutation.

Anatomy is a "branch of morphology that deals with the structure of organisms ".

[ 8 ] Molecular morphology is a rarely used term, usually referring to the superstructure of polymers such as fiber formation [ 9 ] or to larger composite assemblies. The term is commonly not applied to the spatial structure of individual molecules .

Gross morphology refers to the collective structures of an organism as a whole as a general description of the form and structure of an organism, taking into account all of its structures without specifying an individual structure.

Morphology and classification [ edit ] Most taxa differ morphologically from other taxa. Typically, closely related taxa differ much less than more distantly related ones, but there are exceptions to this.

Cryptic species are species which look very similar, or perhaps even outwardly identical, but are reproductively isolated. Conversely, sometimes unrelated taxa acquire a similar appearance as a result of convergent evolution or even mimicry . In addition, there can be morphological differences within a species, such as in Apoica flavissima where queens are significantly smaller than workers. A further problem with relying on morphological data is that what may appear morphologically to be two distinct species may in fact be shown by DNA analysis to be a single species. The significance of these differences can be examined through the use of allometric engineering in which one or both species are manipulated to phenocopy the other species.

A step relevant to the evaluation of morphology between traits/features within species, includes an assessment of the terms: homology and homoplasy . Homology between features indicates that those features have been derived from a common ancestor.

[ 10 ] Alternatively, homoplasy between features describes those that can resemble each other, but derive independently via parallel or convergent evolution .

[ 11 ] 3D cell morphology: classification [ edit ] The invention and development of microscopy enabled the observation of 3-D cell morphology with both high spatial and temporal resolution. The dynamic processes of this cell morphology which are controlled by a complex system play an important role in varied important biological processes, such as immune and invasive responses.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Comparative anatomy Computational anatomy Insect morphology Morphometrics Neuromorphology Phenetics Phenotype Phenotypic plasticity Plant morphology References [ edit ] ^ "Morphology Definition of Morphology by Oxford Dictionary on Lexico.com also meaning of Morphology" .

Lexico DictionariesEnglish . Archived from the original on March 5, 2020.

^ Bailly, Anatole (1981-01-01).

Abrégé du dictionnaire grec français . Paris: Hachette.

ISBN 2010035283 .

OCLC 461974285 .

^ Bailly, Anatole.

"Greek-french dictionary online" .

www.tabularium.be . Archived from the original on 2022-03-18 . Retrieved 2020-02-11 .

^ Mägdefrau, Karl (1992).

Geschichte der Botanik [History of Botany] (2 ed.). Jena: Gustav Fischer Verlag.

ISBN 3-437-20489-0 .

^ Richards, R. J. (2008). A Brief History of Morphology. In: The Tragic Sense of Life. Ernst Haeckel and the Struggle over Evolutionary Thought . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

^ Di Gregorio, M. A. (2005).

From Here to Eternity: Ernst Haeckel and Scientific Faith .

Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

^ Appel, Toby (1987).

The Cuvier-Geoffroy Debate: French Biology in the Decades Before Darwin Archived 2022-12-08 at the Wayback Machine . New York: Oxford University Press.

^ "Anatomy – Definition of anatomy by Merriam-Webster" .

merriam-webster.com . 23 September 2023.

^ "Polymer Morphology" . ceas.uc.edu/. Archived from the original on 2014-12-17 . Retrieved 2010-06-24 .

^ Lincoln, Roger J. (1998).

A dictionary of ecology, evolution, and systematics . Boxshall, Geoffrey Allan.; Clark, P. F. (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 052143842X .

OCLC 36011744 .

^ Pough, F. Harvey (2009).

Vertebrate life . Janis, Christine M.; Heiser, John B. (8th ed.). San Francisco: Benjamin Cummings.

ISBN 978-0321545763 .

OCLC 184829042 .

^ Doyle, A. D.; Petrie, R. J.; Kutys, M. L.; Yamada, K. M. (2013).

"Dimensions in Cell Migration" .

Current Opinion in Cell Biology .

25 (5): 642– 649.

doi : 10.1016/j.ceb.2013.06.004 .

PMC 3758466 .

PMID 23850350 .

^ Dufour, Alexandre Cecilien; Liu, Tzu-Yu; Ducroz, Christel; Tournemenne, Robin; Cummings, Beryl; Thibeaux, Roman; Guillen, Nancy; Hero, Alfred O.; Olivo-Marin, Jean-Christophe (2015).

"Signal Processing Challenges in Quantitative 3-D Cell Morphology: More than meets the eye" .

IEEE Signal Processing Magazine .

32 (1): 30– 40.

Bibcode : 2015ISPM...32...30D .

doi : 10.1109/MSP.2014.2359131 .

S2CID 12630747 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Morphology (biology) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Anatomy and morphology Fields Gross anatomy Superficial anatomy Neuroanatomy brain morphometry Comparative anatomy Microscopic anatomy histology molecular Morphometrics Bacteria and fungi Bacterial cell structure cellular morphologies morphological plasticity Colonial morphology Lichen morphology Protists Structures Plants Plant anatomy fruit Plant habit Plant life-form Plant morphology reproductive Soil morphology Invertebrates Decapod anatomy Gastropod anatomy Insect morphology Diptera Odonata Spider anatomy Arthropod cuticle Mammals Human anatomy Neanderthal anatomy Cat anatomy Dog anatomy Horse anatomy Elephant anatomy Giraffe anatomy Other vertebrates Amphibian anatomy Bird anatomy Fish anatomy Shark anatomy Glossaries Anatomical terminology Anatomical terms of location Glossary of dinosaur anatomy Glossary of plant morphology leaf morphology Related topics Allometry Anatomical variation Anatomical plane Body plan Form classification Gracility Hertwig rule History of anatomy 19th century Physiognomy Standard anatomical position Transcendental anatomy Category Portal Index of anatomy articles Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Morphology_(biology)&oldid=1305799721 " Categories : Morphology (biology) Branches of biology Comparative anatomy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 04:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Morphology (biology) 68 languages Add topic

