Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 History 3 Events worldwide 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents International Day of the Girl Child 49 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Latina Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Русский سنڌي Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International observance, 11th of October International Day of the Girl Child Also called International Day of the Girl, Day of Girls, Girl's Day Type International Significance Raising awareness of issues facing girls internationally, such as education, nutrition, forced child marriage, legal rights, and medical rights Date 11 October Next time 11 October 2025 ( 2025-10-11 ) Frequency annual First time 11 October 2012 Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e International Day of the Girl Child is an international observance day declared by the United Nations; it is also called the Day of Girls and the International Day of the Girl .

October 11 , 2012, was the first Day of the Girl Child. The observation supports more opportunity for girls and increases awareness of gender inequality faced by girls worldwide based upon their gender. This inequality includes areas such as access to education , nutrition, legal rights, medical care, and protection from discrimination, violence against women and forced child marriage .

[ 1 ] The celebration of the day also "reflects the successful emergence of girls and young women as a distinct cohort in development policy, programming, campaigning and research. " [ 2 ] Background [ edit ] International Day of the Girl increases awareness of issues faced by girls around the world. Many [ quantify ] global development plans [ which?

] do not include or consider girls, and their issues become "invisible".

[ 3 ] More than 62 million girls around the world had no access to education, as of c.

2014, according to USAID.

[ 4 ] Worldwide and collectively, girls ages 5 to 14 spend more than 160 million hours more on household chores than boys of the same age do.

[ 5 ] Globally, one in four girls are married before age 18.

[ 6 ] On October 11, 2016, Emma Watson , a United Nations Women's Goodwill Ambassador, urged countries and families worldwide to end forced child marriage .

[ 7 ] Many [ quantify ] girls around the world are vulnerable to acts of sexual violence and the perpetrators often [ how often?

] go unpunished.

[ 8 ] The Day of Girls helps raise awareness not only of the issues that girls face, but also of what is likely to happen when those problems are solved. For example, educating girls helps reduce the rate of child marriage, disease and helps strengthen the economy by helping girls have access to higher paying jobs.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] History [ edit ] Girls at a 2014 International Day of Girls Event The International Day of Girls initiative began as a project of Plan International , a non-governmental organization that operates worldwide.

[ 11 ] The idea for an international day of observance and celebration grew out of Plan International's Because I Am a Girl campaign, which raises awareness of the importance of nurturing girls globally and in developing countries in particular. Plan International representatives in Canada approached the Canadian federal government to seek to the coalition of supporters raised awareness of the initiative internationally. Eventually, Plan International urged the United Nations to become involved.

[ 12 ] International Day of Girls was formally proposed as a resolution by Canada in the United Nations General Assembly.

Rona Ambrose , Canada's Minister for the Status of Women, sponsored the resolution; a delegation of women and girls made presentations in support of the initiative at the 55th United Nations Commission on the Status of Women . On December 19, 2011, the United Nations General Assembly voted to pass a resolution adopting October 11, 2012 as the inaugural International Day of Girls.

[ 13 ] The resolution states that the Day of Girls recognizes: [ 14 ] [the] empowerment of and investment in girls, which are critical for economic growth, the achievement of all Millennium Development Goals , including the eradication of poverty and extreme poverty , as well as the meaningful participation of girls in decisions that affect them, are key in breaking the cycle of discrimination and violence and in promoting and protecting the full and effective enjoyment of their human rights, and recognizing also that empowering girls requires their active participation in decision-making processes and the active support and engagement of their parents, legal guardians, families and care providers, as well as boys and men and the wider community [...] Each year's Day of Girls has a theme - Theme for the International Day of the Girl Child Year Theme 2012 Ending Child Marriage, [ 15 ] 2013 Innovating for Girls' Education, [ 16 ] 2014 Empowering Adolescent Girls: Ending the Cycle of Violence, [ 17 ] 2015 The Power of Adolescent Girl: Vision for 2030 2016 Girls' Progress = Goals' Progress: What Counts for Girls 2017 EmPOWER Girls: Before, during and after crises 2018 With Her: A Skilled Girl Force 2019 GirlForce: Unscripted and Unstoppable 2020 My voice, our equal future 2021 Digital generation. Our generation 2022 Our time is now — Our rights, Our future 2023 Invest in Girls' Rights: Our Leadership , Our Well-being 2024 Girls' vision for the future By 2013, worldwide, there were around 2,043 events for Day of Girls.

[ 18 ] Events worldwide [ edit ] Various events to promote the Day of Girls are planned in several countries. Some are sponsored by the United Nations, such as a concert in Mumbai, India.

[ 19 ] Non-governmental organizations, such as Girl Guides Australia , also support events and activities for International Day of Girls.

[ 20 ] Local organizations have developed their own events, such as Girls and Football South Africa, who, in 2012, distributed T-shirts on International Day of Girls to commemorate the 1956 Black Sash march by 20,000 women.

[ 21 ] An all-day event was held on London's South Bank in 2013, which included theatre and film performances produced by Body Gossip , an organisation that campaigns on body image and mental health issues.

[ 22 ] For the first Day of Girls, a virtual event was developed by Sage Girl and iTwixie to bring thousands of individuals and organizations together online.

[ 23 ] In 2016, London held a Women of the World (WOW) festival where 250 London school-aged girls were paired with women mentors.

[ 24 ] Also in 2016, the President of the United States , Barack Obama , issued a proclamation supporting an end to gender disparity.

[ 25 ] Social media uses the hashtag #dayofthegirl to track events and news about the day.

[ 26 ] See also [ edit ] International Day of the Boy Child Child marriage Girl Gender equality Hinamatsuri International Day of Women and Girls in Science International Women's Day International development References [ edit ] ^ "As Malala Recovers, U.N. Marks International Day of the Girl Child" .

Los Angeles Times . 11 October 2012 . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ Hendricks, Sarah; Bachan, Keshet (2015).

"Because I Am a Girl: The Emergence of Girls in Development" . In Baksh, Rawwida; Harcourt, Wendy (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Transnational Feminist Movements . Oxford University Press. p. 895.

ISBN 9780199943494 .

^ "World Gears for First Ever 'International Day of the Girl Child' " .

Al Arabiya . 6 October 2012. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ "Let Girls Learn" . Archived from the original on 2014-07-01.

^ Haynes, Suyin (11 October 2016).

"What to Know About the UN's International Day of the Girl" .

Motto . TIME. Archived from the original on October 12, 2016 . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ Ford, Liz (11 October 2016).

"How Are You Marking International Day of the Girl? Share Your Stories" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ Beck, Christina (11 October 2016).

"Emma Watson's Powerful Words on International Day of the Girl" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ Picq, Manuela (11 October 2012).

"A Much Needed International Day of the Girl" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ Krache, Donna (11 October 2012).

"Education a Focus on International Day of the Girl Child" .

CNN . Archived from the original on 23 November 2018 . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ Crittenden, Camille (8 October 2012).

"International Day of the Girl: Why Science & Math Programs Matter" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ "Challenge Accepted! Canadian leaders to give up their seats to acknowledge that 'Girls Belong Here' on International Day of the Girl" .

Canada Newswire . 28 September 2016 . Retrieved 11 October 2016 – via EBSCOhost.

^ Ma, Katy (10 October 2013).

"What Is the International Day of the Girl Child?" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ Ambrose, Rona and Rosemary McCarney (December 29, 2011).

"International Day of the Girl Child: girls' rights are human rights" .

Edmonton Journal . Archived from the original on July 19, 2012 . Retrieved September 26, 2012 .

^ "Resolution Adopted by the General Assembly: 66/170 International Day of the Girl Child" . United Nations . Retrieved September 26, 2012 .

^ "WHO | Ending child marriage" . Who.int. 2012-10-11 . Retrieved 2014-08-21 .

^ International Day of the Girl Child , WHO ^ "Day of the Girl Child - Gender equality - UNICEF" .

UNICEF . 17 October 2014. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017 . Retrieved 2 December 2014 .

^ Higgins, Chris (11 October 2013).

"6 Reasons Today is International Day of the Girl" .

Mental Floss . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ Bhandary, Shreya (September 25, 2012).

" 'Because I am a Girl Rock Concert' to celebrate first ever 'International Day of the Girl Child' " .

Times of India . Retrieved September 26, 2012 .

^ "International Day of the Girl Child" . Girl Guides Australia. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016 . Retrieved September 26, 2012 .

^ "South Africa: Women, Football and Song" . All Africa (orig. in Daily Maverick). September 14, 2012 . Retrieved September 26, 2012 .

^ Martinson, Jane (11 October 2013).

"Body Gossip puts spotlight on models and body image" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

^ Bent, Emily (2015).

"Girls' Human Rights and Virtual Empowerment" . In Smallwood, Carol (ed.).

Women, Work, and the Web: How the Web Creates Entrepreneurial Opportunities . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 17.

ISBN 9781442244276 .

^ Proudfoot, Jenny (11 October 2016).

"Women of the World Celebrate the UN International Day of the Girl" .

Marie Claire . Retrieved 11 October 2016 .

^ "Presidential Proclamation -- International Day of the Girl, 2016" .

whitehouse.gov . 7 October 2016 . Retrieved 11 October 2016 – via National Archives .

^ Allen, Lasara Firefox (2016).

Jailbreaking the Goddess: A Radical Revisioning of Feminist Spirituality . Llewellyn Publications.

ISBN 9780738748900 .

Bibliography [ edit ] UN (2015).

"International Day of the Girl Child October 11" . Department of Public Information, UN . Retrieved 25 August 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to International Day of the Girl Child .

Care International Day of Girls 2020 information Plan International Day of Girls information Day of Girls Day of Girls Australia website v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Day_of_the_Girl_Child&oldid=1306180692 " Categories : Feminist events Gender equality International development Millennium Development Goals October observances United Nations days Women and education Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox holiday fixed day (2) Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 10:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Day of the Girl Child 49 languages Add topic

