Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Published works (selection) 2 Awards 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Russell Jacoby 3 languages العربية Français مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American historian (born 1945) Russell Jacoby (born April 23, 1945) is an American academic and  a professor of history at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), an author and a critic of academic culture. His fields of interest are twentieth-century European and American intellectual and cultural history, specifically the history of intellectuals and education. At these points, his work, however, also crosses over into the sociology of knowledge .

As of 2013, he was professor in residence (an untenured position) at the UCLA department of history, and had taken emeritus status by 2022.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A documentary, Velvet Prisons: Russell Jacoby on American Academia , premiered in 2013 and played at many festivals, including the Humanity Explored Film Festival, the Davis International Film Festival, and Columbia Gorge Film Festival.

[ 3 ] He was born in New York City and educated at the University of Chicago and the University of Wisconsin–Madison . He received a doctorate in 1974 from the University of Rochester .

His parents were Jewish and active in left-wing politics, shifting their politics only in later life.

[ 4 ] Published works (selection) [ edit ] Social Amnesia: A Critique of Contemporary Psychology (Beacon Press, 1975; Transaction, 1997) "What is Conformist Marxism?" Telos 45 (Fall 1980). New York: Telos Press.

Dialectic of Defeat: Contours of Western Marxism (Cambridge University Press, 1981) The Repression of Psychoanalysis: Otto Fenichel and the Political Freudians (Basic Books, 1983) The Last Intellectuals: American Culture in the Age of Academe (Basic Books, 1987; new edition with new Introduction, Basic Books 2000) Dogmatic Wisdom: How the Culture Wars Divert Education and Distract America (Doubleday, 1994) The Bell Curve Debate : History, Documents, Opinions (Times Books, 1995).

The End of Utopia: Politics and Culture in the Age of Apathy (Basic Books, 1999) Picture Imperfect: Utopian Thought for an Anti-Utopian Age (Columbia University Press, 2005) Bloodlust: On the Roots of Violence from Cain and Abel to the Present (Free Press, 2011) On Diversity: The Eclipse of the Individual in a Global Era (Seven Stories Press, 2020) Intellectuals in Politics and Academia: Culture in the Age of Hype (Palgrave Macmillan, 2022) Such as other articles and reviews in American Historical Review , Grand Street, The Nation , Los Angeles Times , London Review of Books , The New York Times , Harper's and elsewhere.

Awards [ edit ] Guggenheim Fellowship awarded 1980 National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) Fellowship Andrew Mellon Fellowship Lehrman Fellowship awarded 1999 ( Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History ) References [ edit ] ^ "Review of 'Velvet Prisons: Russell Jacoby on American Academia' | Inside Higher Ed" .

www.insidehighered.com . Retrieved 2022-12-24 .

^ "Faculty | UCLA History" . Archived from the original on 2022-07-07 . Retrieved 2022-12-24 .

^ [lastintellectuals.jigsy.com "Velvet Prisons"].

{{ cite web }} : Check |url= value ( help ) ^ "Documentary Film makers & Film Productions. Watch Documentaries Online" .

Going Public [ dead link ] , Washington Post, by Michael Berube Sunday, July 7, 2002 UCLA History Department online biography Russell Jacoby versus Eric Lott Columbia University online March 24, 2006 USC Libraries online thumbnail biography Russell Jacoby’s PICTURE IMPERFECT Lauren Langman, Columbia University Press, 2005 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Russell Jacoby .

Scott London's book review of How the Culture Wars Divert Education and Distract America , scottlondon.com George Scialabba's book review of How the Culture Wars Divert Education and Distract America , bostonreview.net.  See George Scialabba Biography by Gale Reference Team available through Amazon e-documents Velvet Prisons: Russell Jacoby on American Academia Appearances on C-SPAN On a Critical Thinking Under Influence. An Interview with Russell Jacoby , 2023.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Russell_Jacoby&oldid=1272789291 " Categories : 1945 births Living people Writers from New York City University of California, Los Angeles faculty University of Chicago alumni University of Rochester alumni University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni People involved in race and intelligence controversies Intellectual historians Sociology of knowledge Hidden categories: CS1 errors: URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2025 People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 30 January 2025, at 05:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Russell Jacoby 3 languages Add topic

