Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Present roles and status Toggle Present roles and status subsection 1.1 Additional roles 1.2 Ecumenical and interfaith 2 Origins 3 Province and Diocese of Canterbury 4 Styles and privileges 5 Residences 6 List of recent archbishops 7 Archbishops who became peers 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Archbishop of Canterbury 51 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Nouormand Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Senior bishop of the Church of England "Primate of All England" redirects here. For the Primate of England, see Archbishop of York .

For a list of archbishops, see List of archbishops of Canterbury .

Archbishop of Canterbury Archbishopric Anglican Arms of the diocese of Canterbury : Azure, an episcopal staff in pale or surmounted by a pall proper edged and fringed of the second charged with four crosses pattée fitchée sable Incumbent: Vacation since 7 January 2025 Style The Most Reverend and Right Honourable (otherwise His Grace ) Location Ecclesiastical province Canterbury Residence Lambeth Palace Old Palace Information First holder Augustine of Canterbury Denomination Anglican Established 597 ( 597 ) Diocese Canterbury Cathedral Canterbury Cathedral Website archbishopofcanterbury .org Anglican Communion Part of a series on Anglicanism Organisation Archbishop of Canterbury Vacant Anglican Communion history Anglican Communion Primates' Meetings ( primates ) Lambeth Conference ( 2022 ) Anglican Consultative Council Bishops Episcopal polity Theology Christian theology Father Son Holy Spirit Doctrine Thirty-nine Articles Books of Homilies Caroline Divines Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral Sacraments Mary Saints Ecumenism Ordination of women Homosexuality Windsor Report Liturgy and worship Book of Common Prayer Morning / Evening Prayer Eucharist Liturgical year Biblical Canon Churchmanship High Low Central Broad Other topics Monasticism Music Saint Thomas Anglicans Christian prayer Christian art Christianity portal v t e The archbishop of Canterbury is the senior bishop and a principal leader of the Church of England , the ceremonial head of the worldwide Anglican Communion and the bishop of the diocese of Canterbury . The first archbishop was Augustine of Canterbury , the "Apostle to the English", who was sent to England by Pope Gregory the Great and arrived in 597.

[ 1 ] The position is currently vacant following the resignation of Justin Welby , the 105th archbishop, effective 7 January 2025.

[ 2 ] During the vacancy the official functions of the office have been delegated primarily to the archbishop of York, Stephen Cottrell , with some also undertaken by the bishop of London, Sarah Mullally , and the bishop of Dover, Rose Hudson-Wilkin .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] From Augustine until William Warham , the archbishops of Canterbury were in full communion with the Catholic Church and usually received the pallium from the pope . During the English Reformation , King Henry VIII broke communion with Rome and proclaimed himself the head of the Church of England .

Thomas Cranmer , appointed in 1533, was the first Protestant archbishop of Canterbury and would become one of the most important figures in the development of Anglicanism .

The archbishop is appointed by the British monarch on the advice of the prime minister of the United Kingdom and formally elected by the college of canons of Canterbury Cathedral. In practice, however, candidates are chosen by the Crown Nominations Commission , a Church of England body which advises the prime minister.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Archbishops' Secretary for Appointments wrote to General Synod members regarding appointment of a successor to Justin Welby in January 2025; meetings up to September 2025 were expected, to shortlist candidates.

[ 8 ] Present roles and status [ edit ] Currently the archbishop fills four main roles: [ 9 ] bishop of the diocese of Canterbury , which covers the eastern parts of the County of Kent . Founded in 597, it is the oldest see in the English church.

metropolitan archbishop of the province of Canterbury , which covers the southern two-thirds of England.

the senior primate and chief religious figure of the Church of England (the British sovereign is the supreme governor of the church). Along with their colleague the archbishop of York they chair the General Synod and sits on or chairs many of the church's important boards and committees; power in the church is not highly centralised, however, so the two archbishops can often lead only through persuasion. The archbishop of Canterbury plays a central part in national ceremonies such as coronations ; due to their high public profile, their opinions are often in demand by the news media.

spiritual leader of the Anglican Communion . The archbishop, although without legal authority outside England, is recognised by convention as primus inter pares ("first among equals") of all Anglican primates worldwide. Since 1867 the archbishop has convened more or less decennial meetings of worldwide Anglican bishops, the Lambeth Conferences .

In the last two of these functions, they have an important ecumenical and interfaith role, speaking on behalf of Anglicans in England and worldwide.

The archbishop's main residence is Lambeth Palace in the London Borough of Lambeth . They also have lodgings in the Old Palace, Canterbury , located beside Canterbury Cathedral , where the Chair of St Augustine sits.

As holder of one of the "five great sees" (the others being York , London , Durham and Winchester ), the archbishop of Canterbury is ex officio one of the Lords Spiritual of the House of Lords . They are one of the highest-ranking people in England and the highest ranking non-royal in the United Kingdom's order of precedence .

Since Henry VIII broke with Rome , the archbishops of Canterbury have been selected by the English (British since the Act of Union in 1707) monarch. Since the 20th century, the appointment of archbishops of Canterbury conventionally alternates between Anglo-Catholics and Evangelicals .

[ 10 ] The most recent archbishop, Justin Welby was the 105th holder of the office; he was enthroned at Canterbury Cathedral on 4 February 2013. As archbishop he signed himself as + Justin Cantuar . On 12 November 2024, he announced his decision to resign; [ 11 ] he did so effective 7 January 2025.

[ 2 ] Two  other former archbishops were living as of 2025 [update] : George Carey (born 1935), the 103rd archbishop; and Rowan Williams (born 1950), the 104th archbishop.

Additional roles [ edit ] In addition to their office, the archbishop holds a number of other positions; for example, they are joint president of the Council of Christians and Jews in the United Kingdom. Some positions they formally hold ex officio and others virtually so (the incumbent of the day, although appointed personally, is appointed because of their office). Amongst these are: [ 12 ] Chancellor of Canterbury Christ Church University [ 13 ] Visitor for the following academic institutions: All Souls College, Oxford Selwyn College, Cambridge Merton College, Oxford Keble College, Oxford Ridley Hall, Cambridge The University of Kent (main campus located in Canterbury ) King's College London University of King's College Sutton Valence School Benenden School Cranbrook School Haileybury and Imperial Service College Harrow School King's College School, Wimbledon The King's School, Canterbury St John's School, Leatherhead Marlborough College Dauntsey's School Wycliffe Hall, Oxford (also Patron) Governor of Charterhouse School Governor of Wellington College Visitor, The Dulwich Charities Visitor, Whitgift Foundation Visitor, Hospital of the Blessed Trinity , Guildford (Abbot's Fund) Trustee, Bromley College Trustee, Allchurches Trust President, Corporation of Church House, Westminster Director, Canterbury Diocesan Board of Finance Patron, St Edmund's School Canterbury Patron, The University of King's College , Halifax, Nova Scotia Patron, The Worshipful Company of Parish Clerks Patron, Prisoners Abroad Patron, The Kent Savers Credit Union Patron, Sanctuary Mental Health Ministries [ 14 ] Ecumenical and interfaith [ edit ] The archbishop is also a president of Churches Together in England (an ecumenical organisation).

[ 15 ] Geoffrey Fisher , 99th archbishop of Canterbury, was the first since 1397 to visit Rome, where he held private talks with Pope John XXIII in 1960. In 2005, Rowan Williams became the first archbishop of Canterbury to attend a papal funeral since the Reformation. He also attended the inauguration of Pope Benedict XVI . The 101st archbishop, Donald Coggan , was the first to attend a papal inauguration, that of Pope John Paul II in 1978.

[ 16 ] Since 2002, the archbishop has co-sponsored the Alexandria Middle East Peace process with the Grand Mufti of Egypt . In July 2008, the archbishop attended a conference of Christians, Jews and Muslims convened by the king of Saudi Arabia at which the notion of the "clash of civilizations" was rejected. Delegates agreed "on international guidelines for dialogue among the followers of religions and cultures." [ 17 ] Delegates said that "the deepening of moral values and ethical principles, which are common denominators among such followers, would help strengthen stability and achieve prosperity for all humans." [ 18 ] Origins [ edit ] Arms of the see of Canterbury. Nearly 500 years after the Reformation , the arms still depict the pallium , a symbol of the authority of the Pope and metropolitan archbishops.

It has been suggested that the Roman province of Britannia had four archbishops, seated at Londinium (London), Eboracum ( York ), Lindum Colonia ( Lincoln ) and Corinium Dobunnorum ( Cirencester ).

[ 19 ] However, in the 5th and 6th centuries Britannia began to be overrun by pagan , Germanic peoples who came to be known collectively as the Anglo-Saxons . Of the kingdoms they created, Kent arguably had the closest links with European politics, trade and culture, because it was conveniently situated for communication with continental Europe . In the late 6th century, King Æthelberht of Kent married a Christian Frankish princess named Bertha , possibly before becoming king, and certainly a number of years before the arrival of the first Christian mission to England.

[ 20 ] He permitted the preaching of Christianity.

[ 21 ] The first archbishop of Canterbury was Saint Augustine of Canterbury (not to be confused with Saint Augustine of Hippo ), who arrived in Kent in 597 AD, having been sent by Pope Gregory I on a mission to the English. He was accepted by King Æthelbert , on his conversion to Christianity, about the year 598. It seems that Pope Gregory, ignorant of recent developments in the former Roman province, including the spread of the Pelagian heresy , had intended the new archiepiscopal sees for England to be established in London and York.

[ 22 ] In the event, Canterbury was chosen instead of London, owing to political circumstances.

[ 23 ] Since then the archbishops of Canterbury have been referred to as occupying the Chair of St. Augustine .

A gospel book believed to be directly associated with St Augustine's mission survives in the Parker Library, Corpus Christi College , University of Cambridge, England. Catalogued as Cambridge Manuscript 286 , it has been positively dated to 6th-century Italy and this bound book, the St Augustine Gospels , is still used during the swearing-in ceremony of new archbishops of Canterbury.

Before the break with papal authority in the 16th century, the Church of England was an integral part of the Western European church . Since the break the Church of England, an established national church , still considers itself part of the broader Western Catholic tradition (although this is not accepted by the Roman Catholic Church which regards Anglicanism as schismatic [ 24 ] and does not accept Anglican holy orders as valid) as well as being the "mother church" of the worldwide Anglican Communion.

The Report of the Commissioners appointed by his Majesty to inquire into the Ecclesiastical Revenues of England and Wales (1835) noted the net annual revenue for the Canterbury see was £19,182.

[ 25 ] Province and Diocese of Canterbury [ edit ] View of Canterbury Cathedral from the north west c.

1890–1900 The archbishop of Canterbury exercises metropolitical (or supervisory) jurisdiction over the Province of Canterbury , which encompasses thirty of the forty-two dioceses of the Church of England, with the rest falling within the Province of York . The four Welsh dioceses were also under the province of Canterbury until 1920 when they were transferred from the established church of England to the disestablished Church in Wales .

The archbishop of Canterbury has a ceremonial provincial curia , or court, consisting of some of the senior bishops of their province .

[ 26 ] The bishop of London — the most senior cleric of the church with the exception of the two archbishops — serves as Canterbury's provincial dean , the bishop of Winchester as chancellor , the bishop of Lincoln as vice-chancellor, the bishop of Salisbury as precentor , the bishop of Worcester as chaplain and the bishop of Rochester as cross-bearer .

Along with primacy over the archbishop of York , the archbishop of Canterbury also has a precedence of honour over the other bishops of the Anglican Communion. They are recognised as primus inter pares , or first amongst equals. They do not, however, exercise any direct authority in the provinces outside England, except in certain minor roles dictated by Canon in those provinces (for example, they are the judge in the event of an ecclesiastical prosecution against the archbishop of Wales). They do hold metropolitical authority over several extra-provincial Anglican churches , and they serve as ex officio bishop of the Falkland Islands .

As of 2024 [update] the archbishop has four suffragan bishops: The bishop of Dover is given the additional title of "bishop in Canterbury" and empowered to act almost as if the bishop of Dover were the diocesan bishop of the Diocese of Canterbury , since the archbishop is so frequently away fulfilling national and international duties.

Two further suffragans, the bishop of Ebbsfleet and the bishop of Richborough , are provincial episcopal visitors for the whole Province of Canterbury , licensed by the archbishop as "flying bishops" to provide oversight throughout the province to parishes which for conscience' sake cannot accept that women can be ordained in the Sacrament of Ordination in the Church of England.

The bishop of Maidstone provides alternative episcopal oversight for the province of Canterbury for particular members who take a conservative evangelical view of male headship. On 23 September 2015, Rod Thomas was consecrated bishop of Maidstone.

[ 27 ] Previously the bishop of Maidstone was an actual suffragan bishop working in the diocese, until it was decided at the diocesan synod of November 2010 that a new bishop would not be appointed.

[ 28 ] Styles and privileges [ edit ] "Primate of All England" redirects here.

The archbishops of Canterbury and  York are both styled as "The Most Reverend"; retired archbishops are styled as "The Right Reverend". The archbishop is, by convention, appointed to the Privy Council and may, therefore, also use the style of " The Right Honourable " for life, unless later removed from the council. In formal documents, the archbishop of Canterbury is referred to as "The Most Reverend Forenames , by Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of All England and Metropolitan". In debates in the House of Lords, the archbishop is referred to as "The Most Reverend Primate, the Archbishop of Canterbury". "The Right Honourable" is not used in either instance. They may also be formally addressed as "Your Grace" or, more informally, as "Archbishop".

The surname of the archbishop of Canterbury is not always used in formal documents; often only the first name and see are mentioned. The archbishop is legally entitled to sign their name as "Cantuar" (the Latin for Canterbury). The right to use a title as a legal signature is only permitted to bishops, peers of the Realm and peers by courtesy.

[ citation needed ] Justin Welby as archbishop of Canterbury usually signed as " +Justin Cantuar: ".

In the English and Welsh order of precedence , the archbishop of Canterbury is ranked above all individuals in the realm, with the exception of the sovereign and members of the royal family .

[ 29 ] Immediately below them is the lord chancellor and then the archbishop of York.

The archbishop of Canterbury awards academic degrees, commonly called " Lambeth degrees ".

Residences [ edit ] The Archbishop of Canterbury's official London residence and office is Lambeth Palace , photographed looking east across the River Thames The archbishop of Canterbury's official residence and office in London is Lambeth Palace . They also have an apartment within the Old Palace , next to Canterbury Cathedral which incorporates some 13th-century fabric of the medieval Archbishop's Palace.

Former seats of the archbishops include: Croydon Palace : the summer residence of the archbishops from the 15th to the 18th centuries.

Addington Palace : purchased as a replacement for Croydon Palace in 1807; sold in 1897.

Archbishop's Palace, Maidstone : constructed in the 1390s, the palace was seized by the Crown at the time of the Reformation.

Otford Palace : a medieval palace, rebuilt by Archbishop Warham c.

1515 and forfeited to the Crown by Thomas Cranmer in 1537.

Archbishop's Palace, Charing : a palace existed from at least the 13th century; seized by the Crown after the Dissolution. Remnants survive as a farmhouse.

Knole House : built by Archbishop Bourchier in the second half of the 15th century, it was forfeited to the Crown by Archbishop Cranmer in 1538.

List of recent archbishops [ edit ] Main article: List of archbishops of Canterbury See also: Assistant Bishop of Canterbury Since 1900, the following have served as archbishop of Canterbury: [ 30 ] 1896–1902: Frederick Temple 1903–1928: Randall Davidson 1928–1942: Cosmo Gordon Lang 1942–1944: William Temple 1945–1961: Geoffrey Fisher 1961–1974: Michael Ramsey 1974–1980: Donald Coggan 1980–1991: Robert Runcie 1991–2002: George Carey 2002–2012: Rowan Williams 2013–2025: Justin Welby (Welby resigned his see in January 2025) 2025: Vacant Archbishops who became peers [ edit ] From 1660 to 1902, all the archbishops of Canterbury died in office. In 1928, two years before his death, Randall Davidson became the first  to voluntarily resign his office. All his successors except William Temple (who died in office in 1944) have also resigned their office before death.

Until 2013, all archbishops who retired were immediately given peerages : initially hereditary baronies (although both recipients of such titles died without male heirs and so their titles became extinct on their deaths), and life peerages after the enactment of the Life Peerages Act 1958 . Such titles have allowed retired archbishops to retain the seats in the House of Lords which they held ex officio before their retirement. But Justin Welby (retired in January 2025) has not yet received a peerage, as of June 2025.

Archbishop Title Notes Randall Davidson Baron Davidson of Lambeth in 1928 Extinct in 1930 Cosmo Gordon Lang Baron Lang of Lambeth in 1942 Extinct in 1945 Geoffrey Fisher Baron Fisher of Lambeth for life in 1961 Extinct in 1972 Michael Ramsey Baron Ramsey of Canterbury for life in 1974 Extinct in 1988 Donald Coggan Baron Coggan for life in 1980 Extinct in 2000 Robert Runcie Baron Runcie for life in 1991 Extinct in 2000 George Carey Baron Carey of Clifton for life in 2002 Extant Rowan Williams Baron Williams of Oystermouth for life in 2013 Extant (retired from the House in 2020 [ 31 ] ) See also [ edit ] Accord of Winchester Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople Religion in the United Kingdom References [ edit ] ^ "Announcement of the 105th Archbishop of Canterbury" .

Archbishop of Canterbury Website . 9 November 2012. Archived from the original on 12 November 2012 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 .

^ a b Orders in Council, 18 December 2024, page 42.

[1] Archived, 22 December 2024 ^ Ahmed, Jabel (6 January 2025).

"Justin Welby lays down archbishop's staff as Church of England urged to undergo 'complete reform' " .

The Independent . Retrieved 6 January 2025 .

^ Williams, Hattie (6 January 2025).

"Archbishop Welby spends final day at Lambeth Palace in private" .

Church Times . Retrieved 7 January 2025 .

^ Bailey, Pippa (12 November 2024).

"The race for Lambeth Palace" .

The New Statesman . Retrieved 12 November 2024 .

^ Cabinet Office (15 November 2024).

"Archbishop of Canterbury appointment process" .

gov.uk . Retrieved 7 January 2025 .

^ "Appointing a new Archbishop of Canterbury" . The Church of England . Retrieved 30 March 2025 .

^ Knott, Stephen (22 January 2025).

"Nominating the next Archbishop of Canterbury" . Anglican Ink.

^ Archbishop's Roles and Responsibilities Archived 14 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine , Archbishop of Canterbury website. Retrieved 8 February 2008.

^ The Archbishop of Canterbury Archived 22 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine , website of the Archbishop of York. Retrieved 31 March 2009.

^ Sinmaz, Emine (12 November 2024).

"Justin Welby says he will step down as archbishop of Canterbury" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 12 November 2024 .

^ "Register of Lords' interests" .

House of Lords .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2007 . Retrieved 15 August 2007 .

^ "Archbishop installed as first Chancellor" .

Canterbury Christ Church University . 12 December 2005. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 7 August 2008 .

^ "Justin Welby becomes patron of mental health charity" .

Premier. Christian News . 14 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2021 . Retrieved 15 October 2021 .

^ "The Presidents of Churches Together in England" . Churches Together in England. Archived from the original on 26 February 2014 . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ Hickman, Baden (19 May 2000).

"Lord Coggan of Canterbury" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ "Madrid Interfaith Dialogue Conference: Beginning of a Process" . Saudi-US Relations Information Service. Archived from the original on 15 May 2010 . Retrieved 6 May 2014 .

^ Niles, D. Preman (1989).

Resisting the threats to life: covenanting for justice, peace, and the integrity of creation . Geneva: WCC Publications.

ISBN 9782825409640 .

^ Wacher, J., The Towns of Roman Britain , Batsford, 1974, especially pp. 84–86.

^ Catholic Encyclopedia: Bertha .

^ Bede , Ecclesiastical History , i, 25.

^ Bede, Ecclesiastical History , i, 29.

^ Brooks, N., The Early History of the Church of Canterbury , Leicester University Press, 1984, pp. 3–14.

^ Cavanaugh, Stephen E. (2011).

Anglicans and the Roman Catholic Church: Reflections on Recent Developments . Ignatius Press.

ISBN 978-1-58617-499-6 .

^ The National Enclopaedia of Useful Knowledge , Vol.III, Charles Knight, London, 1847, p. 362 ^ "Order of Service from the Enthronement of the 104th Archbishop in 2003" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2007.

^ "Articles" .

^ "Canterbury Diocese – Synod News" . Archived from the original on 15 June 2011.

^ Whitaker's Almanack , 2008, p. 43 – Precedence, England and Wales ^ Johnson, Ben.

"Archbishops of Canturbury" .

Historic UK . Retrieved 31 January 2020 .

^ "Retirements of Members – Hansard – UK Parliament" . 7 August 2025.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Archbishops of Canterbury .

Official website The Archbishopric of Canterbury, from Its Foundation to the Norman Conquest , by John William Lamb, published 1971, Faith Press, from Google Book Search v t e Archbishop of Canterbury vacant Primate of All England (acting: Stephen Cottrell , Archbishop of York ) List of Archbishops of Canterbury Lambeth Palace Province of Canterbury (Dean: Sarah Mullally , Bishop of London ) Diocese of Canterbury (bishop: Rose Hudson-Wilkin , Bishop of Dover ) Canterbury Cathedral Old Palace, Canterbury David Urquhart , Bishop to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York (episcopal assistant; ad interim ) Hugh Nelson , Bishop to the Forces Jonathan Clark , Bishop for the Falkland Islands Historic palaces (Canterbury–Lambeth chain) The Old Palace, Bekesbourne (16th–17th centuries) Archbishop's Palace, Charing (8th–16th) Archbishop's Palace, Maidstone (14th–16th) Knole House (15th–16th) Otford Palace (8th–16th) Addington Palace (19th) Croydon Palace ( c.

10th–18th ) v t e Archbishops of Canterbury List of archbishops of Canterbury Pre- Conquest Augustine Laurence Mellitus Justus Honorius Deusdedit Wighard Theodore of Tarsus Berhtwald Tatwine Nothhelm Cuthbert Bregowine Jænberht Æthelhard Wulfred Feologild Ceolnoth Æthelred Plegmund Athelm Wulfhelm Oda Ælfsige Byrhthelm Dunstan Æthelgar Sigeric Ælfric of Abingdon Ælfheah Lyfing Æthelnoth Eadsige Robert of Jumièges Stigand Conquest to Reformation Lanfranc Anselm Ralph d'Escures William de Corbeil Theobald of Bec Thomas Becket Roger de Bailleul Richard of Dover Baldwin of Forde Reginald Fitz Jocelin Hubert Walter Reginald John de Gray Stephen Langton Walter d'Eynsham Richard le Grant Ralph Neville John of Sittingbourne John Blund Edmund of Abingdon Boniface William Chillenden Robert Kilwardby Robert Burnell John Peckham Robert Winchelsey Thomas Cobham Walter Reynolds Simon Mepeham John de Stratford John de Ufford Thomas Bradwardine Simon Islip William Edington Simon Langham William Whittlesey Simon Sudbury William Courtenay Thomas Arundel Roger Walden Thomas Arundel Henry Chichele John Stafford John Kemp Thomas Bourchier John Morton Thomas Langton Henry Deane William Warham Thomas Cranmer Reginald Pole Post-Reformation Matthew Parker Edmund Grindal John Whitgift Richard Bancroft George Abbot William Laud Episcopacy abolished ( Commonwealth ) William Juxon Gilbert Sheldon William Sancroft John Tillotson Thomas Tenison William Wake John Potter Thomas Herring Matthew Hutton Thomas Secker Frederick Cornwallis John Moore Charles Manners-Sutton William Howley John Bird Sumner Charles Longley Archibald Campbell Tait Edward White Benson Frederick Temple Randall Davidson Cosmo Lang William Temple Geoffrey Fisher Michael Ramsey Donald Coggan Robert Runcie George Carey Rowan Williams Justin Welby Italics indicate a person who was elected but not confirmed.

v t e Anglican hierarchy in Great Britain and Ireland Church of England Canterbury Province Diocesan bishops Archbishop of Canterbury Bath & Wells Birmingham Bristol Chelmsford Chichester Coventry Derby Ely Exeter Europe Gloucester Guildford Hereford Leicester Lichfield Lincoln London Norwich Oxford Peterborough Portsmouth Rochester St Albans St Edmundsbury & Ipswich Salisbury Southwark Truro Winchester Worcester Suffragan bishops Aston Barking Basingstoke Bedford Bradwell Brixworth Buckingham Colchester Crediton Croydon Dorchester Dorking Dover Dudley Dunwich Ebbsfleet Edmonton Europe Fulham Grantham Grimsby Hertford Horsham Huntingdon Kensington Kingston-upon-Thames Lewes Loughborough Ludlow Lynn Maidstone Plymouth Ramsbury Reading Repton Richborough Sherborne Shrewsbury Southampton St Germans Stafford Stepney Swindon Taunton Tewkesbury Thetford Tonbridge Warwick Willesden Wolverhampton Woolwich York Province Diocesan bishops Archbishop of York Blackburn Carlisle Chester Durham Leeds Liverpool Manchester Newcastle Sheffield Sodor & Man Southwell Suffragan bishops Berwick Beverley Birkenhead Bolton Bradford Burnley Doncaster Huddersfield Hull Jarrow Lancaster Middleton Penrith Richmond Ripon Selby Sherwood Stockport Wakefield Warrington Whitby Other Bishop to the Forces Bishop to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York Bishop of the Falkland Islands Bishop to HM Prisons other spokesperson bishops list of current bishops list of current deans list of current archdeacons Church in Wales Archbishop of Wales Bangor Llandaff Monmouth St Asaph St Davids Swansea & Brecon assistant bishops Scottish Episcopal Church Primus of the Scottish Episcopal Church Aberdeen and Orkney Argyll & The Isles Brechin Edinburgh Glasgow & Galloway Moray, Ross & Caithness St Andrews, Dunkeld & Dunblane Church of Ireland Armagh Province Archbishop of Armagh Clogher Connor Derry & Raphoe Down & Dromore Kilmore, Elphin & Ardagh Dublin Province Archbishop of Dublin Cashel & Ossory Cork, Cloyne & Ross Limerick & Killaloe Meath & Kildare v t e Anglican Communion General Supreme Governor of the Church of England Episcopal polity Archbishop of Canterbury Anglican Communion Primates' Meeting Lambeth Conferences ( 2022 ) Anglican Consultative Council Homosexuality Windsor Report Ordination of women Ecumenism Dioceses African provinces Alexandria Burundi Central Africa Congo Indian Ocean Kenya Mozambique and Angola Nigeria Rwanda Southern Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda West Africa Pan-American provinces Brazil Canada Central America Chile Mexico South America United States of America West Indies Asian provinces Bangladesh (United) Hong Kong and Macao Japan Jerusalem and the Middle East Korea Myanmar (Burma) North India (United) Pakistan (United) Philippines South East Asia South India (United) European provinces England (including the Diocese in Europe ) Ireland Scotland Wales Oceanian provinces Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia Australia Melanesia Papua New Guinea Extra-provincial churches Bermuda Ceylon (Sri Lanka) Falkland Islands Portugal Spain Churches in full communion Mar Thoma Syrian Church Malabar Syrian Church Union of Utrecht Philippine Independent Church Porvoo Communion Christianity portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6wdvv
Cached time: 20250817043543
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.679 seconds
Real time usage: 0.888 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4078/1000000
Revision size: 31723/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 176275/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5410/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 137055/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.371/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27799200/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  712.798      1 -total
 25.34%  180.610      1 Template:Reflist
 17.22%  122.739     15 Template:Cite_web
 13.31%   94.872      2 Template:Infobox
 12.64%   90.071      1 Template:Lang
 12.59%   89.769      1 Template:AnglicanCommunion
 11.73%   83.608      1 Template:Infobox_diocese
  7.45%   53.077      1 Template:Short_description
  7.34%   52.312      8 Template:Navbox
  7.09%   50.570      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2345:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043543 and revision id 1305846003. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archbishop_of_Canterbury&oldid=1305846003 " Categories : Archbishops of Canterbury 597 establishments 6th-century establishments in England Anglican Communion Anglican episcopal offices Christianity in Kent Church of England Culture in Canterbury Ecclesiastical titles People associated with Canterbury Christ Church University People associated with King's College London People associated with the Royal National College for the Blind People associated with the University of Kent Primates of the Church of England Religious leadership roles Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 Use British English from January 2023 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 12:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Archbishop of Canterbury 51 languages Add topic

