Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal life 2 Education and military career 3 Astronaut career Toggle Astronaut career subsection 3.1 STS-74 3.2 STS-100 3.3 International Space Station 4 Social media 5 Music 6 Post-retirement Toggle Post-retirement subsection 6.1 Writing 7 Special honours and affiliations 8 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 8.1 Books 8.2 Essays and reporting 9 Discography Toggle Discography subsection 9.1 Albums 9.2 Guest appearances 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Chris Hadfield 36 languages العربية Aragonés Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kapampangan Latviešu Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canadian astronaut (born 1959) Colonel Chris Hadfield OC OOnt MSC CD Hadfield in July 2011 Born Chris Austin Hadfield ( 1959-08-29 ) August 29, 1959 (age 65) Sarnia , Ontario , Canada Education Royal Roads Military College Royal Military College ( BEng ) University of Waterloo University of Tennessee Space Institute ( MSc ) Spouse Helene Walter ​ ( m.

1981 ) ​ Children 3 Awards Order of Canada (2014) Diamond Jubilee Medal (2012) NASA Exceptional Service Medal (2002) Golden Jubilee Medal (2002) Order of Ontario (1996) Space career CSA astronaut Time in space 165 days, 16 hours, 18 minutes Selection 1992 CSA Group NASA Group 14 (1992) Total EVAs 2 Total EVA time 14 hours, 50 minutes Missions STS-74 STS-100 Soyuz TMA-07M ( Expedition 34 / 35 ) Mission insignia Retirement July 3, 2013 Military career Allegiance Canada Branch Air Command Years of service 1978–2003 Rank Colonel Website chrishadfield .ca Chris Austin Hadfield (born August 29, 1959) is a Canadian retired astronaut , engineer, fighter pilot , musician, and writer. As the first Canadian to perform extravehicular activity in outer space , he has flown two Space Shuttle missions and also served as commander of the International Space Station (ISS). Prior to his career as an astronaut, he served in the Canadian Armed Forces for 25 years as an Air Command fighter pilot.

Hadfield has cited part of his career inspiration to have come to him as a child, when he watched the first crewed Moon landing by American spaceflight Apollo 11 on television. He attended high school in Oakville and Milton in southern Ontario , and earned his glider pilot licence as a member of the Royal Canadian Air Cadets . After enlisting in the Canadian Armed Forces, he earned an engineering degree at the Royal Military College in Kingston, Ontario . Hadfield learned to fly various types of aircraft in the military and eventually became a test pilot , flying several experimental planes. As part of an exchange program with the United States Navy and United States Air Force , he obtained a master's degree in aviation systems at the University of Tennessee Space Institute .

In 1992, Hadfield was accepted into the Canadian astronaut program by the Canadian Space Agency . He first flew in space in November 1995 as a mission specialist aboard STS-74 , visiting the Russian space station Mir . He flew again in April 2001 on STS-100 , when he visited the ISS and walked in space to help install Canadarm2 . In December 2012, he flew for a third time aboard Soyuz TMA-07M to join Expedition 34 on the ISS. When Expedition 34 ended in March 2013, Hadfield became the commander of the ISS as part of Expedition 35 , responsible for a crew of five astronauts and helping to run dozens of scientific experiments dealing with the impact of low gravity on human biology. During this mission, he chronicled life onboard the space station by taking pictures of Earth and posting them on various social media platforms. He was a guest on television news and talk shows and gained popularity by playing the ISS's guitar in space. Hadfield returned to Earth in May 2013, when the mission ended. He announced his retirement shortly after returning, capping a 35-year-long career as a military pilot and astronaut. He has five published books including his autobiography, the NYT-bestseller An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth .

Personal life Hadfield was born in Sarnia , Ontario . His parents are Roger and Eleanor Hadfield, who live in Milton, Ontario . Hadfield was raised on a corn farm in southern Ontario . He was a member of a Wolf Cub Pack that met at the Milton Fairgrounds.

[ 1 ] He became interested in flying at a young age and in being an astronaut at age nine, when he saw the Apollo 11 Moon landing on television.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] On December 23, 1981, in Waterloo, Ontario , Hadfield married his high-school girlfriend Helene Hadfield (née Walter), with whom he has three children: Kyle, Evan, and Kristin Hadfield.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Hadfield used to be a ski instructor at Glen Eden Ski Area [ 6 ] before becoming a test pilot .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Hadfield is of northern English and southern Scottish descent.

[ 9 ] He is a devoted fan of the Toronto Maple Leafs , and wore a Leafs jersey under his spacesuit during his Soyuz TMA-07M re-entry in May 2013.

[ 10 ] After the 2012–13 NHL lockout ended, Hadfield tweeted a photo of himself holding a Maple Leafs logo, and stated he was "ready to cheer [his team] on from orbit".

[ 11 ] He sang the Canadian National Anthem during the Toronto Maple Leafs and Montreal Canadiens game on January 18, 2014, at the Air Canada Centre in Toronto , Ontario.

[ 12 ] In November 2022, he was invited by coach John Herdman to speak to the Canada soccer team ahead of their first match in the FIFA World Cup in Qatar.

[ 13 ] Education and military career Hadfield attended White Oaks Secondary School in Oakville, Ontario , until his senior year and then graduated as an Ontario Scholar from Milton District High School in 1977. As a member of the Royal Canadian Air Cadets , he earned a glider pilot scholarship at age 15 and a powered pilot scholarship at age 16. After graduating from high school in 1978, he joined the Canadian Armed Forces and spent two years at Royal Roads Military College followed by two years at the Royal Military College of Canada , where he received a B.Eng.

degree ( with honours ) in mechanical engineering in 1982.

[ 2 ] He also conducted his post-graduate research at the University of Waterloo in 1982.

[ 14 ] Before graduating, he also underwent basic flight training at CFB Portage la Prairie . In 1983, he took honours as the top graduate from Basic Jet Training at CFB Moose Jaw , and then went on to train as a tactical fighter pilot with 410 Tactical Fighter Operational Training Squadron at CFB Cold Lake , flying the Canadair CF-116 Freedom Fighter and the McDonnell Douglas CF-18 Hornet . After completing his fighter training, Hadfield flew CF-18 Hornets with 425 Tactical Fighter Squadron , flying intercept missions for NORAD . He was the first CF-18 pilot to intercept a Soviet Tupolev Tu 95 long-range bomber in the Canadian Arctic.

[ 7 ] In the late 1980s, Hadfield attended the U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base and served as an exchange officer with the U.S. Navy at Strike Test Directorate at the Patuxent River Naval Air Station . His accomplishments from 1989 to 1992 included testing the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet and LTV A-7 Corsair II aircraft; performing research work with NASA on pitch control margin simulation and flight; completing the first military flight of F/A-18 enhanced performance engines; piloting the first flight test of the National Aerospace Plane external burning hydrogen propulsion engine; developing a new handling qualities rating scale for high angle-of-attack test; and participating in the F/A-18 out-of-control recovery test program.

[ 7 ] In May 1992, Hadfield graduated with an M.Sc.

degree in aviation systems from the University of Tennessee Space Institute , where his thesis concerned high-angle attack aerodynamics of the F/A-18 Hornet fighter jet.

[ 8 ] In total, Hadfield has flown over 70 different types of aircraft.

[ 7 ] Astronaut career Chris Hadfield in 2012 Hadfield was selected to become one of four new Canadian astronauts from a field of 5,330 applicants in June 1992. Three of those four ( Dafydd Williams , Julie Payette and Hadfield) have flown in space. The fourth candidate, Michael McKay , resigned as an astronaut in 1995.

[ 15 ] Hadfield was assigned by the CSA to the NASA Johnson Space Center in Houston , Texas in August, where he addressed technical and safety issues for Shuttle Operations Development, contributed to the development of the glass shuttle cockpit , and supported shuttle launches at the Kennedy Space Center , in Florida. In addition, Hadfield was NASA's chief CAPCOM (capsule communicator ) , the voice of mission control to astronauts in orbit, for 25 Space Shuttle missions. From 1996 to 2000, he represented CSA astronauts and coordinated their activities as the chief astronaut for the CSA.

[ 7 ] He was the director of operations for NASA at the Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center (GCTC) in Star City , Russia from 2001 until 2003. Some of his duties included co-ordination and direction of all International Space Station crew activities in Russia, oversight of training and crew support staff, as well as policy negotiation with the Russian Space Program and other International Partners. He also trained and became fully qualified to be a flight engineer cosmonaut in the Soyuz TMA spacecraft, and to perform spacewalks in the Russian Orlan spacesuit .

[ 7 ] Hadfield is a civilian CSA astronaut, having retired as a colonel from the Canadian Armed Forces in 2003 after 25 years of military service. He was chief of robotics for the NASA Astronaut Office at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas from 2003 to 2006 and was chief of International Space Station Operations from 2006 to 2008.

[ 7 ] In 2008 and 2009, he trained as a back-up to Robert Thirsk on Expedition 21 .

[ 16 ] In May 2010, Hadfield served as the commander of the NEEMO 14 mission aboard the Aquarius underwater laboratory , living and working underwater for fourteen days.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] NASA announced in 2010 that Hadfield would become the first Canadian commander of the International Space Station, leading Expedition 35 after its launch on December 19, 2012.

[ 19 ] His craft docked with the station on December 21. He remained on the station for five months, transferring control to Pavel Vinogradov and departing on May 13, 2013.

[ 20 ] In June 2013, one month after completing his third trip to space, Hadfield announced his retirement from the Canadian Space Agency, effective July 3, 2013.

[ 21 ] Hadfield stated that after living primarily in the United States since the 1980s for his career, he would be moving back to Canada, "making good on a promise I made my wife nearly 30 years ago—that yes, eventually, we would be moving back to Canada." [ 21 ] He noted that he plans to pursue private interests outside government there.

[ 21 ] Hadfield is enthusiastic about the prospects for a crewed mission to Mars, and when asked in 2011 if he would consider being the first to visit even if the journey to Mars were one-way, he said "I would be honoured to be given the opportunity." [ 22 ] STS-74 Main article: STS-74 Hadfield served as mission specialist 1 on STS-74 in November 1995. It was NASA's second space shuttle mission to rendezvous and dock with the Russian Space Station Mir . During the flight, the crew of Space Shuttle Atlantis attached a five-tonne docking module to Mir and transferred over 1,000 kg of food, water, and scientific supplies to the cosmonauts. Hadfield flew as the first Canadian to operate the Canadarm in orbit, and the only Canadian ever to board Mir .

[ 7 ] STS-100 Main article: STS-100 Hadfield spacewalking during the STS-100 mission In April 2001, Hadfield served as mission specialist 1 on STS-100, International Space Station (ISS) assembly Flight 6A. The crew of Space Shuttle Endeavour delivered and installed Canadarm2 , the new Canadian-built robotic arm, as well as the Italian-made resupply module Raffaello . During the 11-day flight, Hadfield performed two spacewalks, which made him the first Canadian to ever leave a spacecraft and float freely in space. During his first spacewalk Hadfield experienced severe eye irritation due to the anti-fog solution used to polish his spacesuit visor, temporarily blinding him and forcing him to vent oxygen into space. In total, Hadfield spent 14 hours, 50 minutes outside, travelling 10 times around the world during his spacewalk.

[ 7 ] [ 23 ] International Space Station Hadfield answering media questions during unveiling of the Canadian $5 Frontier Series banknote during Expedition 35 on April 30, 2013. He unveiled the $10 banknote on the same day.

Main articles: Soyuz TMA-07M , Expedition 34 , and Expedition 35 On December 19, 2012, Hadfield launched in the Soyuz TMA-07M flight for a long duration stay on board the ISS as part of Expedition 35. He arrived at the station two days later, as scheduled, [ 24 ] and became the first Canadian to command the ISS when the crew of Expedition 34 departed in March 2013.

[ 7 ] On May 12, 2013, he turned over command of the ISS, and returned home aboard the Soyuz spacecraft on May 13.

[ 25 ] He received significant media exposure during his time on the ISS, and ended his time on the station by paying tribute to David Bowie with a rendition of " Space Oddity ".

[ 26 ] Social media Hadfield has a social media presence, with over 2,400,000 Twitter followers as of August 2019 [update] .

[ 27 ] He created one of the top Reddit ask me anything (AMA) threads of all time on February 17, 2013.

[ 28 ] He also maintains accounts on Facebook, [ 29 ] Tumblr, [ 30 ] and YouTube.

[ 31 ] His exchanges with William Shatner and other Star Trek actors have received media coverage.

[ 32 ] Hadfield has been described by Forbes as "perhaps the most social media savvy astronaut ever to leave Earth".

[ 28 ] Hadfield enlisted the help of his son Evan to manage his social media presence. They work in tandem to share information over the internet about aspects of life as an astronaut, both the scientific and the mundane.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Music During his free time on Expedition 35 , Hadfield recorded music for an album, using the Larrivée Parlor guitar previously brought to the ISS.

[ 35 ] The first song recorded in space, "Jewel in the Night", was released via YouTube on Christmas Eve 2012.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] His collaboration with Ed Robertson of Barenaked Ladies and the Wexford Gleeks, Is Somebody Singing?

—sometimes shortened I.S.S.

—was aired on the CBC Radio program Q and released by CBC Music online on February 8, 2013.

[ 38 ] Hadfield sang Is Somebody Singing along with singers across Canada for the national Music Monday program.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Hadfield has been credited musically on his brother Dave Hadfield 's albums. He also sang the "Canada Song" with his brother, released on YouTube on Canada Day , 2014.

[ 41 ] On May 12, 2013, after handing over command of the ISS, but before returning home, Hadfield released a music video recorded on the ISS of a modified rendition of " Space Oddity " by David Bowie .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] As of February 2025 [update] , the video has over 55 million views on YouTube.

[ 42 ] The performance was the subject of a piece by Glenn Fleishman in The Economist on May 22, 2013, analysing the legal implications of publicly performing a copyrighted work of music while in Earth orbit .

[ 44 ] In October 2015, Hadfield released Space Sessions: Songs From a Tin Can , an album of songs that he had recorded on the International Space Station.

[ 45 ] Post-retirement In October 2013 Hadfield was interviewed by Maclean's magazine and appeared on its cover wearing face make-up to "replicate Bowie 's famed image from the cover of his Aladdin Sane album." [ 46 ] Hadfield wrote an article for the December 2013 edition of Wired magazine in which he reflects on his time spent on the International Space Station.

[ 47 ] Hadfield with Rusty Schweickart , Alexei Leonov and Garrett Reisman at the Starmus Festival in 2016 On October 8, 2013, the University of Waterloo announced that Hadfield will join the university as a professor for a three-year term beginning in the Fall of 2014. Hadfield's work was expected to involve instructing and advising roles in aviation programs offered by the Faculty of Environment and Faculty of Science , as well as assisting in ongoing research regarding the health of astronauts with the Faculty of Applied Health Sciences .

[ 48 ] In 2017, Hadfield hosted the BBC show Astronauts: Do You Have What It Takes?

alongside Kevin Fong and Iya Whiteley, where 12 contestants compete to earn Hadfield's approval and recommendation as a candidate for future applications to become an astronaut.

[ 49 ] The challenges involved replicated real tests carried out by the different Space Agencies at facilities in Europe and America, including hypoxia and centrifuge training, with contestants eliminated each week.

Hadfield hosted a web series about space exploration on the video platform MasterClass .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] On February 9, 2021, Virgin Galactic announced that Hadfield would be joining their Space Advisory Board to help "provide advice to senior management as the company moves forward to open space for the benefit of all." [ 52 ] Hadfield will be joined by former astronaut Sandra Magnus and Chief Scientist of Cubic Corporation David A. Whelan .

Writing Hadfield's 2013 autobiography, An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth: What Going to Space Taught Me About Ingenuity, Determination, and Being Prepared for Anything [ 3 ] deals with his professional life and work, and with numerous examples from the lead-up to his command of Expedition 35.

[ 53 ] The book was a New York Times bestseller [ 54 ] and was also the bestselling book in Canada on a Canadian subject.

[ 55 ] In 2021, Hadfield released his debut novel The Apollo Murders , a thriller set in the Cold War . A sequel entitled The Defector , was released in 2023.

[ 56 ] Special honours and affiliations Hadfield at Brain Bar Budapest, 2016 Hadfield is the recipient of numerous awards and special honours. These include appointment to the Order of Ontario in 1996, [ 57 ] as an Officer of the Order of Canada in 2014, [ 58 ] receipt of the Vanier Award in 2001, NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 2002, the Queen's Golden Jubilee Medal in 2002, and the Queen's Diamond Jubilee Medal in 2012. He is also the only Canadian to have received both a military and civilian Meritorious Service Cross , the military medal in 2001 and the civilian one in 2013.

[ 59 ] In 1988, Hadfield was granted the Liethen-Tittle Award (top pilot graduate of the USAF Test Pilot School ) and was named US Navy Test Pilot of the Year in 1991. He was inducted into Canada's Aviation Hall of Fame in 2005. Eleven years later, he was recognized as a Genius 100 Visionary [ 60 ] and contributed his vision of the future in the 3D publishing milestone '"Genius: 100 Visions of the Future."' [ 61 ] Further, the Royal Military College granted Hadfield an honorary Doctorate of Engineering in 1996 and he was presented with an honorary Doctorate of Laws from Trent University three years later. In 2013, Hadfield was presented with an Honorary Diploma from Nova Scotia Community College .

[ 62 ] Hadfield was commemorated on Royal Canadian Mint silver and gold coins for his spacewalk to install Canadarm2 on the International Space Station in 2001.

[ 7 ] In Sarnia , the city airport was renamed to Sarnia Chris Hadfield Airport in 1997 [ 63 ] and there are two public schools named after him – one in Milton, Ontario, and the other in Bradford, Ontario.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] The asteroid 14143 Hadfield is also named after him. In 2005, the Royal Canadian Air Cadets 820 Milton Blue Thunder Squadron was renamed as the 820 Chris Hadfield Squadron in honour of Hadfield, who was a cadet there from 1971 to 1978.

[ 66 ] The Town of Milton also named a municipal park and street after Hadfield.

[ 67 ] His name was in 2014 added to the Wall of Honour at the Royal Military College of Canada in Kingston, Ontario , [ 68 ] and, in 2020, the newly discovered Andrena hadfieldi , a species of bee, was named in his honour.

[ 69 ] His affiliations include membership in the Royal Military College Club, Society of Experimental Test Pilots , Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute, and serving as honorary patron of Lambton College , former trustee of Lakefield College School , board member of the International Space School Foundation, and executive with the Association of Space Explorers.

Upon his taking command of the International Space Station, Elizabeth II , Queen of Canada , sent Hadfield a personal message of congratulations, stating "I am pleased to transmit my personal best wishes, and those of all Canadians, to Colonel Christopher Hadfield as he takes command of the International Space Station".

[ 70 ] Elizabeth's successor, Charles III , held an audience with Hadfield at Buckingham Palace on February 9, 2023, to discuss sustainability in space.

[ 71 ] Bibliography Books Hadfield, Chris (2013).

An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth: What Going to Space Taught Me About Ingenuity, Determination, and Being Prepared for Anything . New York: Little, Brown and Company .

ISBN 978-0-316-25301-7 .

Hadfield, Chris (2014).

You Are Here: Around the World in 92 Minutes: Photographs from the International Space Station . New York: Little, Brown and Company .

ISBN 978-0-316-37964-9 .

Hadfield, Chris (2016).

The Darkest Dark . Illustrated by Terry and Eric Fan . New York: Little, Brown and Company .

ISBN 978-0-316-39472-7 .

Hadfield, Chris (2021).

The Apollo Murders . New York: Little, Brown and Company .

ISBN 978-0-316-26473-0 .

Hadfield, Chris (2023).

The Defector . New York: Little, Brown and Company .

ISBN 978-0-316-56502-8 .

Essays and reporting Hadfield, Chris (November 2013).

"We Should Treat Earth as Kindly as We Treat Spacecraft" .

Wired . Vol. 21, no. 12 . Retrieved December 5, 2016 .

Discography Albums Title Album details Peak chart positions Certifications CAN [ 72 ] Space Sessions: Songs From A Tin Can Released: October 31, 2015 Label: Warner Music Formats: CD, DD , LP 10 [ 73 ] Guest appearances Title Year Other artist(s) Album "So Easy" 2014 Emm Gryner Torrential "Re-Entry" 2021 TWRP New & Improved Hadfield also participates as a vocalist and guitarist for the astronaut band Max Q .

See also List of University of Waterloo people References This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration .

^ Hadfield, Chris.

"@Cmdr_Hadfield" .

Twitter . Retrieved March 22, 2020 .

^ a b Davison, Janet (December 7, 2012).

"Chris Hadfield ready for 'surreal' space station odyssey" .

CBC News . Retrieved December 7, 2012 .

^ a b Hadfield, Chris (2013).

An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth: What Going to Space Taught Me About Ingenuity, Determination, and Being Prepared for Anything . New York City: Little, Brown and Company . pp.

2–6 .

ISBN 978-0-316-25301-7 .

LCCN 2013943519 .

^ An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth (Hadfield), pp. 7–10, 289.

^ Agency, Canadian Space (June 3, 2008).

"Astronaut Chris Hadfield's biography" .

Canadian Space Agency . Retrieved December 23, 2023 .

^ "Hadfield personal Twitter Account" . January 31, 2013 . Retrieved October 25, 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Biography of Chris Hadfield" . Canadian Space Agency. April 13, 2013.

^ a b "UTSI Grad Aboard Atlantis Space Shuttle" (Press release). University of Tennessee Knoxville. November 14, 1995 . Retrieved June 27, 2013 .

^ An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth (Hadfield), p. 91.

^ An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth (Hadfield), p. 254.

^ "Famous fans of the Toronto Maple Leafs" .

metronews.ca .

Metro International . April 23, 2013. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016 . Retrieved December 6, 2016 .

^ "Chris Hadfield sings 'O Canada' at Leafs game" .

canada.com .

Postmedia Network . January 19, 2014. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016 . Retrieved December 6, 2016 .

^ Davidson, Neil (November 24, 2022).

"Herdman turns to Chris Hadfield to launch Canada into new soccer stratosphere" . CBC.

^ "Chris Hadfield comes home" .

Waterloo Stories . December 3, 2013 . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ "Biography of Michael McKay" .

www.asc-csa.gc.ca . January 28, 2015.

^ "Spaceflight mission report: Soyuz TMA-15" . Spacefacts.de . Retrieved September 2, 2010 .

^ NASA (July 9, 2010).

"NASA – NEEMO 14" . NASA . Retrieved September 26, 2011 .

^ Alexander, Aaron (2010).

"Archive for the 'NEEMO 14' Mission" . NURC. Archived from the original on March 28, 2012 . Retrieved September 26, 2011 .

^ Andrew Chung (September 2, 2010).

"Space: A (partly) Canadian frontier" .

Toronto Star .

^ Irvine, Chris (May 13, 2013), "Astronaut Chris Hadfield returns to Earth" , The Daily Telegraph , London, archived from the original on May 14, 2013 , retrieved May 13, 2013 ^ a b c Canadian Press (June 10, 2013), "Astronaut Chris Hadfield to retire from Canadian Space Agency" , The Toronto Star , retrieved June 10, 2013 ^ "I am an astronaut who has been to space twice..." Reddit. April 9, 2011 . Retrieved August 30, 2011 .

^ An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth (Hadfield), pp. 86–96.

^ "New Expedition 34 Crew Members Welcomed Aboard Station" . NASA . Retrieved December 24, 2012 .

^ "Astronaut Chris Hadfield returns to Earth" .

Telegraph . London. May 13, 2013. Archived from the original on May 14, 2013.

^ Knapp, Alex (May 13, 2013).

"Astronaut Chris Hadfield Sings David Bowie As He Departs The International Space Station" .

Forbes . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ "Chris Hadfield Verified account:@Cmdr_Hadfield" . twitter.com . Retrieved July 9, 2017 .

^ a b Kantrowitz, Alex (February 18, 2013).

"Five Highlights From Commander Chris Hadfield's Reddit AMA From Space" .

Forbes .

^ "Col. Chris Hadfield (@AstronautChrisHadfield)" .

Facebook . Retrieved March 12, 2018 .

^ "Col. Chris Hadfield" . Tumblr.com.

^ "Rare Earth" .

YouTube . Retrieved March 12, 2018 .

^ " 'Star Trek' Actors Beams Hellos to Astronaut in Space" . Space.com. February 7, 2013.

^ Woods, Allan (February 22, 2013).

"Chris Hadfield: the superstar astronaut taking social media by storm" .

The Guardian . London.

^ An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth (Hadfield), pp. 223–226, 229–231.

^ Hadfield, Chris (February 8, 2013).

Cmdr. Chris Hadfield on pickin' Larrivée Parlor in Space (YouTube). Rare Earth . Retrieved October 31, 2019 .

^ Pearlman, Shaina (December 28, 2012).

"Listen to the First Song Recorded in Space" .

Paste . Retrieved February 8, 2013 .

^ Hadfield 2013, p. 224.

^ Howell, Elizabeth (February 8, 2013).

"Astronaut and Musician Perform 1st Original Duet from Space and Earth" .

Space.com . Retrieved October 31, 2019 .

^ Bowman, John (May 6, 2013).

"Chris Hadfield leads nationwide singalong on Music Monday" .

CBC.ca . Retrieved October 31, 2019 .

^ Hadfield 2013, p. 228.

^ Hadfield, Chris; Hadfield, Dave (July 1, 2014).

Canada Song (YouTube). Rare Earth . Retrieved July 1, 2014 .

^ a b Hadfield, Chris (May 12, 2013).

Space Oddity (YouTube). Rare Earth . Retrieved April 10, 2022 .

^ Hadfield 2013, pp. 251–252.

^ Fleishman, Glenn (May 22, 2013).

"How does copyright work in space?" .

The Economist . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ "I am Chris Hadfield. AMA" . IAmA.

Reddit . October 23, 2015 . Retrieved October 24, 2015 .

^ "Behind the scenes on our Bowie-inspired Chris Hadfield cover" . Macleans.

^ Hadfield, Chris (December 2013). "The View From 250 Miles Up". Alpha.

WIRED . pp.

33– 38.

^ University of Waterloo (October 8, 2013).

"Canadian astronaut Chris Hadfield joins University of Waterloo" .

Waterloo Stories . Retrieved October 8, 2013 .

^ "Astronauts: Do You Have What It Takes?" . 2017 . Retrieved September 16, 2017 .

^ "Chris Hadfield Teaches Space Exploration" .

MasterClass . Archived from the original on March 4, 2019 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ Mosher, Dave (July 8, 2018).

"Astronaut Chris Hadfield says we could have gone to Mars decades ago — here's why we haven't" .

Business Insider .

Hadfield has since retired as astronaut, but he recently shared some of his spaceflight knowledge as part of a new web course on the online education platform MasterClass.

^ "Virgin Galactic Launches Space Advisory Board" . Virgin Galactic . Retrieved February 13, 2021 .

^ Callahan, Maureen (October 6, 2013).

"Astronaut's worst fear: 'floating off into space' " .

New York Post . pp.

18– 19 . Retrieved October 7, 2013 .

^ "Best Sellers" .

The New York Times Book Review . November 17, 2013 . Retrieved December 31, 2013 .

^ "MySTORE Coast-to-Coast Bestsellers List" (PDF) . November 10–16, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 1, 2014 . Retrieved December 31, 2013 .

^ "Explore the written universe of Chris Hadfield" .

chrishadfield.ca . Retrieved March 29, 2024 .

^ "Honours and Awards: Order of Ontario" . Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018 . Retrieved June 24, 2013 .

^ "Order of Canada Appointments" . The Governor General of Canada . Retrieved July 1, 2014 .

^ "Chris Hadfield gets meritorious service medal" . Globalnews.ca. June 27, 2013 . Retrieved July 1, 2013 .

^ "Genius 100 – An active and engaged community of 100 exceptionally imaginative and impactful human beings" . Genius100visions.com . Retrieved February 26, 2022 .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "The Making of the 3D Publishing Milestone: Genius: 100 Visions of the Future" .

YouTube . November 21, 2018.

^ "Honorary Diplomas" . NSCC. June 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 22, 2018 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ "Sarnia Chris Hadfield Airport" . Sarniaairport.com . Retrieved January 16, 2012 .

^ "Chris Hadfield Public School" . Chr.hdsb.ca . Retrieved December 2, 2017 .

^ nurun.com (June 25, 2013).

"New school named after Hadfield | Local | News" .

Barrie Examiner . Archived from the original on November 3, 2013 . Retrieved July 1, 2013 .

^ "About 820 – 820 Milton Squadron" . Sponsoring Committee for 820 Chris Hadfield Squadron, Royal Canadian Air Cadets. Archived from the original on January 7, 2014 . Retrieved January 17, 2014 .

^ LeBlanc, Steve (April 6, 2017).

"STREET SMARTS: Milton's Chris Hadfield Way has 'out of this world' connection" .

www.insidehalton.com . Retrieved December 2, 2017 .

^ McKay, Julia (September 28, 2014).

"Hadfield humbled by honour" .

The Kingston Whig-Standard . Retrieved December 9, 2021 .

^ "New species of bee named after Canadian astronaut Chris Hadfield" .

Global News . Retrieved July 4, 2020 .

^ Elizabeth II (March 13, 2013).

"Message from The Queen to Colonel Hadfield, 13 March 2013" . Queen's Printer. Archived from the original on March 16, 2013.

^ Davison, Janet (February 12, 2023), The royals have their causes, but how much difference can they make?

, CBC News , retrieved June 4, 2023 ^ "Chris Hadfield – Chart history" .

Billboard .

Prometheus Global Media . Retrieved October 31, 2015 .

^ "Billboard Canadian Albums: Top Albums Chart" .

Billboard .

Prometheus Global Media . October 31, 2015 . Retrieved December 6, 2016 .

Further reading Dr. Richard Arthur Preston (1982).

Canada's RMC – A History of Royal Military College (2nd ed.).

R. Guy C. Smith, ed. (1984).

As You Were! Ex-Cadets Remember . Vol. II.

Kingston, Ontario : Royal Military College of Canada.

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chris Hadfield .

Official website NASA astronaut biography Archived September 21, 2020, at the Wayback Machine CSA astronaut biography Spacefacts biography of Chris Hadfield Video of Chris Hadfield on The Agenda with Steve Paikin, "Are We Bound for Space?" panel discussion with Lawrence Krauss , Donna Shirley , Chris McKay, Karl Schroeder and Robert D. Richards Chris Hadfield You Tube Channel Chris Hadfield at TED "What I learned from going blind in space" (TED2014) Appearances on C-SPAN Preceded by Kevin Ford ISS Expedition Commander March 13 to May 13, 2013 Succeeded by Pavel Vinogradov v t e NASA Astronaut Group 14, "The Hogs", 1992 NASA Astronaut Group 13 ← NASA Astronaut Group 14 → NASA Astronaut Group 15 Pilots Scott J. Horowitz Brent Jett Kevin Kregel Kent Rominger Mission specialists Daniel T. Barry Charles Brady Catherine Coleman Michael Gernhardt John M. Grunsfeld Wendy Lawrence Jerry Linenger Richard Linnehan Michael López-Alegría Scott E. Parazynski Winston Scott Steven Smith Joseph Tanner Andy Thomas Mary Weber International mission specialists Marc Garneau (Canada) Chris Hadfield (Canada) Maurizio Cheli (Italy) Jean-François Clervoy (France) Koichi Wakata (Japan) v t e NASA Astronaut Groups NASA Astronaut Corps Groups 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Related List of astronauts by year of selection Astronaut ranks and positions List of United States Marine Corps astronauts List of United States Space Force astronauts v t e Canadian Space Agency Canadian astronauts Active Jeremy Hansen David Saint-Jacques Jenni Sidey-Gibbons Joshua Kutryk Retired Marc Garneau Roberta Bondar Steven MacLean Chris Hadfield Robert Thirsk Bjarni Tryggvason Dafydd Williams Julie Payette Michael McKay Ken Money Satellites Alouette 1 Alouette 2 Anik series BRITE CASSIOPE Hermes ISIS 1 ISIS 2 M3MSat MOST MSAT-1 NEOSSat Nimiq series RADARSAT-1 RADARSAT-2 RADARSAT Constellation SCISAT-1 Sapphire Other space technology Black Brant rocket Canadarm Canadarm2 Dextre FGS/NIRISS MOPITT OSIRIS Facilities John H. Chapman Space Centre David Florida Laboratory Saskatoon CSA Building Contractors COM DEV MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates ( MDA Space Missions / Spar Aerospace ) Magellan Aerospace ( Bristol Aerospace ) Telesat Related institutions Canadian Geospace Monitoring Communications Research Centre Canada Defence Research and Development Canada National Research Council International partners ESA NASA ISRO JAXA SNSB Other Bell Satellite TV Churchill Rocket Research Range International Space Station Lunar Gateway Shaw Direct v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7rs49
Cached time: 20250817044853
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.512 seconds
Real time usage: 1.830 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11150/1000000
Revision size: 48665/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 695983/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15117/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 284796/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.829/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12579776/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1321.964      1 -total
 29.98%  396.358      1 Template:Reflist
 21.09%  278.822      1 Template:Infobox_astronaut
 18.16%  240.115     39 Template:Navbox
 15.18%  200.647     39 Template:Cite_web
  8.91%  117.767      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  8.56%  113.200      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.48%  112.071      8 Template:Cite_book
  6.24%   82.514      1 Template:NASA_Astronaut_Group_14
  5.48%   72.484      2 Template:Infobox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:78114:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044853 and revision id 1305664751. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chris_Hadfield&oldid=1305664751 " Categories : 1959 births Living people Aquanauts Canadian astronauts Canadian guitarists 21st-century Canadian memoirists Canadian people of English descent Canadian people of Scottish descent Canadian test pilots Commanders of the International Space Station Major Tom Members of the Order of Ontario Mensans Mir crew members Officers of the Order of Canada People from Milton, Ontario Writers from Sarnia Recipients of the Meritorious Service Decoration Royal Canadian Air Force officers Royal Military College of Canada alumni Sandford Fleming Award recipients Space Shuttle program astronauts Spacewalkers University of Tennessee at Martin alumni University of Waterloo alumni Wired (magazine) people Musicians from Sarnia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use Canadian English from December 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian English Use mdy dates from February 2021 Pages using infobox military person with embed Articles with hCards Articles containing potentially dated statements from August 2019 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2025 Wikipedia articles incorporating text from NASA Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Webarchive template wayback links People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 11:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chris Hadfield 36 languages Add topic

