Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organisation 2 Worldwide 3 Naming 4 Services 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Météo-France 16 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français Igbo Italiano 日本語 Português Română Русский Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National meteorological and climatological service of France This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Météo-France" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(October 2012) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,151 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Météo-France]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Météo-France}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Météo-France Department overview Formed 18 June 1993 ; 32 years ago ( 1993-06-18 ) Jurisdiction France [ a ] Headquarters 73, avenue de Paris, Saint-Mandé 42, avenue Gaspard-Coriolis, Toulouse Employees 2735 (as of 2020 [update] ) [ 1 ] Minister responsible Christophe Béchu , Ministry of Ecological Transition and Cohesion of Territories Parent department Ministry of Ecological Transition and Cohesion of Territories Website meteofrance .com Footnotes ^ Includes overseas territories and collectivites Météo-France is the official French meteorological administration, also offering services to Andorra and Monaco . It has the powers of the state and can exercise them in relation to meteorology. Météo-France is in charge of observing, studying, and forecasting weather and monitoring snowpack . The organization also issues weather warnings for the Metropole and the overseas territories . Météo-France is also in charge of recording and predicting the climate.

Organisation [ edit ] The organisation was established by decree in June 1993 and is a department of the Ministry of Transportation. It is headquartered in Paris but many domestic operations have been decentralised to Toulouse . Its budget of around €300 million is funded by state grants, aeronautic royalties and sale of commercial services.

Météo-France has a particularly strong international presence, and is the French representative at the World Meteorological Organization . The organisation is a leading member of EUMETSAT , responsible for the procurement of Meteosat weather satellites. It is also member of the Institut au service du spatial, de ses applications et technologies . It is also a critical national weather service member of the ECMWF and hosts one of two major centres of the IFS numerical weather prediction model widely used worldwide.

Worldwide [ edit ] In addition to its operations in metropolitan France, the agency provides forecasts and warnings for the French overseas départements and collectivités . It has four sub-divisions based in Martinique (with further divisions serving Guadeloupe and French Guiana ), New Caledonia , French Polynesia and Réunion . Some of these sub-divisions have particularly important international responsibilities: For example, the French Guiana office, based at Cayenne–Félix Eboué Airport , maintains facilities at the ESA / CNES Centre Spatial Guyanais spaceport in Kourou which assists with launch campaigns of the Ariane rocket .

The RSMC La Réunion sub-division is the official World Meteorological Organisation designated Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre (RSMC) for the provision of forecasts and warnings of tropical cyclones in the south-west Indian Ocean .

The French Polynesia sub-division, whilst not the official RSMC for tropical cyclones in the South Pacific, has been mandated by the WMO to issue forecasts and warnings of tropical cyclones for the neighbouring British Pitcairn Islands .

Naming [ edit ] Although the original name of the organisation was " Météo-France ", with acute accents and normal French capitalisation, all the publications made by Météo-France are now using the name written with capitals only, without any accents, everywhere the name is used as a trademark for the products and services delivered by the national organisation.

This trademark decision reflects the need to have its name not altered in electronic documents due to transcoding errors, and to allow easier international references in many languages, including when referencing the organisation itself (in copyright notices for example, or when citing sources).

The name in capitals or with normal capitalisation with accents is protected internationally under trademark law, and as an organisation name. Some non-binding information documents sometimes forget the hyphen in the name (but the hyphen is normally required).

Services [ edit ] Météo-France has a warning system to inform the population of dangerous weather conditions.

Météo-France heat alert, part of its vigilance system [ fr ] , was put in place following the 2003 European heat wave . The 2022 heat wave was the earliest in the year since records began and marked the fourth time that a red heat alert had been issued since the protocol was activated after the 2003 heat wave .

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] EUMETSAT (international European organisation) References [ edit ] ^ "Les femmes et les hommes de Météo-France" .

meteofrance.fr . Retrieved 2022-07-23 .

^ "Canicule : Météo France place 12 départements en vigilance rouge, 25 départements en orange à partir de vendredi" .

Franceinfo (in French). 16 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Météo-France .

Official website Météo-France Antille-Guyane Météo-France La Réunion Météo-France Nouvelle-Calédonie Météo-France Polynésie Française Météo-France on Top 500 Meteo France International METNEXT Météo-France Régie Meteorage PREDICT Services v t e Établissement public à caractère administratif Ministry of Armed Forces Institut supérieur de l'aéronautique et de l'espace ENSTA Paris École nationale supérieure de techniques avancées Bretagne École polytechnique Naval Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service Établissement de communication et de production audiovisuelle de la Défense Établissement public d'insertion de la défense Musée de l'Armée Musée national de la Marine Musée de l'air et de l'espace Académie de Marine Etablissement public national des fonds de prévoyance militaire et de l'aéronautique National Office for Veterans and Victims of War Ministry of the Interior Right of Asylum in France Conseil national des activités privées de sécurité Ministry of Labour, Employment and Economic Inclusion Agence Nationale pour l'Amélioration des Conditions de Travail Ministry of Economics and Finance Mines Paris – PSL École nationale supérieure des mines de Saint-Étienne École des Mines de Douai École des mines d'Alès École des Mines de Nantes École des Mines d'Albi-Carmaux Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation Groupe Concours Polytechniques 3 of the 4 Groupe des écoles nationales d'ingénieurs École nationale d'ingénieurs de Brest École nationale d'ingénieurs de Metz École nationale d'ingénieurs de Tarbes 7 of the 9 Instituts d'études politiques École nationale supérieure de l'électronique et de ses applications École nationale supérieure d'informatique pour l'industrie et l'entreprise École nationale supérieure de la nature et du paysage École nationale supérieure des arts et techniques du théâtre École nationale supérieure Louis-Lumière Côte d'Azur Observatory Jean-François Champollion University Center for Teaching and Research Institut national supérieur de formation et de recherche pour l'éducation des jeunes handicapés et les enseignements adaptés National Computer Center for Higher Education Ministry of National Education, Youth and Sports Centre international d'études pédagogiques National Centre for Distance Education Ward of the Nation Ministry of Agriculture and Food Établissement national des produits de l'agriculture et de la mer Agence de services et de paiement Institut français du cheval et de l'équitation Inventaire Forestier National Ministry of Ecological Transition Agence nationale de l'habitat Agence de l'eau École nationale des ponts et chaussées École nationale de l'aviation civile Institut national de l'information géographique et forestière Météo-France French Office for Biodiversity Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs Agency for French Education Abroad Ministry of Culture Bibliothèque nationale de France Bibliothèque publique d'information Centre des monuments nationaux Centre Pompidou Centre national des arts plastiques Centre national du cinéma et de l'image animée Centre national du livre Cité nationale de l'histoire de l'immigration CNSAD Conservatoire de Paris Conservatoire national supérieur de musique et de danse de Lyon École du Louvre Écoles nationales supérieure d'architecture École nationale supérieure d'arts de Cergy-Pontoise École nationale supérieure de la photographie École nationale supérieure des arts décoratifs Beaux-Arts de Paris Établissement public des musées d'Orsay et de l'Orangerie - Valéry Giscard d'Estaing Opérateur du patrimoine et des projets immobiliers de la culture Institut national du patrimoine Institut national de recherches archéologiques préventives Palace of Fontainebleau Guimet Museum Musée national Jean-Jacques Henner Sèvres – Cité de la céramique Louvre Musée national Gustave Moreau Musée Picasso Musée Rodin Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles Ministry of Solidarity and Health École nationale supérieure de sécurité sociale Ministry of Territorial Development Institut national des études territoriales Not classified IAE Paris Sorbonne Business School Institut des hautes études de défense nationale French Academy of Technologies Agence centrale des organismes de sécurité sociale Agence nationale de sécurité sanitaire de l'alimentation, de l'environnement et du travail Agence nationale de la recherche AD Isère Drac Romanche Centre d'études et de recherches sur les qualifications Institut national supérieur de formation et de recherche pour l'éducation des jeunes handicapés et les enseignements adaptés Centre national des œuvres universitaires et scolaires Centre régional des œuvres universitaires et scolaires Caisse nationale de solidarité pour l'autonomie Centre de ressources, d'expertise et de performance sportives Chamber of Commerce and Industry Service départemental d'incendie et de secours Île-de-France Mobilités Association syndicale autorisée v t e National meteorological organizations Africa Algeria Ghana Mozambique South Africa Americas Argentina Bermuda Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Ecuador Guatemala Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Asia Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan China Hong Kong (PRC) India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan North Korea South Korea Macau (PRC) Malaysia Pakistan Palestine Philippines Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Taiwan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Vietnam Europe Austria Belgium Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Ukraine Oceania Australia Fiji New Zealand Réunion (France) Tonga Tuvalu Regional: Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts European Severe Storms Laboratory Global: World Meteorological Organization Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hq25j
Cached time: 20250817173359
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.390 seconds
Real time usage: 0.527 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3365/1000000
Revision size: 7971/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 109572/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8141/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 38208/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.232/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6106319/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  453.507      1 -total
 20.89%   94.743      1 Template:Infobox_government_agency
 19.68%   89.232      1 Template:Infobox
 17.56%   79.647      2 Template:Reflist
 17.46%   79.185      2 Template:Ambox
 14.93%   67.698      2 Template:Navbox
 14.73%   66.808      1 Template:Établissement_public_à_caractère_administratif
 13.78%   62.474      1 Template:Cite_web
 11.47%   52.018      1 Template:Short_description
 11.36%   51.513      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4732627:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817173359 and revision id 1304047980. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Météo-France&oldid=1304047980 " Categories : Governmental meteorological agencies in Europe Regional Specialized Meteorological Centres Météo-France 1993 establishments in France Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 16:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Météo-France 16 languages Add topic

