Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Books Toggle Books subsection 1.1 The Forgotten Revolution 1.2 L'America dimenticata 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Lucio Russo 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian physicist, mathematician and historian of science (1944–2025) For the New York State Assemblyman, see Lucio Russo (politician) .

Lucio Russo Russo in 2014 Born ( 1944-11-22 ) 22 November 1944 Venice , Italy Died 12 July 2025 (2025-07-12) (aged 80) Bologna , Italy Nationality Italian Scientific career Fields Physics Mathematics History of science Institutions University of Rome Tor Vergata Lucio Russo (22 November 1944 – 12 July 2025) was an Italian physicist, mathematician and historian of science. Born in Venice , he taught at the Mathematics Department of the University of Rome Tor Vergata . He died in Bologna on 12 July 2025, at the age of 80.

[ 1 ] Among his main areas of interest were Gibbs measure of the Ising model , percolation theory , [ 2 ] and finite Bernoulli schemes, within which he proved an approximate version of the classical Kolmogorov's zero–one law .

[ 3 ] In the history of science, he reconstructed some contributions of the Hellenistic astronomer Hipparchus , through the analysis of his surviving works, and the proof of heliocentrism attributed by Plutarch to Seleucus of Seleucia and studied the history of theories of tides , [ 4 ] from the Hellenistic to modern age.

Books [ edit ] The Forgotten Revolution [ edit ] In The Forgotten Revolution: How Science Was Born in 300 BC and Why It Had to Be Reborn (Italian: La rivoluzione dimenticata ), Russo promotes the belief that Hellenistic science in the period 320–144 BC reached heights not achieved by Classical age science, and proposes that it went further than ordinarily thought, in multiple fields not normally associated with ancient science.

According to Russo, Hellenistic scientists were not simply forerunners, but actually achieved scientific results of high importance, in the fields of "mathematics, solid and fluid mechanics, optics, astronomy, anatomy, physiology, scientific medicine", [ 5 ] even psychoanalysis. They may have even discovered the inverse square law of gravitation (Russo's argument on this point hinges on well established, but seldom discussed, evidence). Hellenistic scientists, among them Euclid , Archimedes and Eratosthenes , developed an axiomatic and deductive way of argumentation. When this way of argumentation was dropped, the ability to understand the results were lost as well. Thus, Russo conjectures that the definitions of elementary geometric objects were introduced in Euclid's Elements by Heron of Alexandria , 400 years after the work was completed.

[ 5 ] More concretely, Russo shows how the theory of tides must have been well developed in Antiquity, because several pre-Newtonian sources relay various complementary parts of the theory without grasping their import or justification (getting the empirical facts wrong but the theory right).

Hellenistic science was focused on the city of Alexandria . The emerging scientific revolution in Alexandria was ended when Ptolemy VIII Physcon came to power. He engaged in mass purges and expulsions of all intellectuals. Other centers of Hellenistic science mentioned in Russo's book were Antioch , Pergamon , Cyzicus , Rhodes , Syracuse and Massilia .

He also concludes that the 17th-century scientific revolution in Europe was due in large part to the recovery of Hellenistic science.

[ 6 ] The Forgotten Revolution has received mixed reviews, praising Russo's enthusiasm but noting that his conclusions outreach his sources.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] L'America dimenticata [ edit ] In L'America dimenticata , Russo suggests that the Americas were known to some European civilizations in ancient times, probably discovered by the Phoenicians or the Carthaginians , but that the knowledge was lost under Roman expansion in the second century BC.

[ 11 ] Russo notes paintings dating to the Roman period that, he claims, represent American fruits ( Ananas ), and small Mesoamerican toys representing wheeled trucks, when the wheel had not been invented nor used in pre-Columbian times.

With the collapse of the Hellenistic world under the attacks of the Romans around the middle of the 2nd century BC (specifically, the destruction of Corinth and Carthage in 146 BC and the expulsion of the scientific elite from Alexandria in 145 BC), he claims, these geographic notions were lost. According to his theories, Ptolemy's later identification of the Blessed Islands with the Canaries was incorrect. Instead, he claims that the Blessed Islands were known to be antipodal to the eastern part of China, and that Ptolemy made ends meet by erroneously enlarging the longitude of all known places, and shrinking the width of a degree of longitude (500 instead of 700 stadia).

Based on this correction, Lucio Russo claims to pinpoint the position of the mythical Thule , reached in the 4th century BC by explorer Pytheas , on the coast of Greenland . He interprets in light of this claim an obscure sentence of Pliny according to which Hipparchus would have enlarged the ecumene (the known world) by 26,000 stadia .

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Antikythera mechanism , a Hellenistic astronomical computer, which, according to Russo, is a proof of the high level of knowledge in science and technology reached during Hellenism References [ edit ] ^ A Dio, Professore (in Italian) ^ Geoffrey R. Grimmett, "The Work of Lucio Russo on Percolation"," Mathematics and Mechanics of Complex Systems ", vol. 4, N° 3–4, pp. 199–211 http://msp.org/memocs/2016/4-3/p02.xhtml ^ M. Talegrand "On Russo's approximate zero-one law", " Annals of Probability ", 22, (1994), 1576–1587 ^ Lucio Russo, Flussi e riflussi: indagine sull'origine di una teoria scientifica , Milan, Feltrinelli, 2003, ISBN 88-07-10349-4 .

^ a b Graffi, Sandro, review of La rivoluzione dimenticata , Notices Amer. Math. Soc.

, vol. 45, no. 5, May 1998.

[1] ^ Lucio Russo, The Forgotten Revolution: How Science Was Born in 300 BC and Why It Had to Be Reborn , Berlin, Springer, 2004, ISBN 978-3-540-20396-4 .

^ Michael Rowan-Robinson, " Praising Alexandrians to excess ." Review of The Forgotten Revolution , Physics World vol. 17, no. 4 (April 2004).

^ Gary B. Magee, Review of The Forgotten Revolution , Economic Record, 80 (2004): 475–476.

[2] ^ Samuel S. Kutler, MAA Reviews , Mathematical Association of America (20 September 2004), [3] ^ Mott Greene, " The birth of modern science?

" Review of The Forgotten Revolution , Nature 430 (5 August 2004): 614.

^ Lucio Russo, L' America dimenticata. I rapporti tra le civiltà e un errore di Tolomeo. Seconda edizione con postfazione di obiezioni e risposte , Milan, Mondadori, 2013, ISBN 978-88-6184-320-2 [4] ^ Plinio, Naturalis Historia, II, 247 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Lucio Russo .

Biografia Lucio Russo Personal site Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Israel Academics Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lucio_Russo&oldid=1301602905 " Categories : 1944 births 2025 deaths Scientists from Venice 20th-century Italian historians 20th-century Italian physicists 20th-century Italian mathematicians 21st-century Italian mathematicians Italian historians of science Academic staff of the University of Rome Tor Vergata Hidden categories: Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 18:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lucio Russo 10 languages Add topic

