Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Terminology 3 Usage Toggle Usage subsection 3.1 Scientific research 4 Empirical cycle 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Empirical research 29 languages Alemannisch العربية বাংলা Български Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano Македонски Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Papiamentu پښتو Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Tagalog Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research using empirical evidence Not to be confused with Evidence-based research .

A scientist gathering data for her research Empirical research is research using empirical evidence . It is also a way of gaining knowledge by means of direct and indirect observation or experience .

Empiricism values some research more than other kinds. Empirical evidence (the record of one's direct observations or experiences) can be analyzed quantitatively or qualitatively .

Quantifying the evidence or making sense of it in qualitative form, a researcher can answer empirical questions, which should be clearly defined and answerable with the evidence collected (usually called data ). Research design varies by field and by the question being investigated. Many researchers combine qualitative and quantitative forms of analysis to better answer questions that cannot be studied in laboratory settings, particularly in the social sciences and in education.

In some fields, quantitative research may begin with a research question (e.g., "Does listening to vocal music during the learning of a word list have an effect on later memory for these words?") which is tested through experimentation. Usually, the researcher has a certain theory regarding the topic under investigation. Based on this theory, statements or hypotheses will be proposed (e.g., "Listening to vocal music has a negative effect on learning a word list."). From these hypotheses, predictions about specific events are derived (e.g., "People who study a word list while listening to vocal music will remember fewer words on a later memory test than people who study a word list in silence."). These predictions can then be tested with a suitable experiment . Depending on the outcomes of the experiment, the theory on which the hypotheses and predictions were based will be supported or not, [ 1 ] or may need to be modified and then subjected to further testing.

History [ edit ] The experimental method has evolved over the ages, with many scientists contributing to its foundation and development. In ancient times, Greek philosophers, such as Aristotle, relied on observation and rational inference in their studies. Aristotle, for example, rejected exclusive reliance on logical deduction, emphasizing the importance of observation in understanding nature.

During the Middle Ages, Muslim scientists significantly advanced the experimental method. Jabir ibn Hayyan, known as the father of chemistry, introduced experimental methodology into chemistry and developed chemical processes such as crystallization, calcination, and distillation. He also discovered important acids like sulfuric and nitric acid, expanding the possibilities of chemical experiments. The famous optics scientist Alhazen (Ibn al-Haytham) was among the first to rely on experimentation in studying light and vision. In his book Book of Optics , he employed a scientific method based on observation, experimentation, and mathematical proof, making him a pioneer of the modern scientific method.

[ 2 ] These scientific approaches were transmitted to Europe through translations, influencing the development of modern scientific methodology. European scientists, such as Francis Bacon, were inspired by the works of Muslim scholars in refining the experimental method. The researcher Robert Briffault , in his book Making of Humanity , states: "It was under their successors at Oxford School (that is, successors to the Muslims of Spain) that Roger Bacon learned Arabic and Arabic Sciences. Neither Roger Bacon nor later namesake has any title to be credited with having introduced the experimental method. Roger Bacon was no more than one of apostles of Muslim Science and Method to Christian Europe".

[ 3 ] Terminology [ edit ] The term empirical was originally used to refer to certain ancient Greek practitioners of medicine who rejected adherence to the dogmatic doctrines of the day, preferring instead to rely on the observation of phenomena as perceived in experience. Later empiricism referred to a theory of knowledge in philosophy which adheres to the principle that knowledge arises from experience and evidence gathered specifically using the senses. In scientific use, the term empirical refers to the gathering of data using only evidence that is observable by the senses or in some cases using calibrated scientific instruments. What early philosophers described as empiricist and empirical research have in common is the dependence on observable data to formulate and test theories and come to conclusions.

Usage [ edit ] The researcher attempts to describe accurately the interaction between the instrument (or the human senses ) and the entity being observed. If instrumentation is involved, the researcher is expected to calibrate his/her instrument by applying it to known standard objects and documenting the results before applying it to unknown objects. In other words, it describes the research that has not taken place before and their results.

In practice, the accumulation of evidence for or against any particular theory involves planned research designs for the collection of empirical data , and academic rigor plays a large part of judging the merits of research design . Several typologies for such designs have been suggested, one of the most popular of which comes from Campbell and Stanley.

[ 4 ] They are responsible for popularizing the widely cited distinction among pre-experimental , experimental , and quasi-experimental designs and are staunch advocates of the central role of randomized experiments in educational research .

Scientific research [ edit ] Accurate analysis of data using standardized statistical methods in scientific studies is critical to determining the validity of empirical research.

Statistical formulas such as regression, uncertainty coefficient , t-test, chi square , and various types of ANOVA (analyses of variance) are fundamental to forming logical, valid conclusions. If empirical data reach significance under the appropriate statistical formula, the research hypothesis is supported. If not, the null hypothesis is supported (or, more accurately, not rejected), meaning no effect of the independent variable (s) was observed on the dependent variable (s).

The result of empirical research using statistical hypothesis testing is never proof . It can only support a hypothesis, reject it, or do neither. These methods yield only probabilities. Among scientific researchers, empirical evidence (as distinct from empirical research ) refers to objective evidence that appears the same regardless of the observer. For example, a thermometer will not display different temperatures for each individual who observes it. Temperature, as measured by an accurate, well calibrated thermometer, is empirical evidence. By contrast, non-empirical evidence is subjective, depending on the observer. Following the previous example, observer A might truthfully report that a room is warm, while observer B might truthfully report that the same room is cool, though both observe the same reading on the thermometer. The use of empirical evidence negates this effect of personal (i.e., subjective) experience or time.

This section may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the section . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The varying perception of empiricism and rationalism shows concern with the limit to which there is dependency on experience of sense as an effort of gaining knowledge. According to rationalism, there are a number of different ways in which sense experience is gained independently for the knowledge and concepts. According to empiricism, sense experience is considered as the main source of every piece of knowledge and the concepts. 
In general, rationalists are known for the development of their own views following two different way. First, the key argument can be placed that there are cases in which the content of knowledge or concepts end up outstripping the information. This outstripped information is provided by the sense experience (Hjørland, 2010, 2). Second, there is construction of accounts as to how reasoning helps in the provision of addition knowledge about a specific or broader scope. Empiricists are known to be presenting complementary senses related to thought.

First, there is development of accounts of how there is provision of information by experience that is cited by rationalists. This is insofar for having it in the initial place. At times, empiricists tend to be opting skepticism as an option of rationalism. If experience is not helpful in the provision of knowledge or concept cited by rationalists, then they do not exist (Pearce, 2010, 35). Second, empiricists have a tendency of attacking the accounts of rationalists, while considering reasoning to be an important source of knowledge or concepts.

The overall disagreement between empiricists and rationalists shows major concerns about how knowledge is gained with respect to the sources of knowledge and concepts. In some of the cases, disagreement on the point of gaining knowledge results in the provision of conflicting responses to other aspects as well. There might be a disagreement in the overall feature of warrant, while limiting the knowledge and thought. Empiricists are known for sharing the view that there is no existence of innate knowledge and rather that is derivation of knowledge out of experience. These experiences are either reasoned using the mind or sensed through the five senses human possess (Bernard, 2011, 5). On the other hand, rationalists are known to be sharing the view that there is existence of innate knowledge and this is different for the objects of innate knowledge being chosen.

In order to follow rationalism, there must be adoption of one of the three claims related to the theory that are deduction or intuition, innate knowledge, and innate concept. The more there is removal of concept from mental operations and experience, there can be performance over experience with increased plausibility in being innate. Further ahead, empiricism in context with a specific subject provides a rejection of the corresponding version related to innate knowledge and deduction or intuition (Weiskopf, 2008, 16). Insofar as there is acknowledgement of concepts and knowledge within the area of subject, the knowledge has major dependence on experience through human senses.

Empirical cycle [ edit ] Empirical cycle according to A.D. de Groot A.D. de Groot 's empirical cycle: [ 5 ] Observation : The observation of a phenomenon and inquiry concerning its causes.

Induction : The formulation of hypotheses - generalized explanations for the phenomenon.

Deduction : The formulation of experiments that will test the hypotheses (i.e. confirm them if true, refute them if false).

Testing : The procedures by which the hypotheses are tested and data are collected.

Evaluation : The interpretation of the data and the formulation of a theory - an abductive argument that presents the results of the experiment as the most reasonable explanation for the phenomenon.

See also [ edit ] Case study Fact Field research Scientific method References [ edit ] ^ Goodwin, C. J. (2005).

Research in Psychology: Methods and Design.

USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

^ Tbakhi, Abdelghani; Amr, Samir S. (2007).

"Ibn Al-Haytham: father of modern optics" .

Annals of Saudi Medicine .

27 (6): 464– 467.

doi : 10.5144/0256-4947.2007.464 .

ISSN 0256-4947 .

PMC 6074172 .

PMID 18059131 .

^ Robert Briffault. (1919). Making of Humanity. (pp. 200) London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd.

^ Campbell, D. & Stanley, J. (1963).

Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for research . Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.

^ Heitink, G. (1999).

Practical Theology: History, Theory, Action Domains: Manual for Practical Theology.

Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, p. 233.

ISBN 9780802842947 External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of empirical research at Wiktionary Some Key Concepts for the Design and Review of Empirical Research Archived 2021-04-16 at the Wayback Machine Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Empirical_research&oldid=1285674811 " Categories : Research Empiricism Concepts in epistemology Epistemology of science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 April 2025, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Empirical research 29 languages Add topic

