Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Unjust price: a kind of fraud 2 Later reinterpretations of the doctrine Toggle Later reinterpretations of the doctrine subsection 2.1 School of Salamanca 2.2 Capitalism 3 Laesio enormis Toggle Laesio enormis subsection 3.1 Modern law 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Just price 6 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory of ethics in economics St Thomas Aquinas taught that raising prices in response to high demand was a type of theft.

The just price is a theory of ethics in economics that attempts to set standards of fairness in transactions. With intellectual roots in ancient Greek philosophy , it was advanced by Thomas Aquinas based on an argument against usury , which in his time referred to the making of any rate of interest on loans . It gave rise to the contractual principle of laesio enormis .

Part of a series on Thomas Aquinas Thomism Scholasticism Apophatic theology Aseity Divine simplicity Analogia entis Quinque viae Beatific vision Actus purus Actus essendi Primum Movens Correspondence theory Hylomorphism Substance theory ( ousia ) Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / accident nature ) Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Transcendentals Aristotelian ethics Cardinal / Theological Natural law Determinatio Just war Satisfaction theory of the atonement Thomistic sacramental theology Just price Concupiscence Intrinsic finality Thomistic theology of merit Compatibilism Theological intellectualism Works Summa Theologica Treatise on Law Summa contra Gentiles Contra Errores Graecorum Commentaries on Aristotle De regno, ad regem Cypri De regimine Judaeorum De principiis naturae, ad fratrem Sylvestrum De aeternitate mundi, contra murmurantes De motu cordis, ad Magistrum Philippum Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate Commentary on the Book of Causes De iudiciis astrorum Compendium Theologiae Catena aurea Hymns and prayers Adoro te devote Creator ineffabilis Lauda Sion O sacrum convivium Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium Tantum ergo Sacris solemniis Panis angelicus Verbum supernum prodiens O salutaris hostia Influences Aristotle St. Paul Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard Averroes Maimonides St. Albertus Magnus Classical Thomists Cantimpré Saint-Cher Beauvais Penyafort Innocent V Lessines Piperno Moerbeke Martí Trilia Houghton Apolda Sutton Auvergne Benedict XI Fontaines Winterburn Colonna Ymbert di Bologna Fiadoni Guidonis Nédellec Paludanus Holkott Regina Bromyard Kydones Eymerich Calecas Ferrer Dominici Gerson Gorkum Sabunde Capreolus Pierozzi de Flandria Torquemada de Rupe Niger Almadura Mirabilibus Savonarola Fabri Gostynin Głogów Tetzel Deza Mazzolini di Ferrara Gaetanus Koellin Pagnino Faber Vitoria Catherinus Ory Soto (Domingo) Cano Pelargus Soto (Pedro) Senensis Mercado Medina de Granada Fernandes Báñez Zumel Porrecta Duperron Medices Lessius Malvenda Lemos Álvarez Oliva Rispoli Riccardi Gravina Poinsot Ripada Molinier Torres Vallgornera Pallavicino Nicolaï Lynch Ferre Gonet Bancel Quétif Massoulié Alexandre Échard Benedict XIII Serry Plessis Gotti Leocata Concina Benedict XIV De Rubeis Burke de Boxadors Mamachi Gazzaniga Neo-Thomism Aertsen Anquín Anscombe Arintero Ashley Barron Bocheński Bouquillon Bourke Canals Coffey Copleston Coreth Cornoldi Daujat De Wulf Fabro Fairweather Farrer Feser Franca Gardet Garrigou-Lagrange Gauthier Geach George Grenier Hawkins von Donnersmarck Henle Hugon Inagaki Jolivet Kleutgen Knasas Komar Koninck Krąpiec Leo XIII Lira Lonergan MacIntyre Maréchal Maritain Marshall Mascall McInerny Meinvielle Millán-Puelles Newman Pace Pecci Pegis Piolanti Pirotta Pius X Ramírez Régis Ripperger Russo Ryan Sanseverino Sertillanges Simon Smith Stein Tanaka Taparelli Torre Ušeničnik White Wilhelmsen Wippel Woodbury Zigliara History Medieval philosophy Condemnations of 1210–1277 Canonization of Thomas Aquinas Second scholasticism Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas School of Salamanca Physical premotion Congregatio de Auxiliis Salmanticenses and Complutenses Neo-scholasticism Æterni Patris Editio Leonina Neo-Thomism in Brazil Analytical Thomism ICUSTA Scholarship Aquinas Index Thomisticus Nova et Vetera Revue thomiste The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas The Oxford Handbook of Aquinas The Thomist Thomas Aquinas Dictionary Art 1476 Altarpiece Carafa Chapel Charles Bridge statue Cortona Triptych Enthroned Madonna and Child with Saints Fiesole Altarpiece Madonna and Child with St Dominic and St Thomas Aquinas San Pietro Martire Triptych The Apotheosis of Saint Thomas Aquinas The Vision of Fray Lauterio The Vision of Saint Thomas Aquinas Temptation of St. Thomas Triumph of Saint Thomas Aquinas Related topics Aristotelianism Actus primus Catholic theology Doctor of the Church Dominican Order Empiricism List of institutions named after Aquinas Saint Thomas Aquinas Church Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Unjust price: a kind of fraud [ edit ] The argument against usury was that the lender was receiving income for nothing, since nothing was actually lent, rather the money was exchanged. Furthermore, a dollar can only be fairly exchanged for a dollar, so asking for more is unfair.  Aquinas later expanded his argument to oppose any unfair earnings made in trade, basing the argument on the Golden Rule . The Christian should "do unto others as you would have them do unto you", meaning he should trade value for value. Aquinas believed that it was specifically immoral to raise prices because a particular buyer had an urgent need for what was being sold and could be persuaded to pay a higher price because of local conditions: If someone would be greatly helped by something belonging to someone else, and the seller not similarly harmed by losing it, the seller must not sell for a higher price: because the usefulness that goes to the buyer comes not from the seller, but from the buyer's needy condition: no one ought to sell something that doesn't belong to him.

[ 1 ] — Summa Theologiae , 2-2, q. 77, art. 1 Aquinas would therefore condemn practices such as raising the price of building supplies in the wake of a natural disaster . Increased demand caused by the destruction of existing buildings does not add to a seller's costs, so to take advantage of buyers' increased willingness to pay constituted a species of fraud in Aquinas's view.

[ 2 ] Aquinas believed all gains made in trade must relate to the labour exerted by the merchant, not to the need of the buyer. Hence, he condoned moderate gain as payment even for unnecessary trade, provided the price were regulated and kept within certain bounds: ...there is no reason why gain [from trading] may not be directed to some necessary or even honourable end; and so trading will be rendered lawful; as when a man uses moderate gains acquired in trade for the support of his household, or even to help the needy...

Later reinterpretations of the doctrine [ edit ] School of Salamanca [ edit ] With their reflexions on Contract law and fairness in exchange, [ 3 ] the members of the School of Salamanca were often confronted with the notion of just price.

The just price of something, which respects the principle of commutative justice, depend on many factors. It have a certain latitude [ 4 ] because it's not the result of God's will or of labor but of the common estimation of the people (communis aestimatio hominum).

[ 5 ] On this Luis Saravia de la Calle wrote in 1544: Those who measure the just price by the labour, costs, and risk incurred by the person who deals in the merchandise or produces it, or by the cost of transport or the expense of traveling...or by what he has to pay the factors for their industry, risk, and labour, are greatly in error.... For the just price arises from the abundance or scarcity of goods, merchants, and money...and not from costs, labour, and risk.... Why should a bale of linen brought overland from Brittany at great expense be worth more than one which is transported cheaply by sea?... Why should a book written out by hand be worth more than one which is printed, when the latter is better though it costs less to produce?... The just price is found not by counting the cost but by the common estimation.

However, as this quote might suggest, the just price isn't always the market price. the members of the School of Salamanca thought that authorities were sometimes required to intervene and to control prices , [ 4 ] especially in monopoly cases [ 6 ] or for staples.

[ 7 ] Every violation of the just price constitutes a laesio for one, and an unjust enrichment , an infraction to the seventh Commandment and a sin for the other. Only a restitution of the undue prince enables the absolution [ 8 ] and bring back the contractual equilibrium.

[ 9 ] Capitalism [ edit ] With the rise of Capitalism , the use of just price theory faded, largely replaced by the microeconomic concept of supply and demand from Locke , Steuart , Ricardo , Ibn Taymiyyah , and especially Adam Smith . In modern economics regarding returns to the means of production, interest is seen as payment for a valuable service, which is the use of the money, though most banking systems still forbid excessive interest rates .

Likewise, during the rapid expansion of capitalism over the past several centuries the theory of the just price was used to justify popular action against merchants who raised their prices in years of dearth. The Marxist historian E. P. Thompson emphasized the continuing force of this tradition in his article on the " Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth Century." [ 10 ] Other historians and sociologists have uncovered the same phenomenon in variety of other situations including peasants riots in continental Europe during the nineteenth century and in many developing countries in the twentieth. The political scientist James C. Scott , for example, showed how this ideology could be used as a method of resisting authority in The Moral Economy of the Peasant: Subsistence and Rebellion in Southeast Asia .

[ 11 ] Laesio enormis [ edit ] Main articles: Laesio enormis and Inequality of bargaining power Although the Imperial Roman Code, the Corpus Juris Civilis had stated that the parties to an exchange were entitled to try to outwit one another, [ 12 ] the view developed that a contract could be unwound if it was significantly detrimental to one party: if there were abnormal harm ( laesio enormis ). This meant that if an agreement was significantly imbalanced to the detriment of one party, the courts would decline to enforce it, and have jurisdiction to reverse unjust enrichment . Through the 19th century, the codifications in France and Germany declined to adopt the principle while common law jurisdictions attempted to generalise the doctrine of freedom of contract . However, in practice, and increasingly over the 20th century and early 21st century, the law of consumer protection , tenancy contracts, and labour law was regulated by statute to require fairness in exchange. Certain terms would be compulsory, others would be regarded as unfair, and courts could substitute their judgment for what would be just in all the circumstances.

Modern law [ edit ] Bundesgerichtshof Entscheidung (24 January 1979), the billiards equipment, NJW 1979, 758 Bundesgerichtshof Entscheidung (12 March 1981), the disproportionate loan, BGHZ 80, 153 Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch §138, transactions contrary to public policy; usury Austrian Civil Code §934 French Civil Code articles 1674-5 Vernon v Bethell (1762) 28 ER 838 Consumer Credit Act 1974 ss 140A-B National Minimum Wage Act 1998 Louisiana Civil Code article 2589 See also [ edit ] Catholic social teaching History of economic thought Labor theory of value Price Pricing Supply and demand Notes [ edit ] ^ Si vero aliquis multum iuvetur ex re alterius quam accepit, ille vero qui vendidit non damnificatur carendo re illa, non debet eam supervendere. Quia utilitas quae alteri accrescit non est ex vendente, sed ex conditione ementis, nullus autem debet vendere alteri quod non est suum. . .

^ Aquinas, Summa Theologica , 2ª-2ae q. 77 pr.

: " Deinde considerandum est de peccatis quae sunt circa voluntarias commutationes. Et primo, de fraudulentia quae committitur in emptionibus et venditionibus ...

" ^ Decock 2013 , p. 507-624.

^ a b Decock 2013 , p. 525.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 521.

^ Decock, Wim (2022).

" 'Mercatores isti regulandi': Monopolies and Moral Regulation of the Market in Pedro de Oñate's 'De contractibus' " .

Tijdschrift voor Rechtsgeschiedenis .

90 ( 3– 4): 462– 488.

doi : 10.1163/15718190-20220017 .

hdl : 2268/297954 .

^ Decock, Wim (2018). "Collaborative Legal Pluralism. Confessors as Law Enforcers in Mercado's Advices on Economic Governance (1571)".

Zeitschrift des Max-Planck-Instituts für europaïsche Rechtsgeschichte .

25 : 103– 114.

^ Decock, Wim (2022). "Droit, morale et marché : l'héritage théologique revisité".

Revue de la faculté de Droit de l'université de Liège (in French) (1): 30.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 516-517.

^ Thompson, E. P. (February 1971). "The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth Century".

Past & Present (50): 76– 136.

doi : 10.1093/past/50.1.76 .

JSTOR 650244 .

^ (Yale, 1976; ISBN 9780300021905 ).

^ Code 4, 44, 2 References [ edit ] H Grotius, De Jure Belli ac Pacis (1964) ch XI, trans FW Kelsey M Weber, Economy and Society (1978) 578, 583, 589 and 1198 RH Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism (1922) 40-44, on Aquinas and just price Dawson, 'Economic Duress and Fair Exchange in French and German Law' (1937) 11 Tulane Law Review 345, 365 Holstein, 'Vices of Consent in the Law of Contracts' (1939) 13 Tulane Law Review 560, 569 WJ Ashley, An Introduction to English Economic History and Theory (1920) 126, on just price M Wolf, Rechtsgeschäftliche Entscheidungsfreiheit und vertraglicher Interessenausgleich (1971) AT Mehren and J Gordley, The Civil Law System (1977) 926 J Gordley, 'Equality in Exchange' (1981) 69 Calif LR 138 Decock, Wim (2013).

Theologians and Contract Law : The Moral Transformation of the Ius commune (ca. 1500-1650) . Leiden/Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 723.

ISBN 978-90-04-23285-3 .

External links [ edit ] St Thomas Aquinas's Summa Theologiae , 2-2, q. 77 on lawful and unlawful gains in trade (Latin) An article discusses the Salamanca school and just price Another article traces the development of Just Price doctrine through the Salamanca school v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Just_price&oldid=1286733248 " Categories : Applied ethics Market failure Preclassical economics Catholic social teaching Thomism Catholic Church and finance Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 17:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Just price 6 languages Add topic

