Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Monochronic time 3 Polychronic time Toggle Polychronic time subsection 3.1 Measuring polychronicity 4 Predictable patterns between cultures with differing time systems Toggle Predictable patterns between cultures with differing time systems subsection 4.1 Cross-cultural perspectives on time 5 Time orientations Toggle Time orientations subsection 5.1 Time orientation and consumers 6 Culture and diplomacy Toggle Culture and diplomacy subsection 6.1 Cultural roots 6.2 Influence on global affairs 7 Control of time in interpersonal relationships Toggle Control of time in interpersonal relationships subsection 7.1 Waiting time 7.2 Talk time 7.3 Work time 8 Associated theories Toggle Associated theories subsection 8.1 Expectancy violations theory 8.2 Interpersonal adaptation theory 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Chronemics 11 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of the role of time in communication This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( October 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chronemics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Communication Portal History General aspects Communication theory Information Semiotics Language Logic Sociology Fields Discourse analysis Linguistics Mass communication Organizational communication Pragmatics Semiotics Sociolinguistics Disciplines Public speaking Discourse Culture Argumentation Persuasion Research Rhetoric Media Categories Outline v t e Part of a series on Anthropology Outline History Types Archaeological Biological Cultural Linguistic Social Archaeological Aerial Aviation Battlefield Biblical Bioarchaeological Environmental Ethnoarchaeological Experimental Feminist Forensic Maritime Paleoethnobotanical Zooarchaeological Biological Anthrozoological Biocultural Evolutionary Forensic Molecular Neurological Nutritional Paleoanthropological Primatological Social Cultural Applied Art Cognitive Cyborg Development Digital Ecological Environmental Economic Political economy Feminist Food Historical Institutional Kinship Legal Media Medical Museums Musical Political Psychological Public Religion Symbolic Transpersonal Urban Visual Linguistic Anthropological Descriptive Ethnological Ethnopoetical Historical Ideology Semiotic Sociological Research framework Anthropometry Ethnography cyber Ethnology Cross-cultural comparison Participant observation Holism Reflexivity Thick description Cultural relativism Ethnocentrism Emic and etic Key concepts Culture Development Ethnicity Evolution sociocultural Gender Kinship and descent Meme Prehistory Race Society Value Colonialism / Postcolonialism Key theories Actor–network theory Alliance theory Boasian anthropology Cross-cultural studies Cultural materialism Culture theory Diffusionism Feminism Functionalism Historical particularism Interpretive Performance studies Political economy Practice theory Structuralism Post-structuralism Systems theory Lists Anthropologists by nationality Anthropology by year Bibliography Journals List of indigenous peoples Organizations v t e Chronemics is an anthropological , philosophical , and linguistic subdiscipline that describes how time is perceived, coded, and communicated across a given culture. It is one of several subcategories to emerge from the study of nonverbal communication .

According to the Encyclopedia of Special Education , "Chronemics includes time orientation, understanding and organisation, the use of and reaction to time pressures, the innate and learned awareness of time, by physically wearing or not wearing a watch, arriving, starting, and ending late or on time." [ 1 ] A person's perception and values placed on time plays a considerable role in their communication process.

The use of time can affect lifestyles, personal relationships, and professional life. Across cultures, people usually have different time perceptions, and this can result in tension or friction between individuals.

Time perceptions include punctuality , interactions, and willingness to wait.

[ 2 ] Definition [ edit ] Chronemics is the study of the use of time in nonverbal communication, though it carries implications for verbal communication as well. Time perceptions include punctuality, willingness to wait, and interactions. The use of time can affect lifestyles, daily agendas, speed of speech, movements, and how long people are willing to listen.

Fernando Poyatos , Professor Emeritus at the University of New Brunswick , coined the term chronemics in 1972.

[ 3 ] Thomas J. Bruneau (1940–2012), Professor Emeritus at Radford University who taught at the University of Guam in his early career and whose scholarship focused on silence, empathy , and intercultural communication, identified the parameters of this field of study in the late 1970s.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Bruneau defined chronemics and specified the functions of time in human interactions as follows: Chronemics can be briefly and generally defined as the study of human tempo as it related to human communication. More specifically, chronemics involves the study of both subjective and objective human tempos as they influence and are interdependent with human behavior. Further, chronemics involves the study of human communication as it relates to interdependent and integrated levels of time-experiencing. Previously, these interdependent and integrated levels have been outlined and discussed as: biological time; psychological time; social time; and cultural time. A number of classification systems exist in the literature of time. However, such systems are not applied to human interaction directly.

[ 10 ] Time can be used as an indicator of status . For example, in most companies the boss can interrupt progress to hold an impromptu meeting in the middle of the work day, yet the average worker would have to make an appointment to see the boss.

[ citation needed ] More realistically is mutual respect as being disrespectful of another's time, regardless of hierarchy, quickly results in conflict.

[ 11 ] The way in which different cultures perceive time can influence communication as well.

Monochronic time [ edit ] A monochronic time system means that things are done one at a time and time is segmented into small precise units. Under this system, time is scheduled, arranged, and managed.

[ 12 ] The United States considers itself a monochronic society. This perception came about during the Industrial Revolution . Many Americans think of time as a precious resource not to be wasted or taken lightly.

[ 13 ] As communication scholar Edward T. Hall wrote regarding the American's viewpoint of time in the business world, "the schedule is sacred." Hall says that for monochronic cultures, such as the American culture, "time is tangible" and viewed as a commodity where "time is money" or "time is wasted." John Ivers, a professor of cultural paradigms, agrees with Edward Hall by stating, "In the market sense, monochronic people consume time." [ 14 ] The result of this perspective is that monochronic cultures place a paramount value on schedules, tasks, and "getting the job done.

[ full citation needed ] Monochronic time orientation is very prominent in core Germanic -speaking countries, Finland, France, Japan and the " Asian economic tigers ".

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] If, for example, a businessperson from the United States has a meeting scheduled, they may grow frustrated if they are required to wait an hour for their partner to arrive. This is an example of a monochronic-time-oriented individual running in to conflict with a polychronic-time-oriented individual.

[ 17 ] Though the United States is seen as one of the most monochronic countries, it "has subcultures that may lean more to one side or the other of the monochronic-polychronic divide" [ This quote needs a citation ] within the states themselves. Southern states can be similarly compared to northern ones. Ivers points this out by comparing waiters in restaurants in northern and southern states. Waiters from the north are "to the point": they will "engage in little" and there is usually "no small talk." They try to be as efficient as possible, while those in the south work towards "establishing a nice, friendly, micro-relationship" with the customer. They are still considerate of time, but it is not the most important goal in the south.

[ 14 ] The culture of African Americans might also be seen as polychronic .

[ 18 ] Polychronic time [ edit ] A polychronic time system means several things can be done at once. In polychronic time systems, a wider view of time is exhibited, and time is perceived in large fluid sections.

[ 12 ] Examples of polychronic cultures are Latin American, African, Arab, South Asian, Mediterranean, and Native American cultures. These cultures' view on time can be connected to "natural rhythms, the earth, and the seasons". These analogies can be understood and compared because natural events can occur spontaneously and sporadically, like polychronic-time-oriented people and polychronic-time-oriented cultures.

[ 19 ] A scenario would be an Inuk working in a factory in Alaska where the superiors blow a whistle to alert for break times, etc. The Inuit are not fond of that method because they determine their times by the sea tides, how long it takes place and how long it lasts. In polychronic cultures, "time spent with others" is considered a "task" and of importance to one's daily regimen.

[ 17 ] Polychronic cultures are much less focused on the preciseness of accounting for time and more on tradition and relationships rather than on tasks. Polychronic societies have no problem being late for an appointment if they are deeply focused on some work or in a meeting that ran past schedule, because the concept of time is fluid and can easily expand or contract as need be. As a result, polychronic cultures have a much less formal perception of time. They are not ruled by precise calendars and schedules.

[ 13 ] Measuring polychronicity [ edit ] Bluedorn, Allen C., Carol Felker Kaufman, and Paul M. Lane concluded that "developing an understanding of the monochronic/polychronic continuum will not only result in a better self-management but will also allow more rewarding job performances and relationships with people from different cultures and traditions." [ 20 ] Researchers have examined that predicting someone's polychronicity plays an important role in productivity and individual well-being.

[ 21 ] Researchers have developed the following questionnaires to measure polychronicity: Inventory of Polychronic Values (IPV) , developed by Bluedorn et al., which is a 10-item scale designed to assess "the extent to which people in a culture prefer to be engaged in two or more tasks or events simultaneously and believe their preference is the best way to do things." [ 22 ] Polychronic Attitude Index (PAI) , developed by Kaufman-Scarborough & Lindquist in 1991, which is a 4-item scale measuring individual preference for polychronicity, in the following statements: [ 23 ] "I do not like to juggle several activities at the same time".

"People should not try to do many things at once".

"When I sit down at my desk, I work on one project at a time".

"I am comfortable doing several things at the same time".

Predictable patterns between cultures with differing time systems [ edit ] Predictable patterns between cultures with differing time systems [ 24 ] Monochronic people Polychronic people Do one thing at a time Do many things at once Concentrate on a task set before them Concentrate on an event happening around them Consider time commitments (deadlines, schedules) seriously Consider objectives (goals, results) seriously Are low-context and need information Are high-context and already have information Are committed to the job and end results Are committed to people and relationships Dedicate themselves to plans Change plans often and easily Are more concerned with privacy and individual ownership Are more concerned with community and shared connections Emphasize prompt time recognition, regardless of relationship or circumstances Emphasize response based on nature of relationship and circumstances Have strong tendency to build temporary, practical relationships Have strong tendency to build lifetime, familial relationships Cross-cultural perspectives on time [ edit ] Conflicting attitudes between the monochronic and polychronic perceptions of time can interfere with cross-cultural relations and play a role in these domains, and as a result, challenges can occur within an otherwise assimilated culture.

[ 12 ] One example in the United States is the Hawaiian culture , which employs two time systems: Haole time and Hawaiian time.

When you hear someone say, 'See you at two o'clock haole time,' they mean they will do just that. Haole time is when the person will meet when they say they will meet. But if you were to hear someone say, 'I'll be there at two o'clock Hawaiian time,' then something different is implied. Hawaiian time is very lax and it basically means 'when you get there.' —Nick Lewis [ 13 ] According to Ashley Fulmer and Brandon Crosby, "as intercultural interactions increasingly become the norm rather than the exception, the ability of individuals, groups, and organizations to manage time effectively in cross-cultural settings is critical to the success of these interactions".

[ 25 ] Time orientations [ edit ] The way an individual perceives time and the role time plays in their lives is a learned perspective.  As discussed by Alexander Gonzalez and Phillip Zimbardo, "every child learns a time perspective that is appropriate to the values and needs of his society" (Guerrero, DeVito & Hecht, 1999, p. 227).

There are four basic psychological time orientations: Past Time-line Present Future Each orientation affects the structure, content, and urgency of communication (Burgoon, 1989). The past orientation has a hard time developing the notion of elapsed time and these individuals often confuse present and past happenings as all in the same. People oriented with time-line cognitivity are often detail oriented and think of everything in linear terms. These individuals also often have difficulty with comprehending multiple events at the same time. Individuals with a present orientation are mostly characterized as pleasure seekers who live for the moment and have a very low risk aversion. Those individuals who operate with future orientation are often thought of as being highly goal oriented and focused on the broad picture.

The use of time as a communicative channel can be a powerful, yet subtle, force in face-to-face interactions. Some of the more recognizable types of interaction that use time are: Regulating interaction This is shown to aid in the orderly transition of conversational turn-taking . When the speaker is opening the floor for a response, they will pause. However, when no response is desired, the speaker will talk a faster pace with minimal pause. (Capella, 1985) Expressing intimacy As relationships become more intimate, certain changes are made to accommodate the new relationship status. Some of the changes that are made include lengthening the time spent on mutual gazes, increasing the amount of time doing tasks for or with the other person and planning for the future by making plans to spend more time together (Patterson, 1990).

Affect management The onset of powerful emotions can cause a stronger affect, ranging from joy to sorrow or even to embarrassment. Some of the behaviors associated with negative affects include decreased time of gaze and awkwardly long pauses during conversations. When this happens, it is common for the individuals to try and decrease any negative affects and subsequently strengthen positive affects (Edelman & Iwawaki, 1987).

Evoking emotion Time can be used to evoke emotions in an interpersonal relationship by communicating the value of the relationship. For example, when someone with whom one has a close relationship is late, one may not take it personally, especially if that is characteristic of them. However, when meeting with a total stranger, disrespect for the value of one's time may be taken personally and could even cause one to display negative emotions if and when they do arrive for the meeting.

Facilitating service and task goals Professional settings can sometimes give rise to interpersonal relations which are quite different from other "normal" interactions. For example, the societal norms that dictate minimal touch between strangers are clearly altered if one member of the dyad is a doctor, and the environment is that of a hospital examination room.

Time orientation and consumers [ edit ] Time orientation has also revealed insights into how people react to advertising. Martin, Gnoth and Strong (2009) found that future-oriented consumers react most favorably to ads that feature a product to be released in the distant future and that highlight primary product attributes. In contrast, present-oriented consumers prefer near-future ads that highlight secondary product attributes. Consumer attitudes were mediated by the perceived usefulness of the attribute information.

[ 26 ] Culture and diplomacy [ edit ] Cultural roots [ edit ] Just as monochronic and polychronic cultures have different time perspectives, understanding the time orientation of a culture is critical to becoming better able to successfully handle diplomatic situations. Americans think they have a future orientation. Hall indicates that for Americans "tomorrow is more important" and that they "are oriented almost entirely toward the future" (Cohen, 2004, p. 35). The future-focused orientation attributes to at least some of the concerns that Americans have with "addressing immediate issues and moving on to new challenges" (Cohen, 2004, p. 35).

On the other hand, many polychronic cultures have a past-orientation toward time.

These time perspectives are the seeds for communication clashes in diplomatic situations. Trade negotiators have observed that "American negotiators are generally more anxious for agreement because "they are always in a hurry" and basically "problem solving oriented." In other words, they place a high value on resolving an issue quickly calling to mind the American catchphrase "some solution is better than no solution" (Cohen, 2004, p. 114). Similar observations have been made of Japanese -American relations. Noting the difference in time perceptions between the two countries, former ambassador to Tokyo , Mike Mansfield commented "We're too fast, they're too slow" (Cohen, 2004, p. 118).

Influence on global affairs [ edit ] Different perceptions of time across cultures can influence global communication. When writing about time perspective, Gonzalez and Zimbardo comment that "There is no more powerful, pervasive influence on how individuals think and cultures interact than our different perspectives on time—the way we learn how we mentally partition time into past, present and future." [ 27 ] : 227 Depending upon where an individual is from, their perception of time might be that "the clock rules the day" or that "we'll get there when we get there." [ This quote needs a citation ] Improving prospects for success in the global community requires understanding cultural differences, traditions and communication styles.

[ according to whom?

] The monochronic-oriented approach to negotiations is direct, linear and rooted in the characteristics that illustrate low context tendencies. The low context  culture approaches diplomacy in a lawyerly, dispassionate fashion with a clear idea of acceptable outcomes and a plan for reaching them. Draft arguments would be prepared elaborating positions. A monochronic culture, more concerned with time, deadlines and schedules, tends to grow impatient and want to rush to "close the deal." More polychronic-oriented cultures come to diplomatic situations with no particular importance placed on time. Chronemics is one of the channels of nonverbal communication preferred by a High context Polychronic negotiator over verbal communication. The polychronic approach to negotiations will emphasize building trust between participants, forming coalitions and finding consensus. High context Polychronic negotiators might be charged with emotion toward a subject thereby obscuring an otherwise obvious solution.

[ citation needed ] [ original research?

] Control of time in interpersonal relationships [ edit ] See also: Personal boundaries Waiting time [ edit ] Researchers Insel and Lindgren [ 27 ] : 325 write that the act of making an individual of a lower stature wait is a sign of dominance. They note that one who "is in the position to cause another to wait has power over him. To be kept waiting is to imply that one's time is less valuable than that of the one who imposes the wait." Talk time [ edit ] There is a direct correlation between the status of an individual in an organization and conversation. This includes both length of conversation, turn-taking, and who initiates and ends a conversation. Extensive research indicates that those with more status in an organization will speak more often and for a greater length of time. Meetings between superiors and subordinates provide an opportunity to illustrate this concept. A superior – regardless of whether or not they are running the actual meeting – lead discussions, ask questions, and have the ability to speak for longer periods of time without interruption. Likewise, research shows that turn-taking is also influenced by power. Social psychologist Nancy Henley notes that "Subordinates are expected to yield to superiors and there is a cultural expectation that a subordinate will not interrupt a superior".

[ 27 ] : 326 The length of a response follows the same pattern. While the superior can speak for as long as they want, the responses of the subordinate are shorter in length.

Albert Mehrabian noted that deviation from this pattern led to negative perceptions of the subordinate by the superior. Beginning and ending a communication interaction in the workplace is also controlled by the higher-status individual in an organization. The time and duration of the conversation are dictated by the higher-status individual.

[ citation needed ] Work time [ edit ] The time of high status individuals is perceived as valuable, and they control their own time. On the other hand, a subordinate with less status has their time controlled by a higher status individual and are in less control of their time – making them likely to report their time to a higher authority. Such practices are more associated with those in non-supervisory roles or in blue collar rather than white collar professions. Instead, as one's status in an organization increase, the flexibility of the work schedule also increases. For instance, while administrative professionals might keep a 9 to 5 work schedule, their superiors may keep less structured hours. This does not mean that the superior works less. They may work longer, but the structure of their work environment is not strictly dictated by the traditional workday. Instead, as Koehler and their associates note "individuals who spend more time, especially spare time, to meetings, to committees, and to developing contacts, are more likely to be influential decision makers".

[ 27 ] : 327 A specific example of the way power is expressed through work time is scheduling. As Yakura and others have noted in research shared by Ballard and Seibold, "scheduling reflects the extent to which the sequencing and duration of plans activities and events are formalized" (Ballard and Seibold, p. 6).

[ full citation needed ] Associated theories [ edit ] Expectancy violations theory [ edit ] Developed by Judee Burgoon , expectancy violations theory (EVT) sees communication as the exchange of information which is high in relational content and can be used to violate the expectations of another which will be perceived as either positively or negatively depending on the liking between the two people.

[ full citation needed ] When our expectations are violated, we will respond in specific ways. If an act is unexpected and is assigned favorable interpretation, and it is evaluated positively, it will produce more favorable outcomes than an expected act with the same interpretation and evaluation.

Interpersonal adaptation theory [ edit ] Main article: Interpersonal adaptation theory The interpersonal adaptation theory (IAT), founded by Judee Burgoon, states that adaptation in interaction is responsive to the needs, expectations, and desires of communicators and affects how communicators position themselves in relation to one another and adapt to one another's communication. For example, they may match each other's behavior, synchronize the timing of behavior, or behave in dissimilar ways. It is also important to note that individuals bring to interactions certain requirements that reflect basic human needs, expectations about behavior based on social norms , and desires for interaction based on goals and personal preferences (Burgoon, Stern & Dillman, 1995).

[ full citation needed ] See also [ edit ] African time Paul Virilio Philosophy of space and time Johannes Fabian References [ edit ] ^ Reynolds, Cecil R.; Vannest, Kimberly J.; Fletcher-Janzen, Elaine (2018).

Encyclopedia of Special Education, Volume 3: A Reference for the Education of Children, Adolescents, and Adults Disabilities and Other Exceptional Individuals . Wiley. p. 773.

ISBN 978-1-119-52002-3 .

^ Lateiner, Donald (2011).

The Homer Encyclopedia . Blackwell Publishing Ltd . Retrieved 18 December 2019 .

^ Thomas J. Bruneau, "Chronemics," in Stephen W. Littlejohn and Karen A. Foss (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Communication Theory , Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2009, p. 100.

^ Thomas J. Bruneau, "Time and Nonverbal Communication," Journal of Popular Culture , Vol. 8, No. 3, Winter 1974, pp. 658–666.

^ Thomas J. Bruneau, "Chronemics: The Study of Time in Human Interaction," Communication: Journal of the Communication Association of the Pacific , Vol. 6, No. 1, July 1977, pp. 1–30.

^ Thomas J. Bruneau, "Chronemics: Time and Organizational Communication," Communication: Journal of the Communication Association of the Pacific , Vol. 7, No. 2, January 1979, pp. 81–94.

^ Thomas J. Bruneau, "Theoretical Perspectives on the Temporal Bases of Intercultural Communication," Communication: Journal of the Communication Association of the Pacific , Vol. 9, No. 1, October 1980, pp. 77–115.

^ Thomas J. Bruneau, "The Structure of Chronemics," in Thomas Bagley (Ed.), Current Trends in Nonverbal Communication: A Multidisciplinary Approach , Jonesboro, AR: Arkansas State University, 1986, pp. 95-120.

^ Thomas J. Bruneau, "The Time Dimension in Intercultural Communication," in Larry A. Samovar and Richard E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural Communication: A Reader (5th Ed.), Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1988, pp. 282–292.

^ Thomas J. Bruneau, "Chronemics and the Verbal-Nonverbal Interface," in Mary Ritchie Key (Ed.), The Relationship of Verbal and Nonverbal Communication , The Hague, The Netherlands, Mouton, 1980, p. 114.

^ Gnozzo, Christina (12 March 2023).

"Red Flags That Your Boss is Toxic" .

Fast Company . Retrieved 24 June 2025 .

^ a b c "Time Sense: Polychronicity and Monochronicity" . 21 January 2018 . Retrieved 21 January 2018 .

^ a b c Lewis, Nick (17 November 2003).

"Chronemics" . Colorado State University. Archived from the original on 15 February 2005 . Retrieved 7 October 2015 .

^ a b [Ivers, J. J. (2017). For Deep Thinkers Only. John J. Ivers] ^ Würtz, Elizabeth (1 November 2005).

"Intercultural Communication on Web sites: a Cross-Cultural Analysis of Web sites from High-Context Cultures and Low-Context Cultures" .

Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication .

11 (1): 274– 299.

doi : 10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.tb00313.x .

^ "Monochronic vs Polychronic: Cultural differences explained" .

Habitgrowth . Retrieved 27 February 2025 .

^ a b Duranti, G. & Di Prata, O. (2009). Everything is about time: does it have the same meaning all over the world? Paper presented at PMI® Global Congress 2009—EMEA, Amsterdam, North Holland, The Netherlands. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute.

^ "Black History Month: An Explanation of CP Time by Your Very Delayed Guest Book Editor" .

HuffPost . 25 April 2010 . Retrieved 20 March 2024 .

^ Fulmer, Ashley; Crosby, Brandon; Gelfand, Michele (2014).

"Cross-cultural Perspectives on Time" . In Abbie Shipp; Yitzhak Fried (eds.).

Time and Work: How Time Impacts Groups, Organizations and Methodological Choices . Psychological Press.

doi : 10.4324/9781315798370 .

ISBN 9781317756354 .

^ Bluedorn, Allen C.; Felker Kaufman, Carol; Lane, Paul M. (1992).

Academy of Management Perspectives . pp.

17– 26.

^ Jang, Jichul; George, Thomas (2012). "Understanding the influence of polychronicity on job satisfaction and turnover intention: A study of non-supervisory hotel employees".

International Journal of Hospitality Management .

31 (2): 588– 595.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijhm.2011.08.004 .

^ Bluedorn, Allen C.; Kalliath, Thomas J.; Strube, Michael J; Martin, Gregg D. (1999). "Polychronicity and the Inventory of Polychronic Values (IPV)".

Journal of Managerial Psychology .

14 (3/4): 205– 231.

doi : 10.1108/02683949910263747 .

ISSN 0268-3946 .

^ Lindquist, Jay D.; Kaufman-Scarborough, Carol (2016). "The Polychronic—Monochronic Tendency Model".

Time & Society .

16 ( 2– 3): 253– 285.

doi : 10.1177/0961463X07080270 .

ISSN 0961-463X .

S2CID 144070208 .

^ Kaufman-Scarborough, Carol (2003).

The Journal of American Culture (PDF) . pp.

87– 95.

^ Fulmer, Ashley C.; Crosby, Brandon (2014).

Time and Work, Volume 2 . Routledge. pp.

63– 85.

^ Martin, B.A.S., Gnoth, J., & Strong, C. (2009).

Temporal construal in advertising: The moderating role of temporal orientation and attribute importance upon consumer evaluations Archived 2013-12-17 at the Wayback Machine , Journal of Advertising , 38 (3), 5-19.

^ a b c d Guerrero, L.K.; Devito, J.A.; Hecht, M.L. (1999).

The Nonverbal Communication Reader: Classic and contemporary readings (2 ed.). Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.

ISBN 9781577660408 .

Adler, ROBIN.B., Lawrence B.R., & Towne, N. (1995).

Interplay (6th ed.). Fort Worth: Hardcourt Brace College.

Ballard, D & Seibold, D., Communication-related organizational structures and work group temporal differences: the effects of coordination method, technology type, and feedback cycle on members' construals and enactments of time . Communication Monographs, Vol. 71, No. 1, March 2004, pp. 1–27 Buller D.B., & Burgoon, J.K. (1996). Interpersonal deception theory.

Communication Theory, 6, 203–242.

Buller, D.B., Burgoon, J.K., & Woodall, W.G. (1996).

Nonverbal communications: The unspoken dialogue (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Burgoon, J.K., Stern, L.A., & Dillman, L. (1995).

Interpersonal adaptation: Dyadic interaction patterns . Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press.

Capella, J. N. (1985). Controlling the floor in conversation. In A. Siegman and S. Feldstein (Eds.), Multichannel integrations of nonverbal behavior , (pp. 69–103). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Cohen, R. (2004).

Negotiating across cultures: International communication in an interdependent world (rev. ed.). Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace.

Eddelman, R.J., and Iwawaki, S. (1987).

Self-reported expression and the consequences of embarrassment in the United Kingdom and Japan . Psychologia, 30, 205-216 Griffin, E. (2000).

A first look at communication theory (4th ed). Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.

Gonzalez, G., & Zimbardo, P. (1985). Time in perspective.

Psychology Today Magazine, 20–26.

Hall, E.T. & Hall, M. R. (1990).

Understanding cultural differences: Germans, French, and Americans . Boston, MA: Intercultural Press.

Hall, J.A., & Kapp, M.L. (1992).

Nonverbal communication in human interaction (3rd ed.). New York: Holt Rinehart and Winston, Inc.

Knapp, M. L. & Miller, G.R.  (1985).

Handbook of Interpersonal Communication . Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.

Koester, J., & Lustig, M.W.  (2003).

Intercultural competence (4th ed.). New York: Pearson Education, Inc.

Patterson, M.L. (1990).

Functions of non-verbal behavior in social interaction .

H. Giles & W.P. Robinson (Eds), Handbook of Language and Social Psychology, Chichester, G.B.: Wiley West, R., & Turner, L. H. (2000).

Introducing communication theory: Analysis and application . Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.

Wood, J. T. (1997).

Communication theories in action: An introduction . Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.

Ivers, J. J. (2017).

For Deep Thinkers Only . John J. Ivers Further reading [ edit ] Bluedorn, A.C. (2002).

The human organization of time: Temporal realities and experience . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Cohen, R. (2004).

Negotiating across cultures: International communication in an interdependent world (rev. ed.). Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace.

Griffin, E. (2000).

A first look at communication theory (4th ed). Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.

Hugg, A. (2002, February 4).

Universal language . Retrieved May 10, 2007 from Website: [1] Osborne, H. (2006, January/February).

In other words…actions can speak as clearly as words . Retrieved May 12, 2007 from Website: http://www.healthliteracy.com/article.asp?PageID=3763 Wessel, R.  (2003, January 9).

Is there time to slow down?

. Retrieved May 10, 2007 from Website: https://www.csmonitor.com/2003/0109/p13s01-sten.html Chisholm, Hugh (22 February 2010).

"Monochronos" .

A sonnet on the topic by the editor of the 11th edition (1910) of the Encyclopædia Britannica .

External links [ edit ] "Intercultural Skills Test" . ICTAC. Archived from the original on 18 March 2012.

"Peace Corps, National Geographic Society Collaborate on Education Project" . Peace Corps. Archived from the original on 16 September 2014.

"Lesson 1 for The Meaning of Time" .

Recognizing How Another Culture Differs From One's Own . The Washington File. Peace Corps. 29 January 2003. Archived from the original on 28 February 2013 . Retrieved 9 October 2015 .

Hahn, Harley (27 March 2005).

"Time Sense: Polychronicity and Monochronicity" .

v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronemics&oldid=1306152035 " Categories : Nonverbal communication Social constructionism Time Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2021 Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2015 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2024 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from October 2015 Articles with unsourced quotes All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2015 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from June 2025 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 06:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chronemics 11 languages Add topic

