Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Science and technology Toggle Science and technology subsection 1.1 Chemistry 1.1.1 Types of Analysis 1.1.2 Isotopes 1.2 Computer science 1.3 Engineering 1.4 Mathematics 1.5 Psychotherapy 1.6 Signal processing 1.7 Statistics 2 Business 3 Economics 4 Government Toggle Government subsection 4.1 Intelligence 4.2 Policy 5 Humanities and social sciences Toggle Humanities and social sciences subsection 5.1 Linguistics 5.2 Literature 5.3 Music 5.4 Philosophy 6 Other 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Analysis 49 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Bosanski Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Lombard Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Română Shqip سنڌي کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of understanding a complex topic or substance For other uses, see Analysis (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may lack focus or may be about more than one topic .

Please help improve this article , possibly by splitting the article or organising a disambiguation page . There might be further discussion about this on the talk page .

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Adriaen van Ostade , "Analysis" (1666) Part of a series on Research Research design Ethics Proposal Question Writing Argument Referencing Research strategy Interdisciplinary Multimethodology Qualitative Art-based Quantitative Philosophical schools Antipositivism Constructivism Critical rationalism Empiricism Fallibilism Positivism Postpositivism Pragmatism Realism Critical realism Subtle realism Methodology Action research Art methodology Critical theory Grounded theory Hermeneutics Historiography Human subject research Narrative inquiry Phenomenology Pragmatism Scientific method Methods Analysis Case study Content analysis Descriptive statistics Discourse analysis Ethnography Autoethnography Experiment Field experiment Social experiment Quasi-experiment Field research Historical method Inferential statistics Interviews Mapping Cultural mapping Phenomenography Secondary research Bibliometrics Literature review Meta-analysis Scoping review Systematic review Scientific modelling Simulation Survey Tools and software Argument technology GIS software LIS software Bibliometrics Reference management Science software Qualitative data analysis Simulation Statistics Philosophy portal v t e Analysis ( pl.

: analyses ) is the process of breaking a complex topic or substance into smaller parts in order to gain a better understanding of it. The technique has been applied in the study of mathematics and logic since before Aristotle (384–322 BC), though analysis as a formal concept is a relatively recent development.

[ 1 ] The word comes from the Ancient Greek ἀνάλυσις ( analysis , "a breaking-up" or "an untying" from ana- "up, throughout" and lysis "a loosening").

[ 2 ] From it also comes the word's plural, analyses .

As a formal concept, the method has variously been ascribed to René Descartes ( Discourse on the Method ), and Galileo Galilei . It has also been ascribed to Isaac Newton , in the form of a practical method of physical discovery (which he did not name).

The converse of analysis is synthesis : putting the pieces back together again in a new or different whole.

Science and technology [ edit ] Chemistry [ edit ] A clinical chemistry analyzer See also: Analytical chemistry , List of chemical analysis methods , and Chemical synthesis The field of chemistry uses analysis in three ways: to identify the components of a particular chemical compound (qualitative analysis), [ 3 ] to identify the proportions of components in a mixture (quantitative analysis), [ 4 ] and to break down chemical processes and examine chemical reactions between elements of matter .

[ 5 ] For an example of its use, analysis of the concentration of elements is important in managing a nuclear reactor , so nuclear scientists will analyze neutron activation to develop discrete measurements within vast samples. A matrix can have a considerable effect on the way a chemical analysis is conducted and the quality of its results. Analysis can be done manually or with a device .

Types of Analysis [ edit ] Qualitative Analysis It is concerned with which components are in a given sample or compound.

Example: Precipitation reaction Quantitative Analysis It is to determine the quantity of individual component present in a given sample or compound.

Example: To find concentration by uv-spectrophotometer.

Isotopes [ edit ] See also: Isotope analysis and Isotope geochemistry Chemists can use isotope analysis to assist analysts with issues in anthropology , archeology , food chemistry , forensics , geology , and a host of other questions of physical science . Analysts can discern the origins of natural and man-made isotopes in the study of environmental radioactivity .

Computer science [ edit ] Requirements analysis – encompasses those tasks that go into determining the needs or conditions to meet for a new or altered product, taking account of the possibly conflicting requirements of the various stakeholders, such as beneficiaries or users.

Competitive analysis (online algorithm) – shows how online algorithms perform and demonstrates the power of randomization in algorithms Lexical analysis – the process of processing an input sequence of characters and producing as output a sequence of symbols Object-oriented analysis and design – à la Booch Program analysis (computer science) – the process of automatically analysing the behavior of computer programs Semantic analysis (computer science) – a pass by a compiler that adds semantical information to the parse tree and performs certain checks Static code analysis – the analysis of computer software that is performed without actually executing programs built from that Structured systems analysis and design methodology – à la Yourdon Syntax analysis – a process in compilers that recognizes the structure of programming languages, also known as parsing Worst-case execution time – determines the longest time that a piece of software can take to run Engineering [ edit ] See also: Engineering analysis and Systems analysis Analysts in the field of engineering look at requirements , structures , mechanisms, systems and dimensions .

Electrical engineers analyse systems in electronics .

Life cycles and system failures are broken down and studied by engineers. It is also looking at different factors incorporated within the design.

Mathematics [ edit ] Main article: Mathematical analysis Modern mathematical analysis is the study of infinite processes. It is the branch of mathematics that includes calculus.  It can be applied in the study of classical concepts of mathematics, such as real numbers , complex variables , trigonometric functions , and algorithms , or of non-classical concepts like constructivism , harmonics , infinity , and vectors .

Florian Cajori explains in A History of Mathematics (1893) the difference between modern and ancient mathematical analysis, as distinct from logical analysis, as follows: The terms synthesis and analysis are used in mathematics in a more special sense than in logic. In ancient mathematics they had a different meaning from what they now have. The oldest definition of mathematical analysis as opposed to synthesis is that given in [appended to] Euclid , XIII. 5, which in all probability was framed by Eudoxus : "Analysis is the obtaining of the thing sought by assuming it and so reasoning up to an admitted truth; synthesis is the obtaining of the thing sought by reasoning up to the inference and proof of it." The analytic method is not conclusive, unless all operations involved in it are known to be reversible. To remove all doubt, the Greeks, as a rule, added to the analytic process a synthetic one, consisting of a reversion of all operations occurring in the analysis. Thus the aim of analysis was to aid in the discovery of synthetic proofs or solutions.

James Gow uses a similar argument as Cajori, with the following clarification, in his A Short History of Greek Mathematics (1884): The synthetic proof proceeds by shewing that the proposed new truth involves certain admitted truths. An analytic proof begins by an assumption, upon which a synthetic reasoning is founded. The Greeks distinguished theoretic from problematic analysis. A theoretic analysis is of the following kind. To prove that A is B, assume first that A is B. If so, then, since B is C and C is D and D is E, therefore A is E. If this be known a falsity, A is not B. But if this be a known truth and all the intermediate propositions be convertible , then the reverse process, A is E, E is D, D is C, C is B, therefore A is B, constitutes a synthetic proof of the original theorem. Problematic analysis is applied in all cases where it is proposed to construct a figure which is assumed to satisfy a given condition. The problem is then converted into some theorem which is involved in the condition and which is proved synthetically, and the steps of this synthetic proof taken backwards are a synthetic solution of the problem.

Psychotherapy [ edit ] Psychoanalysis – seeks to elucidate connections among unconscious components of patients' mental processes Transactional analysis Transactional analysis is used by therapists to try to gain a better understanding of the unconscious.  It focuses on understanding and intervening human behavior.

[ 6 ] Signal processing [ edit ] Finite element analysis – a computer simulation technique used in engineering analysis Independent component analysis Link quality analysis – the analysis of signal quality Path quality analysis Fourier analysis Statistics [ edit ] In statistics , the term analysis may refer to any method used
for data analysis . Among the many such methods, some are: Analysis of variance (ANOVA) – a collection of statistical models and their associated procedures which compare means by splitting the overall observed variance into different parts Boolean analysis – a method to find deterministic dependencies between variables in a sample, mostly used in exploratory data analysis Cluster analysis – techniques for finding groups (called clusters), based on some measure of proximity or similarity Factor analysis – a method to construct models describing a data set of observed variables in terms of a smaller set of unobserved variables (called factors) Meta-analysis – combines the results of several studies that address a set of related research hypotheses Multivariate analysis – analysis of data involving several variables, such as by factor analysis, regression analysis, or principal component analysis Principal component analysis – transformation of a sample of correlated variables into uncorrelated variables (called principal components), mostly used in exploratory data analysis Regression analysis – techniques for analysing the relationships between several predictive variables and one or more outcomes in the data Scale analysis (statistics) – methods to analyse survey data by scoring responses on a numeric scale Sensitivity analysis – the study of how the variation in the output of a model depends on variations in the inputs Sequential analysis – evaluation of sampled data as it is collected, until the criterion of a stopping rule is met Spatial analysis – the study of entities using geometric or geographic properties Time-series analysis – methods that attempt to understand a sequence of data points spaced apart at uniform time intervals Business [ edit ] Financial statement analysis – the analysis of the accounts and the economic prospects of a firm Financial analysis – refers to an assessment of the viability, stability, and profitability of a business , sub-business or project Gap analysis – involves the comparison of actual performance with potential or desired performance of an organization Business analysis – involves identifying the needs and determining the solutions to business problems Price analysis – involves the breakdown of a price to a unit figure Market analysis – consists of suppliers and customers, and price is determined by the interaction of supply and demand Sum-of-the-parts analysis – method of valuation of a multi-divisional company Opportunity analysis – consists of customers trends within the industry, customer demand and experience determine purchasing behavior Economics [ edit ] Agroecosystem analysis Input–output model if applied to a region, is called Regional Impact Multiplier System Government [ edit ] Intelligence [ edit ] See also: Intelligence analysis The field of intelligence employs analysts to break down and understand a wide array of questions.

Intelligence agencies may use heuristics , inductive and deductive reasoning , social network analysis , dynamic network analysis , link analysis , and brainstorming to sort through problems they face.

Military intelligence may explore issues through the use of game theory , Red Teaming , and wargaming .

Signals intelligence applies cryptanalysis and frequency analysis to break codes and ciphers .

Business intelligence applies theories of competitive intelligence analysis and competitor analysis to resolve questions in the marketplace .

Law enforcement intelligence applies a number of theories in crime analysis .

Policy [ edit ] Policy analysis – The use of statistical data to predict the effects of policy decisions made by governments and agencies Policy analysis includes a systematic process to find the most efficient and effective option to address the current situation.

[ 7 ] Qualitative analysis – The use of anecdotal evidence to predict the effects of policy decisions or, more generally, influence policy decisions Humanities and social sciences [ edit ] Linguistics [ edit ] See also: Linguistics Linguistics explores individual languages and language in general. It breaks language down and analyses its component parts: theory , sounds and their meaning , utterance usage , word origins , the history of words , the meaning of words and word combinations , sentence construction , basic construction beyond the sentence level , stylistics , and conversation . It examines the above using statistics and modeling , and semantics . It analyses language in context of anthropology , biology , evolution , geography , history , neurology , psychology , and sociology . It also takes the applied approach, looking at individual language development and clinical issues.

Literature [ edit ] Literary criticism is the analysis of literature . The focus can be as diverse as the analysis of Homer or Freud . While not all literary-critical methods are primarily analytical in nature, the main approach to the teaching of literature in the west since the mid-twentieth century, literary formal analysis or close reading, is. This method, rooted in the academic movement labelled The New Criticism , approaches texts – chiefly short poems such as sonnets , which by virtue of their small size and significant complexity lend themselves well to this type of analysis – as units of discourse that can be understood in themselves, without reference to biographical or historical frameworks. This method of analysis breaks up the text linguistically in a study of prosody (the formal analysis of meter) and phonic effects such as alliteration and rhyme , and cognitively in examination of the interplay of syntactic structures, figurative language, and other elements of the poem that work to produce its larger effects.

Music [ edit ] Musical analysis – a process attempting to answer the question "How does this music work?" Musical Analysis is a study of how the composers use the notes together to compose music. Those studying music will find differences with each composer's musical analysis, which differs depending on the culture and history of music studied. An analysis of music is meant to simplify the music for you.

[ 8 ] Schenkerian analysis Schenkerian analysis is a collection of music analysis that focuses on the production of the graphic representation. This includes both analytical procedure as well as the notational style.

[ 9 ] Simply put, it analyzes tonal music which includes all chords and tones within a composition.

[ 8 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Philosophical analysis – a general term for the techniques used by philosophers Philosophical analysis refers to the clarification and composition of words put together and the entailed meaning behind them.

[ 10 ] Philosophical analysis dives deeper into the meaning of words and seeks to clarify that meaning by contrasting the various definitions. It is the study of reality, justification of claims, and the analysis of various concepts. Branches of philosophy include logic, justification, metaphysics, values and ethics.  If questions can be answered empirically, meaning it can be answered by using the senses, then it is not considered philosophical. Non-philosophical questions also include events that happened in the past, or questions science or mathematics can answer.

[ 10 ] Analysis is the name of a prominent journal in philosophy.

Other [ edit ] Aura analysis – a pseudoscientific technique in which supporters of the method claim that the body's aura, or energy field is analysed Bowling analysis – Analysis of the performance of cricket players Lithic analysis – the analysis of stone tools using basic scientific techniques Lithic analysis is most often used by archeologists in determining which types of tools were used at a given time period pertaining to current artifacts discovered.

[ 11 ] Protocol analysis – a means for extracting persons' thoughts while they are performing a task See also [ edit ] Formal analysis Metabolism in biology Methodology Scientific method Synthesis (disambiguation) – list of terms related to synthesis , the converse of analysis References [ edit ] ^ Beaney, Michael (Summer 2012).

"Analysis" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 23 May 2012 .

^ Douglas Harper (2001–2012).

"analysis (n.)" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Douglas Harper . Retrieved 23 May 2012 .

^ "Qualitative Analysis" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ "Quantitative Chemical Analysis".

Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions . OpenStaxCollege. October 2014.

^ "CHEMICAL AND BIOMOLECULAR ENGINEERING" (PDF) . Spring 2018.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Hargaden, Helena; Sills, Charlotte (23 April 2014).

Transactional Analysis .

doi : 10.4324/9781315820279 .

ISBN 9781315820279 .

^ "Dye, Dr Christopher", Who's Who , Oxford University Press, 1 December 2012, doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.256626 ^ a b Warfield, Scott (November 2014). "Lady in the Dark: Biography of a Musical. By bruce d. mcclung. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007. - Oklahoma!: The Making of an American Musical. By Tim Carter. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007. - South Pacific: Paradise Rewritten. By Jim Lovensheimer. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. - Wicked: A Musical Biography. By Paul R. Laird. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2011".

Journal of the Society for American Music .

8 (4): 587– 596.

doi : 10.1017/s1752196314000443 .

ISSN 1752-1963 .

S2CID 232401945 .

^ Neumeyer, David (November 2018).

Guide to Schenkerian Analysis . The University of Texas at Austin; University of Texas Libraries.

doi : 10.15781/T2D21S443 (inactive 1 July 2025).

hdl : 2152/70263 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b Hospers, John (15 April 2013).

An Introduction to Philosophical Analysis .

doi : 10.4324/9780203714454 .

ISBN 9780203714454 .

^ McCall, Grant (March 2012). "In Memory of George H. Odell".

Lithic Technology .

37 (1): 3– 4.

doi : 10.1179/lit.2012.37.1.3 .

ISSN 0197-7261 .

S2CID 108647958 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Analysis .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Analysis .

Look up Analysis or analysis in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Analysis at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project "Analysis" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Analysis at PhilPapers Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kmbpd
Cached time: 20250814221459
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.627 seconds
Real time usage: 0.788 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2153/1000000
Revision size: 22270/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 71378/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8046/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 68033/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.436/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22625148/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  670.932      1 -total
 22.59%  151.567      1 Template:Reflist
 16.05%  107.673      1 Template:Lang
 15.42%  103.448      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.15%   81.494      1 Template:Research
 11.69%   78.417      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.79%   72.412      2 Template:Ambox
 10.60%   71.141      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  8.84%   59.322      1 Template:Short_description
  8.06%   54.069      1 Template:Morefootnotes Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1134:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221459 and revision id 1300009723. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Analysis&oldid=1300009723 " Categories : Analysis Abstraction Critical thinking skills Emergence Empiricism Epistemological theories Intelligence Mathematical modeling Metaphysics of mind Methodology Ontology Philosophy of logic Rationalism Reasoning Research methods Scientific method Theory of mind Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles lacking focus from February 2023 All Wikipedia articles lacking focus Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 19:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Analysis 49 languages Add topic

