Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Precursors 1.2 Current institution 1.3 Athletics 1.4 The Register Forum 1.5 Media Arts Program 1.6 Controversies 2 Notable alumni 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Rindge and Latin School Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′27″N 71°06′43″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37417°N 71.11194°W ﻿ / 42.37417; -71.11194 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public school in Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States Cambridge Rindge and Latin School Location 459 Broadway Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 United States Coordinates 42°22′27″N 71°06′43″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37417°N 71.11194°W ﻿ / 42.37417; -71.11194 Information Type Public Motto Opportunity, Diversity, and Respect Established 1648 ; 377 years ago ( 1648 ) School district Cambridge Public School District Principal Alan Gately-Gehant (interim) (preceded by            Damon Smith) Teaching staff 217 (2021–2022) [ 1 ] Grades 9 – 12 Age range 14–20 Enrollment 1,979 (2023–2024) [ 2 ] Color(s) Black, Silver and White Athletics conference MIAA District A – Dual County League Mascot Falcons Accreditation NEASC Newspaper The Register Forum Nobel laureates Eric Allin Cornell Website crls .cpsd .us The Cambridge Rindge and Latin School (also known as "CRLS" or "Rindge") is a public high school in Cambridge, Massachusetts , United States. It is a part of the Cambridge Public School District . In 1977, two separate schools, Rindge Technical School and Cambridge High and Latin School, merged to form the Cambridge Rindge and Latin School. The newly built high school at the time increased its capacity to more than 2,000 students in all four grades.

History [ edit ] Precursors [ edit ] In 1642, the year Harvard College 's first class of nine young men was graduated, the General Court made it the duty of Cambridge to require that parents and masters properly educate their children or be fined if they neglected to do so.  In 1648, Cambridge set up a public grammar school, Master Elijah Corlett's "lattin schoole," making Cambridge the fifth town (after Boston, Charlestown, Dorchester, and Salem) in the Massachusetts Bay Colony to do so. Corlett's schoolhouse came into the possession of Old Cambridge in 1660, and over the next century was succeeded by several new buildings. The public school that evolved from Cortlett's original was a "grammar school" in a double sense: an English grammar school for Old Cambridge and a Latin grammar school (teaching the rudiments of Latin and Greek) for all Cambridge.

[ 4 ] The school generally aimed to prepare students for admission to college: "And by the side of the colledge a faire GRAMMAR Schoole, for the training up of young Schollars, and fitting of them for ACADEMICALL LEARNING, that still as they are judged ripe, they may be received into the colledge of this Schoole. Master CORLETT is the Mr., who hath very well approved himselfe for his abilities, dexterity and painfulness in teaching and education of the youth under him." [ 5 ] Education during this period was open only to boys, though by 1832, public schools in Cambridge were open to girls as well. In 1838, Cambridgeport organized a public high school to serve all of Cambridge at the corner of Broadway and Windsor Streets. However, since the location was not easily accessible to either Old Cambridge or East Cambridge, most of the new high schools' students were drawn from Cambridgeport. In 1843, Old Cambridge set up the Female High School, and East Cambridge completed its Otis schoolhouse.

Current institution [ edit ] Not until 1848 did plans to merge the high schools of the three competitive wards overcome sectional differences. This marked the origin of the Cambridge High School, which began in a new building erected at the corner of Amory and Summer streets and was immediately flooded with over 135 applicants.

[ 4 ] The Cambridge High School was divided in 1886: its classical department became the Cambridge Latin School and its remaining departments the Cambridge English High School. The English High School was located at the corner of Broadway and Fayette Streets, while the Latin School was transferred to the Lee Street church, which had been renovated to receive it. At the time of the separation, the high school contained 515 pupils, and 16 teachers. Six teachers and 165 pupils went to the Latin school.

[ 4 ] From 1969 to 2000 the school hosted an experimental program known as The Pilot School, founded as a joint venture of the Cambridge public schools and the Harvard Graduate School of Education .

[ 6 ] The Pilot School was established to offer a small classroom experience including outside-of-school experiences.

[ 7 ] The program closed in June 2000 as part of an overall restructuring of the school.

[ 8 ] In 2001 there was an attempt to restructure the Cambridge Rindge & Latin school under headmaster Paula Evans, which had found controversy. She resigned shortly afterwards. After her resignation she began efforts to create a charter school, which became the Community Charter School of Cambridge (CCSC). Colleen Walsh of the Boston Globe said that Evans's charter school efforts "touched off a firestorm" and that "many people" were upset at her because they perceived that she had abandoned Cambridge Rindge & Latin.

[ 9 ] Beginning in 2003, the City of Cambridge set in motion an plan for CRLS: "the first major renovation and refurbishing of the 35-year-old [sic] high school building." [ 10 ] The project continued to be pushed back, due to state funding issues and other obstructions along the way.  In 2006, the state announced a return in funding, and by the Spring 2007 the School Committee started looking at wider-ranging renovations for the building. The renovations were at last undertaken in 2009-2011.

[ 10 ] Athletics [ edit ] Athletics have always played a major part in the school's extracurricular activity structure.

[ 11 ] The 11 fall sports take place between September and Thanksgiving (the day of the football team's final game), Winter sports are played between the first Monday following Thanksgiving and February/March depending on the circumstances of the year. The ten spring sports start on the third Monday in March, and finish in the latter days of May.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] The Register Forum [ edit ] The school's newspaper is Register Forum . It was first founded in 1891 as the C.M.T.S Register, [ 15 ] the name was further changed to the Rindge Register, and in 1977, when the two public high schools in the city merged, their papers merged as well.

[ 16 ] The Cambridge Latin Forum merged with the Rindge Register to become The Register Forum . The Register Forum now publishes 10 editions per year at the end of each month, September to June. Those editions range from 8 to 24 pages, and focus on events around the city and school. The paper was formerly printed at The Harvard Crimson press, but has since moved production to out of state facilities due to cost restraints.

[ citation needed ] Media Arts Program [ edit ] During the early 21st century the Media Arts Studio was founded at 454 Broadway Ct in Cambridge MA. Throughout the years of the Media Arts Program, a large archive of film was broadcast on local channels 6 and 26, [ 17 ] some of the students who have participated in the Media Arts Studio Program have gone on to pursue careers in sports broadcasting from prestigious universities such as Syracuse.

[ 18 ] Controversies [ edit ] During the late 1980s and early 1990s, the school was subject to multiple accusations of inherent racism in its infrastructure, which led to the disbanding of the original houses, as well as the changing of the original school mascot from a bust of a Native American to a falcon and their name from Warriors to Falcons after concerns about the racist history of the mascot. Students entered their ideas and then voted for the new mascot in a school wide contest. The graduating class of 1990 was the last class to wear brown and gold, being the last of the Warriors.

[ 19 ] In 2000 the Commonwealth of Massachusetts uncovered a number of issues with the school's electrical and graphic arts vocational programs, citing below-standard safety equipment, staffing, and classroom space, and placed them on probation.

[ 20 ] CRLS has had student walkouts in protest of sexual assault and harassment at the school in 2016, [ 21 ] 2019, [ 22 ] and 2021.

[ 23 ] The 2021 walkout led to the creation of a feminist student advocacy group called Title IX Aurelia Advocates.

[ 24 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Ben Affleck (1990), actor, director, and screenwriter Casey Affleck (1993), actor Emily Banks , actress Shore Leave , model Miss Rheingold Matt Damon (1988), actor and screenwriter Nate Albert , musician Mighty Mighty Bosstones , record executive Leroy Anderson , composer [ 25 ] Orson Bean , actor Lukas Biewald , entrepreneur Traci Bingham , actress and model Maxime Bôcher (1883), mathematician Walter Brennan , actor and three-time Academy Award -winner Max Casella , (1985) actor, The Sopranos and Doogie Howser, M.D.

Peggy Cass , actress and comedian Del Castillo , (1893 – 1992), organist, composer [ 26 ] David Chu , Hong Kong politician [ 27 ] Jeremy Collins , Winner, Sole Survivor of Survivor: Cambodia Eric Cornell , 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics Bronson Crothers , pediatric neurologist E. E. Cummings , poet Bill de Blasio , the Mayor of New York City Patrick Ewing , (1981) NCAA Basketball champion and head coach of the Georgetown Hoyas , legendary center for the New York Knicks , and member of the Basketball Hall of Fame Wilma Cannon Fairbank (1928) Scholar of Chinese art, diplomat.

Jessica Garretson Finch (1893), author, suffragette , founding president of Finch College .

Helen Lee Franklin (1895 – 1949), teacher and social justice advocate Lily Fitts (2019), singer Gina Grant , known for gaining early admission to Harvard University , only to have it revoked when it was revealed that she had killed her mother Vernon Grant , cartoonist Sian Heder , writer/director of CODA (2021 film) and other films Emanuel D. Molyneaux Hewlett , one of the first African American attorneys to argue before the United States Supreme Court Karl Hobbs , head coach of the George Washington University Colonials basketball team Charles "Charlie" Jenkins , winner of two gold medals at the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne, Australia D. D. Kosambi (1907 – 1966), mathematician, statistician, Marxist historian of India, and polymath Rev.

Ashley Day Leavitt , pastor, Harvard Congregational Church, Brookline, Massachusetts Tom and Ray Magliozzi , aka Click and Clack, the Tappet Brothers , hosts of NPR 's Car Talk Paul F. O'Rourke , public health advisor Walter Pierce , director of Celebrity Series of Boston Rumeal Robinson , NCAA Basketball champion at Michigan and NBA player Harold Russell , World War II veteran and Academy Award winner William Russell , youngest person ever elected Governor of Massachusetts Walter J. Sullivan , Massachusetts politician [ 28 ] John Thomas , set several world records in the high jump. Winner of Bronze medal at 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome & Silver medal at 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo.

Jean Tatlock , psychiatrist, communist , and writer who was romantically involved with J. Robert Oppenheimer Dzhokhar Tsarnaev , [ 29 ] and Tamerlan Tsarnaev , Boston Marathon bombers - Philip Martin of WGBH described them as the school's "most infamous graduates".

[ 30 ] Korczak Ziółkowski , sculptor of the Crazy Horse Memorial Eddie Waitkus , Major League Baseball player Miles In Transit , Public transport advocate and Youtuber References [ edit ] ^ "Profile: CRLS: Teacher Data (2010–11)" , Massachusetts Department of Education ^ "Profile: CRLS: Enrollment Data" , Massachusetts Department of Education ^ "Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education - 2019-20 SAT Performance Report - All Students Statewide Report" .

^ a b c Arthur Gilman, ed. The Cambridge of 1896: a picture of the city and its industries fifty years after its incorporation. The Riverside Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1896. pages 187–197. Google Books ^ "History" , Cambridge Public School District (archived 2004) ^ Gollub, Wendy L.; Mulhauser, Fritz (September 1970).

"Cambridge Pilot School. First Year Report" .

^ "Alternative School Spokesmen Press Cambridge for Support" .

Harvard Crimson . March 21, 1973 . Retrieved August 2, 2018 .

^ Coleman, Sandy (May 2, 2000). "For School, A Final Bell: Nontraditional Program In Cambridge To Close Its Doors".

Boston Globe .

ProQuest 405348903 .

^ Walsh, Colleen. " A NEW SCHOOL CAMPAIGNS FOR CREDIBILITY; EDUCATOR UPBEAT DESPITE THE CRITICS ." Boston Globe . August 14, 2005. City Weekly p. 8. Retrieved on June 3, 2013.

^ a b "CRLS Renovation Project" . Archived from the original on September 27, 2008 . Retrieved September 29, 2008 .

^ "Cambridge Athletics Hall of Fame" .

^ "Fall Sports" .

^ "Winter Sports" .

^ "Spring Sports" .

^ "The Rindge register" .

^ "The Rindge register" .

^ "Cambridge Educational Access TV (CEATV) 6/26" .

^ "Sports Media and Communications Track" .

^ Duncan-Wald, Chloe; McArthur, LiLi.

"History of the CRLS Mascot" .

The Register Forum . Cambridge Rindge and Latin School . Retrieved April 5, 2019 .

^ Holbrook, Andrew S. (December 6, 2000).

"State Decertifies Programs at CRLS" . The Harvard Crimson, Inc . Retrieved March 24, 2024 .

^ Cummings, Jean (April 13, 2016).

"Student group leads high school walkout protesting culture of sexual harassment" . Cambridge Day . Retrieved April 8, 2025 .

^ Vandermark, Juliana (June 4, 2019).

"Sexual Assault Walkout" . The Register Forum . Retrieved April 8, 2025 .

^ Korn, Allison (December 24, 2021).

"Students Stage Walkout in Protest of Sexual Assault" . The Register Forum . Retrieved April 8, 2025 .

^ Bowers, Alex (February 3, 2022).

"Sexual consent education improvements pass after student walkouts that called out assaults" . Cambridge Day . Retrieved April 8, 2025 .

^ "Bio: Leroy Anderson" ^ "Rindge Diplomas Given; Exercises of the Cambridge Manual Training School Graduates at Sanders Theatre" .

The Boston Globe . June 16, 1910. p. 15. Retrieved May 26, 2023.

^ Theroux, Paul (2001).

Fresh Air Fiend: Travel Writings, 1985–2000 . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 258.

ISBN 9780618126934 .

^ 'Public Officials of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 1951–1952,' Biographical Sketch of Walter Joseph Sullivan, pg. 290 ^ Goode, Erica; Serge F. Kovaleski (April 20, 2013).

"Boy at Home in U.S., Swayed by One Who Wasn't" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 23, 2018 .

Dzhokhar, a handsome teenager with a wry yearbook smile, was liked and respected by his classmates at Cambridge Rindge and Latin School,[...] ^ Martin, Philip (March 25, 2015).

"Tsarnaev Trial Puts Cambridge Rindge & Latin High in National Spotlight" .

WGBH . Retrieved September 23, 2018 .

And since 2013, CRL has also become known for its most infamous graduates: the Brothers Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cambridge Rindge and Latin School .

Official website – CRLS website Cambridge Public School District website The CRLS Sub-Community of CambridgePublic, an unofficial information and discussion site Notable Cambridge Alumni Cambridge Rindge and Latin School Performance Information In Memoriam: Cambridge High and Latin School + Class of 1969 Yearbook Project v t e Cambridge, Massachusetts History Timeline Squares Central Square Harvard Square Inman Square Kendall Square Lechmere Square Porter Square Neighborhoods East Cambridge (Area 1) MIT Campus (Area 2) Wellington-Harrington (Area 3) The Port (Area 4) Cambridgeport (Area 5) Mid-Cambridge (Area 6) Riverside (Area 7) Agassiz (Area 8) Neighborhood Nine (Area 9) West Cambridge (Area 10) North Cambridge (Area 11) Cambridge Highlands (Area 12) Strawberry Hill (Area 13) Education Cambridge PSD Amigos School Graham and Parks School Rindge and Latin Community Charter Prospect Hill Academy Charter Buckingham Browne & Nichols School St. Paul's Choir School Harvard University template Massachusetts Institute of Technology template Lesley University Cambridge Public Library Landmarks List of tallest buildings and structures City Hall Harvard Book Store Mount Auburn Cemetery Transportation Bus routes MBTA Green Line ( Lechmere ) MBTA Red Line ( Alewife Central Harvard Porter Kendall/MIT ) MA-2 / MA-2A , MA-16 , MA-28 , MA-60 , US-3 This list is incomplete.

v t e Massachusetts public high schools Barnstable County Barnstable ( Barnstable Sturgis Charter ) Bourne ( Bourne Upper Cape Cod Regional Technical ) Chatham Dennis-Yarmouth Regional Falmouth Harwich ( Cape Cod Regional Technical Harwich Monomoy Regional ) Mashpee Nauset Regional Provincetown Sandwich Berkshire County Berkshire Arts & Technology Charter Hoosac Valley Lee Lenox Memorial Monument Mountain Regional Mount Everett Regional Mount Greylock Regional North Adams ( Drury Charles H. McCann Technical ) Pittsfield ( Pittsfield Taconic ) Wahconah Regional Bristol County Attleboro Dartmouth Dighton ( Dighton-Rehoboth Regional Bristol County Agricultural ) Fairhaven Easton ( Oliver Ames Southeastern Regional Vocational Technical ) Fall River ( B.M.C. Durfee Diman Regional Vocational Technical ) Joseph Case Mansfield New Bedford ( Greater New Bedford Regional Vocational-Technical New Bedford ) North Attleborough Norton Seekonk Somerset Berkley Regional Taunton ( Bristol-Plymouth Regional Technical Taunton ) Westport Dukes County Martha's Vineyard Regional Martha's Vineyard Charter Essex County Amesbury Andover ( Andover Greater Lawrence Technical ) Beverly ( Beverly Northshore Academy ) Danvers ( Danvers Essex Agricultural and Technical ) Georgetown Gloucester Hamilton-Wenham Regional Haverhill ( Haverhill Whittier Regional Vocational Technical ) Ipswich Lawrence Lynn ( Lynn Classical Lynn English Lynn Vocational and Technical ) Lynnfield Manchester Essex Regional Marblehead Masconomet Regional Methuen Newburyport North Andover North Shore Technical Peabody Veterans Memorial Pentucket Regional Rockport Salem Saugus Swampscott Triton Regional Franklin County Frontier Regional Greenfield ( Four Rivers Charter Greenfield ) Mohawk Trail Regional Montague ( Franklin County Technical Turners Falls ) Pioneer Valley Ralph C. Mahar Regional Hampden County Agawam Chicopee ( Chicopee Comprehensive Chicopee ) East Longmeadow Holyoke Longmeadow Ludlow Minnechaug Regional Monson Palmer ( Palmer Pathfinder Vocational Technical ) Southwick Regional Springfield ( SABIS International Charter Springfield High School of Commerce Roger L Putnam Vocational-Technical Springfield Central Springfield High School of Science and Technology Springfield Renaissance ) West Springfield Westfield ( Westfield Westfield Technical ) Hampshire County Amherst Regional Belchertown Easthampton Gateway Regional Granby Junior Senior Hampshire Regional Hopkins Academy Northampton ( Northampton Smith Vocational and Agricultural ) Smith Academy South Hadley ( Pioneer Valley Performing Arts Charter South Hadley ) Ware Middlesex County Acton-Boxborough Regional Arlington Ashland Ayer ( Ayer Shirley Regional Francis W. Parker Charter ) Bedford Belmont Billerica ( Billerica Memorial Shawsheen Valley Technical ) Burlington Cambridge ( Cambridge Rindge and Latin Community Charter School of Cambridge Prospect Hill Academy Charter School ) Chelmsford Concord-Carlisle Dracut Everett ( Everett Pioneer Charter School of Science ) Framingham ( Framingham Joseph P. Keefe Technical ) Groton-Dunstable Regional Holliston Hopkinton Hudson Lexington ( Lexington Minuteman Career and Technical ) Lincoln-Sudbury Regional Littleton Lowell ( Lowell Lowell Middlesex Academy Charter ) Malden ( Malden Mystic Valley Regional Charter ) Marlborough ( Advanced Math and Science Academy Charter Assabet Valley Regional Technical Marlborough ) Maynard Medford ( Medford Medford Vocational Technical ) Melrose Natick Newton ( Newton North Newton South ) North Middlesex Regional North Reading Reading Memorial Somerville Stoneham Tewksbury Memorial Tyngsborough ( Greater Lowell Technical Innovation Academy Charter Tyngsborough ) Wakefield ( Northeast Metro Tech Wakefield Memorial ) Waltham Watertown Wayland Westford ( Nashoba Valley Technical Westford Academy ) Weston Wilmington Winchester Woburn Memorial Nantucket County Nantucket Norfolk County Avon Middle High Bellingham ( Bellingham Primavera Junior/Senior ) Braintree Brookline Canton ( Blue Hills Regional Technical Canton ) Cohasset Dedham Dover-Sherborn Foxborough ( Foxborough Foxborough Regional Charter ) Franklin ( Franklin Tri-County Regional Vocational Technical ) Holbrook Junior Senior King Philip Regional Medfield Medway Millis Milton Needham Norwood Quincy ( North Quincy Quincy ) Randolph Sharon Stoughton Walpole ( Norfolk County Agricultural Walpole ) Wellesley Westwood Weymouth Plymouth County Abington Apponequet Regional Bridgewater-Raynham Regional Brockton ( Brockton Brockton Champion Edison Academy Frederick Douglass Academy Goddard Alternative School ) Carver Duxbury East Bridgewater Hanover ( Hanover South Shore Vocational Technical ) Hingham Hull Marshfield Middleborough Norwell ( Norwell South Shore Charter ) Old Colony Regional Vocational Technical Old Rochester Regional Pembroke Plymouth ( Plymouth North Plymouth South Rising Tide Charter MAP Academy ) Rockland Senior Scituate Silver Lake Regional Wareham West Bridgewater Whitman-Hanson Regional Suffolk County Boston ( Academy of the Pacific Rim Charter Another Course to College Boston Arts Academy Boston Community Leadership Academy Boston Day and Evening Academy Boston Latin Academy Boston Latin School Brighton Charlestown City on a Hill Charter Codman Academy Charter Dorchester East Boston Edward M. Kennedy Academy for Health Careers The English High School Excel Fenway Greater Egleston Hyde Park Jamaica Plain Jeremiah E. Burke School John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics & Science Madison Park Technical Vocational Match Charter Monument New Mission Odyssey Roxbury Charter Roxbury Memorial Snowden International School South Boston TechBoston Academy West Roxbury ) Chelsea ( Chelsea Phoenix Charter ) Revere ( Revere SeaCoast ) Winthrop Worcester County Algonquin Regional Athol Auburn Bartlett Junior Senior Blackstone-Millville Regional Bay Path Regional Vocational Technical The Bromfield School Clinton David Prouty Douglas Fitchburg ( Fitchburg North Central Essential Charter ) Gardner Grafton Hopedale Junior Senior Leicester Leominster Lunenburg Milford Millbury Murdock Montachusett Regional Vocational Technical Narragansett Regional Nashoba Regional North Brookfield Northbridge Oakmont Regional Oxford Quabbin Regional Quaboag Regional Southbridge Sutton Upton ( Blackstone Valley Regional Vocational Technical Nipmuc Regional ) Worcester ( Abby Kelley Foster Charter Burncoat Doherty Memorial Massachusetts Academy of Math and Science at WPI North South High Community School University Park Campus School Worcester Technical ) Shepherd Hill Regional Shrewsbury Tahanto Regional Tantasqua Regional Uxbridge Wachusett Regional West Boylston Westborough Italics indicates closed schools Portals : Massachusetts Schools Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Geographic MusicBrainz place NCES Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_Rindge_and_Latin_School&oldid=1304609168 " Categories : 1648 establishments in the Massachusetts Bay Colony 1977 establishments in Massachusetts Educational institutions established in the 1640s Educational institutions established in 1977 Buildings and structures in Cambridge, Massachusetts Public high schools in Massachusetts Schools in Cambridge, Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Use mdy dates from October 2015 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Official website not in Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 02:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Rindge and Latin School Add languages Add topic

