Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Elements 2 Environmental justice Toggle Environmental justice subsection 2.1 United States 3 North America Toggle North America subsection 3.1 Canada 3.2 United States 4 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 4.1 Philippines 5 Australia Toggle Australia subsection 5.1 New South Wales 5.2 Victoria 5.3 South Australia 5.4 Queensland 6 Europe 7 Professional qualifications 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Notes 9.2 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Environmental planning 11 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa 日本語 Suomi Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Considering environment in developing land This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with Australia and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( August 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Grassed tram track in Belgrade, Serbia Environmental planning is the process of facilitating decision making to carry out land development with the consideration given to the natural environment, social, political, economic and governance factors and provides a holistic framework to achieve sustainable outcomes. A major goal of environmental planning is to create sustainable communities, which aim to conserve and protect undeveloped land.

[ 1 ] Elements [ edit ] Part of a series on Sustainable energy Energy conservation Arcology Building insulation Cogeneration Compact fluorescent lamp Eco hotel Eco-cities Ecohouse Ecolabel Efficient energy use Energy audit Energy efficiency implementation Energy recovery Energy recycling Energy saving lamp Energy Star Energy storage Environmental planning Environmental technology Fossil fuel phase-out Glass in green buildings Green building and wood Green building Heat pump List of low-energy building techniques Low-energy house Microgeneration Passive house Passive solar building design Sustainable architecture Sustainable city Sustainable habitat Sustainable refurbishment Thermal energy storage Tropical green building Waste-to-energy Zero heating building Zero-energy building Renewable energy Biofuel Sustainable Biogas Biomass Carbon-neutral fuel Geothermal energy Geothermal power Geothermal heating Hydropower Hydroelectricity Micro hydro Pico hydro Run-of-the-river Small hydro Marine current power Marine energy Tidal power Tidal barrage Tidal farm Tidal stream generator Ocean thermal energy conversion Renewable energy transition Renewable heat Solar Wave Wind Community Farm Floating wind turbine Forecasting Industry Lens Outline Rights Turbine Windbelt Windpump Sustainable transport Green vehicle Electric vehicle Bicycle Solar vehicle Wind-powered vehicle Human-electric Twike Plug-in Human-powered transport Helicopter Hydrofoil Land vehicle Bicycle Cycle rickshaw Kick scooter Quadracycle Tricycle Velomobile Roller skating Skateboarding Walking Watercraft Personal transporter Rail transport Tram Rapid transit Personal rapid transit Category Renewable energy portal v t e Environmental planning concerns itself with the decision making processes where they are required for managing relationships that exist within and between natural systems and human systems. Environmental planning endeavors to manage these processes in an effective, orderly, transparent and equitable manner for the benefit of all constituents within such systems for the present and for the future. Present day environmental planning practices are the result of continuous refinement and expansion of the scope of such decision making processes.
Some of the main elements of present-day environmental planning are: Social and economic development Urban development Regional development Natural resource management and integrated land use Infrastructure systems Governance frameworks The environmental planning assessments encompass areas such as land use, socio-economics , transportation , economic and housing characteristics, air pollution , noise pollution , the wetlands , habitat of the endangered species , flood zones susceptibility, coastal zones erosion , and visual studies among others, and is referred to as an Integrated environmental planning assessment.

[ 2 ] It is the ability to analyze environmental issues that will facilitate critical decision making.

Many environmental planning actions currently revolve around the reduction of emissions and material reuse, not adaptations in order to lessen future climate change impacts.

[ 3 ] This is most frequently seen as a result of the difficulty of predicting the long term effects of climate change. Climate action is very complex in nature and the timeline of emissions mitigation is unpredictable. However, as an alternative to avoiding adaptation, several cities in the US have taken an "anticipatory governance" approach. This method intends to explore the uncertainty surrounding the impacts of climate change specific to their communities in order to include adaptation in their environmental planning.

[ 3 ] Environmental justice [ edit ] Environmental justice is the equitable inclusion and treatment of all human beings in all aspects of environmental planning, as well as in the enforcement of environmental legislation.

[ 4 ] It is increasingly recognized as a key part of environmental planning. Environmental justice issues are usually fought within communities to establish environmentally-friendly and accessible neighborhoods and living conditions, and to improve the local ecology. The Environmental Protection Agency has declared it essential that residents should play an active role in the reshaping of their neighborhoods.

[ 5 ] Many levels of government and international organizations agree on the need for equitable and sustainable housing and transportation, as core characteristics of environmental justice; these are considered today a part of the battle against the climate crisis. Environmental activists act as watchdogs on government support for the battles of underrepresented communities against environmental hazards that threaten their health or way of life.

United States [ edit ] In the United States of America, there have been numerous examples of the state provisioning of environmental justice in multiple communities. Listed are some of such projects: The Phillips community in Minneapolis, Minnesota: The Phillips community began a campaign against the city of Minneapolis to halt the construction of a garbage transfer station in their neighborhood. The city was ordered for the demolition of twenty-eight homes for the site, amassing ten acres of land; this project was soon stopped by the aforementioned Phillips neighborhood.

[ 6 ] The people of Phillips established an organization known as the "Green Institute" afterwards in order to repurpose this vacant ten-acre lot. The Green Institute partnered with the city of Minneapolis to create sustainable business enterprises to ultimately bolster the job market while improving Minneapolis' environment by reducing waste and promoting clean energy techniques.

[ 6 ] With funding from the city government of Minneapolis, the Green Institute has established city-wide projects such as the "ReUse Center" and the "DeConstruction" service. The ReUse Center's services provide systems to repurpose scavenged construction materials so that building waste is reduced; the DeConstruction service assists those who want to collect discarded construction materials from demolition or building sites to reclaim.

[ 6 ] With these services, it is estimated that up to 75 percent of unused structures can be repurposed and then sold for new uses.

[ 6 ] This idea for the Green Institute, first drummed up by the citizens of the Phillips community, was quickly incorporated as a government-funded project that advocates for environmental justice.

North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] In Canada, "Planners safeguard the health and well-being of urban and rural communities, by addressing the use of land, resources, facilities and services with consideration to physical, economic, and social efficiency" as stated on the Canadian Institute of Planners official website.

United States [ edit ] Local municipals around the US are implementing Climate Action Plans (CAPs) as urban areas grow. However, the level of detail is variable; some act more as motivational goals while others are a concrete plan for implementation.

[ 7 ] In the United States, for any project, environmental planners deal with a full range of environmental regulations from federal to state and city levels, administered federally by the Environmental Protection Agency .

[ 8 ] A rigorous environmental process has to be undertaken to examine the impacts and possible mitigation of any construction project was Depending on the scale and impact of the project, an extensive environmental review is known as an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), and the less extensive version is Environmental Assessment (EA). Procedures follow guidelines from National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA) and/or City Environmental Quality Review (CEQR), and other related federal or state agencies published regulations. Eccleston has developed a set of tools and techniques for solving NEPA and environmental planning problems.

[1] A study found that the best may to minimize information asymmetry and goal incongruence between organizations working to implement environmental policy is to focus on principal-agent dynamics thus avoiding conflict and allowing for progress in addressing environmental issues.

[ 9 ] The Association of Environmental Professionals (AEP) is a non-profit organization of interdisciplinary professionals including environmental science, resource management, environmental planning and other professions contributing to this field. AEP is the first organization of its kind in the US, and its influence and model have spawned numerous other regional organizations throughout the United States. Its mission is to improve the technical skills of members, and the organization is dedicated to "the enhancement, maintenance and protection of the natural and human environment". From inception in the mid-1970s the organization has been closely linked with the maintenance of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), due to California being one of the first states to adopt a comprehensive legal framework to govern the environmental review of public policy and project review.

Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) in the major qualification system for green building. It is a certification system created by the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) and is used worldwide. The program includes certifications for new types of buildings as well as existing building that are candidates for modification. The multi-tiered point system enables building to be certified beyond local, state and federal standards.

[ 10 ] LEED standards play an important role in quantifying a building's environmental impact, encouraging  sustainable environmental practices, and acting as a hybrid between "material objects and human practices." [ 11 ] Asia [ edit ] Philippines [ edit ] In the Philippines, Republic Act 10587 governs the practice of Environmental Planning.

[ 12 ] The law defines environmental planning as "a multi-disciplinary art and science of analyzing, specifying, clarifying, harmonizing, managing, and regulating the use and development of land and water resources in relation to their environs, for the development of sustainable communities and ecosystems." It is sometimes referred to as urban and regional planning , city planning , town and country planning , or human settlements planning .

An Environmental Planner is a person who is registered and licensed to practice environmental planning in the Philippines. To be a licensed environmental planner, an individual must hold a valid Certificate of Registration issued by the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC). To obtain these credentials, candidates must pass the Environmental Planning Board Exam.

[ 13 ] Currently, there is a proposal to require a Bachelor of Science in Environmental Planning as a requisite for becoming a licensed environmental planner, with the change expected to take effect within five years. As of this writing, the curriculum for the BS Environmental Planning program is under review by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) .

The Philippine Institute of Environmental Planners (PIEP) is the only accredited professional organization for environmental planners in the Philippines. PIEP serves as the official body for advancing the profession and ensuring environmental planners adhere to high professional standards.

Australia [ edit ] Planning in Australia has shifted from a focus on amenity and resource use to a more integrated approach. Australia incorporated environmental considerations in land-use planning following the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment . This alignment with global trends reflected a shift towards integrated development planning that considers environmental impacts.

New South Wales [ edit ] In NSW the first attempt to incorporate environmental assessment and protection into planning law began in 1974 with the appointment of a Planning and Environment Commission to overhaul the existing predominately urban land-use system. After various delays the Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979 (EP&A Act) came into force on 1 September 1980. The EP&A Act establishes a framework for assessing the environmental and community impacts of development proposals. It requires varying levels of assessment based on significance, and considers input from regulatory bodies and the public. The Act has been updated to give the government more influence in approvals, while also incorporating environmental protection measures.

Victoria [ edit ] The Environment Effects Act 1978 was the first environmental planning control in Victoria, and it assessed the environmental impact of significant developments via an Environmental Effects Statement (EES). However the obligation for presenting an EES remained somewhat unclear and is ultimately at the discretion of the Minister for Planning (Eccles and Bryant 2007). The Planning and Environment Act 1987 created a statewide nested planning process, Victoria Planning Provisions (VPP) which has within the statewide objectives: "the protection of natural and man-made resources and the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic diversity" (PaE Act 1987, s4(1)) To achieve these ends, the VPP includes several overarching policy frameworks, including the identification of important environmental values and assets, such as 'protection of catchments, waterways and groundwater', 'coastal areas' and 'Conservation of native flora and fauna'. Below this level, local planning schemes identify land-uses through Zone designation, and also identify land affected by other criteria, called 'overlays'. Overlays include environmental parameters such as 'Environmental Significance', 'Vegetation Protection', 'Erosion Management' and 'Wildfire Management', but also social issues like 'Neighbourhood Character'. Below this again are various regulations on particular issues, such as details pertaining to regulation of areas of Native Vegetation DSE Victoria.

Reform has occurred to the Victorian framework in recent years aimed at improving land use and transport outcomes including consideration of environmental impacts. 
The Transport Integration Act [ 14 ] identifies key planning agencies as interface bodies required to have regard to a vision for the transport system and objectives and decision making principles if decisions are likely to have a significant impact on Victoria's transport system.  In addition, the Major Transport Projects Facilitation Act 2009 [ 15 ] establishes a scheme to improve the approval and delivery of major rail, road and ports projects.

South Australia [ edit ] Planning in South Australia is coordinated within the Development Act 1993. Under this law most urban and land-use planning is assessed against local plans of allowed development. The Minister must declare a proposed development either 'Major Development' or a 'Major Project' for it to be subjected to greater depth of environmental assessment and public consultation, via an independent Development Assessment Commission of experts. Complex proposals will generally require an indepth EIS. Planning SA Queensland [ edit ] The Integrated Planning Act 1997 [ 16 ] vested most planning control with local government, but required 'significant projects' to be assessed by a State Coordinator General and usually required an environmental impact statement (EIS).

[ 17 ] This has been replaced by the Sustainable Planning Act 2009 [ 18 ] which came into force 18 December 2009. This law aims to 'improve sustainable environmental outcomes through streamlined processes', and incorporates Statewide, Regional and local planning hierarchies, which follow the model of Victoria's VPP.  The Coordinator General may still declare projects to be 'significant projects' which then require assessment under the State Development and Public Works Organisation Act 1971 (Qld).

[ 19 ] Europe [ edit ] Over the past decade the European Union has given the environment more attention with more strict legislation on issues such as air , soil , and water pollution as well regulations for toxic and hazardous substances. Currently over 18% of the territory belonging to the EU is denoted as protected areas for nature.

[ 20 ] To date, the European Union's Environmental Policy is determined by the 7th Environmental Action Programme and is expected to be followed up through 2020. The EU has goals beyond this, however, and hopes by 2050 to have an "innovative, circular economy where nothing is wasted and where natural resources are managed sustainably, and biodiversity is protected, valued and restored in ways that enhance our society's resilience." [ 21 ] The EU has three core objectives to help achieve this vision: conservation of natural resources, conversion to an efficient, environmentally sustainable economy , and protection of the health of citizens.

[ 21 ] Professional qualifications [ edit ] Environmental planning qualifications are offered in a number of forms by various universities throughout the world.

The following are some of the qualifications offered by tertiary education institutions: Bachelor of Resource and Environmental Planning Bachelor of Environmental Studies Bachelor of Planning and Environmental Policy Master in Environmental Planning e.g. at the Technische Universität Berlin [2] Master in Environmental Studies (planning) [ 22 ] Bachelor of Urban and Environmental Planning Master of Urban Planning See also [ edit ] Architecture portal Ecology portal Engineering portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Air quality – Presence of dangerous substances in the air Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Biogeochemistry – Study of chemical cycles of the earth that are either driven by or influence biological activity Conservation development – Controlled-growth land use development Disaster mitigation – Reduction of something harmful or the reduction of its harmful effects Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Eco-sufficiency – Reduction in energy and resource consumption Ecology – Study of organisms and their environment Environmental design – Design process Green building – Structures and processes of building structures that are more environmentally responsible Green development – Real estate development concept Greening – Process of incorporating more environmentally friendly behaviors or systems Landscape planning – Branch of architecture List of environmental issues List of environmental organizations List of planning journals Natural landscape – Original landscape formed by nature Noise pollution – Excessive displeasing noise Passive solar building design – Architectural engineering that uses the Sun's heat without electric or mechanical systems Sustainable development – Mode of human development Sustainable habitat Smart growth – Urban planning philosophy The Merton Rule – Energy law in the United Kingdom Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Triad (environmental science) Timeline of environmental events Transition Towns – Community with core principles of self-sufficiency Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Urban design – Designing and shaping of human settlements Water quality – Assessment against standards for use Cities Curitiba – a Brazilian city noted for its innovative public transit system and environmental planning.

New York City – considered by many to be the most sustainable U.S. city with a population greater than one million because of its high population density and usage of mass transit.

Reykjavík – the capital of Iceland known for its use of geothermal power.

References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Beathley, Timothy (1995).

"Planning and Sustainability: The elements of a new paradigm" .

Journal of Planning Literature .

doi : 10.1177/088541229500900405 .

S2CID 108642248 . Retrieved 26 September 2016 .

^ p.160, Petts ^ a b Quay, Ray (2010-09-29). "Anticipatory Governance: A Tool for Climate Change Adaptation".

Journal of the American Planning Association .

76 (4): 496– 511.

doi : 10.1080/01944363.2010.508428 .

ISSN 0194-4363 .

S2CID 155678316 .

^ Salkin, Patricia (2014). "Environmental Justice and Land-Use Planning".

American Planning Association's Planning Advisory Service .

^ United States. Environmental Protection Agency, issuing body.

Environmental justice: key resources for building a community of practice for local use planning .

OCLC 921477466 .

^ a b c d Agyeman, Julian; Evans, Tom (November 2003). "Toward Just Sustainability in Urban Communities: Building Equity Rights with Sustainable Solutions".

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

590 (1): 35– 53.

doi : 10.1177/0002716203256565 .

ISSN 0002-7162 .

S2CID 145274467 .

^ Bassett, Ellen; Shandas, Vivek (2010-09-29). "Innovation and Climate Action Planning: Perspectives From Municipal Plans".

Journal of the American Planning Association .

76 (4): 435– 450.

doi : 10.1080/01944363.2010.509703 .

ISSN 0194-4363 .

S2CID 152544975 .

^ p.1, Environmental planning for communities ^ Fowler, Luke (2020-07-02).

"Best practices for implementing federal environmental policies: a principal-agent perspective" .

Journal of Environmental Planning and Management .

63 (8): 1453– 1469.

Bibcode : 2020JEPM...63.1453F .

doi : 10.1080/09640568.2019.1670627 .

ISSN 0964-0568 .

S2CID 211331149 .

^ Pushkar, Svetlana; Verbitsky, Oleg (December 2018). "Strategies for LEED certified projects: the building layer versus the service layer".

Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering .

45 (12): 1065– 1072.

doi : 10.1139/cjce-2017-0497 .

ISSN 0315-1468 .

S2CID 116027557 .

^ Cidell, Julie (August 2009). "A political ecology of the built environment: LEED certification for green buildings".

Local Environment .

14 (7): 621– 633.

Bibcode : 2009LoEnv..14..621C .

doi : 10.1080/13549830903089275 .

ISSN 1354-9839 .

S2CID 7743411 .

^ "Republic Act No. 10587" . 2024-10-16. Archived from the original on 16 October 2024 . Retrieved 2025-03-27 .

^ "PRC reinforces the compliance of RA NO. 10587 Law on Professional Practice of Environmental Planning | Professional Regulation Commission" .

prc.gov.ph . Retrieved 2025-03-27 .

^ "Transport Integration Act 2010" (PDF) . Victoria State Government. 1 September 2010.

^ Major Transport Projects Facilitation Act 2009 ^ Now repealed and available at http://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/Repealed/repealed_I.htm ^ Per the State Development and Public Works Organisation Act 1971 available at http://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/LEGISLTN/CURRENT/S/StateDevA71.pdf ^ Available at http://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/LEGISLTN/CURRENT/S/SustPlanA09.pdf ^ See section 26 of that Act available at http://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/LEGISLTN/CURRENT/S/StateDevA71.pdf ^ "Environment Action Programme to 2020 – Environment – European Commission" .

ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2015-12-21 .

^ a b "Environment Action Programme to 2020" (PDF) .

Europa . European Commission . Retrieved 21 December 2015 .

^ "Planning Program" .

yorku.ca .

Bibliography [ edit ] Beer A 1977 'Environmental Impact Analysis: A Review Article' Town Planning Review 48(4):389 Burchell RW and Listokin D 1975 The environmental impact handbook Center for Urban Policy Research , Rutgers, the State University, New Brunswick, N.J.

Conacher A & Conacher J., Environment planning & management in Australia , Oxford University Press, 2000 Eccles D & Bryant TL., 2007, Statutory planning in Victoria Federation Press, Annandale Environmental planning for communities: a guide to the environmental visioning process utilizing a geographic information system (GIS) , United States Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, DIANE Publishing, Cincinnati, Ohio, 2000 Park H 2010 'NSW Planning Framework: History of Reforms' e-brief pdf Archived 2022-01-20 at the Wayback Machine Petts, Judith, Handbook of environmental impact assessment, Volume 2 , Blackwell Publishing, 1999 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Environmental planning .

Dave Vergel . Castro & Associates Association of Environmental Professionals United Nation Environment Protection 1972 at the Library of Congress Web Archives (archived 2015-03-14) Canadian Institute of Planners official website DSE Victoria Planning SA Australia Planning Institute of Australia Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979, NSW, Australia (An Act to institute a system of environmental planning and assessment for the State of New South Wales.), Parliament of NSW Department of Planning NSW in South Australia website [ permanent dead link ] Department of Planning website of Planning and Community Development website Queensland Department of Infrastructure and Planning website Infrastructure and Resource Information Service (IRIS) website State Law Publisher of Western Australia website Planning & Land Authority website [ permanent dead link ] Northern Territory Government website v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Environmental science Main fields Atmospheric science Biogeochemistry Ecology Environmental chemistry Geosciences Hydrology Limnology Oceanography Soil science Related fields Biology Chemistry green Ecological economics Environmental design Environmental economics Environmental engineering Environmental health epidemiology Environmental studies Environmental humanities Environmental statistics Environmental toxicology Geodesy Physics Radioecology Sustainability science Systems ecology Urban ecology Applications Energy conservation Environmental technology Natural resource management Pollution control Public transport encouragement Recycling Remediation Renewable energy Road ecology Sewage treatment Urban metabolism Water purification Waste management Lists Degrees Journals Research institutes Glossary Environment by year See also Human impact on the environment Sustainability Technogaianism Category scientists Commons Environment portal WikiProject v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees v t e Land use General Degradation Development/Conversion Planning Conflict Land management Landscaping Integrated landscape management Land grabbing Land consumption Land loss Habitat destruction Illegal construction Land reclamation Land rehabilitation Landscape ecology Rangeland management Environmental planning Leopold matrix Watertable control Developed environments Built-up area Locally unwanted land use Property Property Subdivision (land) Real estate development Land development bank Land (economics) Customary land Related fields Soil Soil science Soil compaction Soil contamination Alkali soil Pollution Deforestation Urban planning Agriculture Drainage system (agriculture) Land change modeling Categories: Land use Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_planning&oldid=1300716137 " Category : Environmental planning Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from August 2013 Australia-centric Wikipedia introduction cleanup from April 2021 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2021 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template other archives All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2024 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 00:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental planning 11 languages Add topic

