Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose and freedom 2 Choice and sedimentation 3 Responsibility 4 The Absurd 5 In popular culture 6 Criticism 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Existence precedes essence 13 languages العربية Български Čeština Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ کوردی Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Central claim of existentialism formulated by Sartre This article is about the existentialist phrase coined by Jean-Paul Sartre. For the transcendent theosophy founder, see Mulla Sadra .

The proposition that existence precedes essence ( French : l'existence précède l'essence ) is a central claim of existentialism , which reverses the traditional philosophical view  that the essence (the nature) of a thing is more fundamental and immutable than its existence (the mere fact of its being).

[ 1 ] To existentialists, human beings—through their consciousness —create their own values and determine a meaning for their life because the human being does not possess any inherent identity or value . That identity or value must be created by the individual. By posing the acts that constitute them, they make their existence more significant.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The idea originates from a speech by F. W. J. Schelling delivered in December 1841.

[ 4 ] Søren Kierkegaard was present at this occasion and the idea can be found in Kierkegaard's works in the 19th century, [ 5 ] but was explicitly formulated by philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre in the 20th century. The three-word formula originated in his 1945 [ 6 ] lecture " Existentialism Is a Humanism ", though antecedent notions can be found in Heidegger's Being and Time .

[ 7 ] As a result, for Sartre, "existence precedes essence" not only defines and determines his own existential thinking or interpretation of existentialism, but also any thinking or philosophising that declares itself to be existential. Despite Sartre's later efforts to distance himself and his thinking from this remark and its consequences, it has become the most quoted, repeated, and cited description of existentialism and any non-theistic existential thought.

[ 8 ] Purpose and freedom [ edit ] The Sartrean claim is best understood in contrast to the scholastic thesis that essence precedes existence; a typical claim for this traditional thesis would be that a human is essentially selfish, or that they are essentially a rational being.

To Sartre,  "existence precedes essence" means that a personality is not built from a previously designed model or for a precise purpose , because it is the human being who chooses to engage in such enterprise. While not denying the constraining conditions of human existence, he answers to Spinoza who affirmed that people are determined by what surrounds them. Therefore, to Sartre an oppressive situation is not intolerable in itself, but once regarded as such by those who feel oppressed the situation becomes intolerable. So by projecting my intentions onto my present condition, "It is I who freely transform it into action". When he said that "the world is a mirror of my freedom ", he meant that the world obliges me to react, to overtake myself. It is this overtaking of a present constraining situation by a project to come that Sartre names transcendence . He added that "we are condemned to be free".

[ 9 ] To claim that existence precedes essence is to assert that there is no such predetermined essence to be found in humans, and that an individual's essence is defined by the individual through how that individual creates and lives his or her life. As Sartre puts it in his Existentialism is a Humanism : "man first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world – and defines himself afterwards".

[ 10 ] Choice and sedimentation [ edit ] Jonathan Webber interprets Sartre's usage of the term essence not in a modal fashion, i.e. as necessary features, but in a teleological fashion: "An essence is the relational property of having a set of parts ordered in such a way as to collectively perform some activity".

[ 11 ] : 3 [ 12 ] For example, it belongs to the essence of a house to keep the bad weather out, which is why it has walls and a roof. Humans are different from houses because unlike houses they don't have an inbuilt purpose: they are free to choose their own purpose and thereby shape their essence, therefore their existence precedes their essence .

Sartre is committed to a radical conception of freedom: nothing fixes our purpose but we ourselves, our projects have no weight or inertia except for our endorsement of them.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Simone de Beauvoir , on the other hand, holds that there are various factors, grouped together under the term sedimentation , that offer resistance to attempts to change our direction in life.

Sedimentations are themselves products of past choices and can be changed by choosing differently in the present, but such changes happen slowly. They are a force of inertia that shapes the agent's evaluative outlook on the world until the transition is complete.

[ 11 ] : 5, 9, 66 Responsibility [ edit ] When it is said that people define themselves, it is often perceived as stating that they can "wish" to be something – anything, a bird, for instance – and then be it. According to Sartre's account, however, this would be a kind of bad faith . What is meant by the statement is that people are (1) defined only insofar as they act and (2) that they are responsible for their actions. To clarify, it can be said that a person who acts cruelly towards other people is, by that act, defined as a cruel person and in that same instance, they (as opposed to their genes, for instance) are defined as being responsible for being this cruel person. Of course, the more positive therapeutic aspect of this is also implied: You can choose to act in a different way, and to be a good person instead of a cruel person. Here it is also clear that since people can choose to be either cruel or good, they are, in fact, neither of these things essentially .

[ 15 ] The Absurd [ edit ] Existentialism tends to focus on the question of human existence and the conditions of this existence. What is meant by existence is the concrete life of each individual, and their concrete ways of being in the world. Even though this concrete individual existence must be the primary source of information in the study of people, certain conditions are commonly held to be "endemic" to human existence. These conditions are usually in some way related to the inherent meaninglessness or absurdity of the universe and its apparent contrast with our pre-reflexive lived lives which normally present themselves to us as meaningful. A central theme is that since the world "in-itself" is absurd, that is, not "fair", then a meaningful life can at any point suddenly lose all its meaning. The reasons why this happens are many, ranging from a tragedy that "tears a person's world apart", to the results of an honest inquiry into one's own existence. Such an encounter can make a person mentally unstable, and avoiding such instability by making people aware of their condition and ready to handle it is one of the central themes of existentialism.

Albert Camus , for instance, famously claimed in Le Mythe de Sisyphe that "There is only one truly serious philosophical problem, and that is suicide".

[ 16 ] Aside from these "psychological" issues, it is also claimed that these encounters with the absurd are where we are most in touch with our condition as humans. Such an encounter cannot be without philosophical significance, and existentialist philosophers derive many metaphysical theories from these encounters. These are often related to the self , consciousness and freedom as well as the nature of meaning.

In popular culture [ edit ] Bilal Tanweer used existence precedes essence in his novel The Scatter Here Is Too Great (2013) , whose characters are engaged in a quest to discover and shape their essence. They exercise their capacity for free choice and bear responsibility for their actions.

[ 17 ] Criticism [ edit ] Sartre's definition of existentialism was based on Heidegger's magnum opus Being and Time (1927). In the correspondence with Jean Beaufret later published as the Letter on Humanism , Heidegger implied that Sartre misunderstood him for his own purposes of subjectivism, and that he did not mean that actions take precedence over being so long as those actions were not reflected upon.

[ 18 ] Heidegger commented that "the reversal of a metaphysical statement remains a metaphysical statement", meaning that he thought Sartre had simply switched the roles traditionally attributed to essence and existence without interrogating these concepts and their history.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Metousiosis Social constructionism Tabula rasa Notes [ edit ] ^ Plato, Timaeus ; Aristotle, Metaphysics ; St Thomas Aquinas, Summa contra Gentiles , Pars 3:1, Summa Theologiae , Pars 1:1, etc. Analysis of "existence before essence" in Etienne Gilson, The Christian Philosophy of Saint Thomas Aquinas , Introduction.

^ (Dictionary) "L'existencialisme" – see "l'identité de la personne" (in French) .

^ Encyclopédie de la jeunesse, 1979, p. 567 (in French) .

^ Engels, 1841.

^ Kierkegaard, Søren.

Philosophical Fragments , 1844.

^ The lecture was delivered on Monday, October 29, 1945, although not published until 1946. "Existentialism is a Humanism." trans. Carol Macomber, preface by Arlene Elkaïm-Sartre, ed. John Kulka (New Haven: Yale, 2007), p. vii.

^ Sartre, in Being and Nothingness (1943), credits a slightly longer version of the claim to Heidegger: "Now freedom has no essence. It is not subject to any logical necessity; we must say of it what Heidegger said of the Dasein in general: 'In it existence precedes and commands essence.'" However, Sartre gives no page reference for this citation.  In Being and Time , Heidegger writes: "The 'essence' of human-being lies in its existence." ("Das 'Wesen' des Daseins liegt in seiner Existenz", Sein und Zeit , p. 42.) ^ "Explaining Sartre's "Existence Precedes Essence" | that-which" .

that-which | Philosophy | Philosophemes | Philosophers . Retrieved 2023-10-27 .

^ Notions de philosophie, L'existencialisme: Jean-Paul Sartre [ permanent dead link ] (in French) .

^ Sartre, Existentialism is a Humanism.

^ a b Webber, Jonathan (2018).

Rethinking Existentialism . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Crowell, Steven (2020).

"Existentialism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 16 November 2020 .

^ Burnham, Douglas.

"Existentialism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 16 November 2020 .

^ Cox, Gary (2008).

The Sartre Dictionary . Continuum. pp.

41– 42.

^ Catalano p. 81.

^ Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus.

^ Ali, Murtaza (2022).

"Essence and Existence in Bilal Tanweer's The Scatter Here is Too Great" .

SSRN Electronic Journal .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.4151441 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

S2CID 250712415 .

^ Heidegger, Martin (1993). David Farrell Krell (ed.).

Basic Writings: From Being and Time (1927) to The Task of Thinking (1964) (Revised and expanded ed.). San Francisco, California: Harper San Francisco.

ISBN 0-06-063763-3 .

OCLC 26355951 .

^ Heidegger, Martin (1993). David Farrell Krell (ed.).

Basic Writings: From Being and Time (1927) to The Task of thinking (1964) (Revised and expanded ed.). San Francisco, California: Harper San Francisco. pp.

243 .

ISBN 0-06-063763-3 .

OCLC 26355951 .

References [ edit ] Albert Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus , 1948.

Joseph S. Catalano, A Commentary on Jean-Paul Sartre's Being and Nothingness , University of Chicago Press 1985.

Sartre, Existentialism is a Humanism (L'existentialisme est un humanisme) 1946 lecture Engels, Schelling's Revelation , 1841, in  MECW Volume 2, p. 181ff Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, article Existentialism Wilhelmsen, Frederick (1970).

The Paradoxical Structure of Existence . Irving, Texas; University of Dallas Press.

External links [ edit ] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy article v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Existentialism Variants Atheistic Christian Jewish Islamic Nihilist Phenomenological Concepts Abandonment Absurdism Angst Authenticity Bad faith Being in itself Dasein Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Leap of faith Meaning Nihilism Other Ressentiment Thrownness People Artists Beckett Buzzati Camus Cioran Dostoevsky Ellison Fondane Giacometti Ionesco Kafka Mahfouz Marcel Sartre Unamuno Wilson Wright Philosophers Abbagnano Arendt Barth Berdyaev Buber Bultmann Camus Carlyle Cioran Beauvoir Fanon Flusser Fondane Heidegger Husserl James Jaspers Kaufmann Kierkegaard Levinas Marcel May Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rosenzweig Sartre Shestov Soloveitchik Tillich Unamuno Wilson Wright Zapffe Related Continental philosophy German idealism Marxist humanism Phenomenology Transcendentalism Western Marxism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Existence_precedes_essence&oldid=1291970919 " Categories : Existentialist concepts Modernism Philosophical phrases 1840s quotations 1945 quotations Quotations from literature Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 13:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Existence precedes essence 13 languages Add topic

