Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Ethics 2.1.1 Naturalistic fallacy 2.1.2 Open-question argument 2.1.3 Good as indefinable 2.1.4 Good as a non-natural property 2.1.5 Moral knowledge 2.2 Asymmetrical value interpretation 2.2.1 Right action, duty and virtue 2.3 Proof of an external world 2.4 Moore's paradox 2.5 Organic wholes 3 Works 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents G. E. Moore 44 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Latviešu Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English philosopher (1873–1958) For the cofounder of Intel, see Gordon Moore .

G. E. Moore OM FBA Moore in 1914 Born George Edward Moore ( 1873-11-04 ) 4 November 1873 Upper Norwood , London, England Died 24 October 1958 (1958-10-24) (aged 84) Evelyn Nursing Home , Cambridge, England Spouse Dorothy Ely Children 2, including Nicholas Moore Relatives Thomas Sturge Moore (brother) Education Alma mater Trinity College, Cambridge Academic advisors James Ward [ 1 ] Philosophical work Era 19th- / 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Consequentialism Institutions Trinity College, Cambridge Aristotelian Society (president, 1918–19) Ethical Union (president, 1935–36) Doctoral students Casimir Lewy Notable students R. B. Braithwaite [ 2 ] Main interests Ethics Epistemology Philosophy of language Notable ideas Naturalistic fallacy Moore's paradox Paradox of analysis Open-question argument External and internal relations [ 3 ] " Here is one hand " (Moorean shift) Transparency of consciousness [ 4 ] [ 5 ] George Edward Moore OM FBA (4 November 1873 – 24 October 1958) was an English philosopher, who with Bertrand Russell , Ludwig Wittgenstein and earlier Gottlob Frege was among the initiators of analytic philosophy . He and Russell began de-emphasizing the idealism which was then prevalent among British philosophers and became known for advocating common-sense concepts and contributing to ethics , epistemology and metaphysics . He was said to have had an "exceptional personality and moral character".

[ 6 ] Ray Monk dubbed him "the most revered philosopher of his era".

[ 7 ] As Professor of Philosophy at the University of Cambridge , he influenced but abstained from the Bloomsbury Group , an informal set of intellectuals. He edited the journal Mind . He was a member of the Cambridge Apostles from 1894 to 1901, [ 8 ] a fellow of the British Academy from 1918, and was chairman of the Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club in 1912–1944.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] A humanist , he presided over the British Ethical Union (now Humanists UK ) in 1935–1936.

[ 11 ] Life [ edit ] Moore, c.

1903 George Edward Moore was born in Upper Norwood , in south-east London, on 4 November 1873, the middle child of seven of Daniel Moore, a medical doctor, and Henrietta Sturge.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] His grandfather was the author George Moore . His eldest brother was Thomas Sturge Moore , a poet, writer and engraver.

[ 12 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] He was educated at Dulwich College [ 17 ] and, in 1892, began attending Trinity College, Cambridge , to learn classics and moral sciences . His tripos results were a double first .

[ 18 ] He became a Fellow of Trinity in 1898 and was later University of Cambridge Professor of Mental Philosophy and Logic from 1925 to 1939.

Moore is known best now for defending ethical non-naturalism , his emphasis on common sense for philosophical method, and the paradox that bears his name . He was admired by and influenced by other philosophers and some of the Bloomsbury Group . But unlike his colleague and admirer Bertrand Russell, who for some years thought Moore fulfilled his "ideal of genius", [ 19 ] he is mostly unknown presently except among academic philosophers. Moore's essays are known for their clarity and circumspection of writing style and methodical and patient treatment of philosophical problems. He was critical of modern philosophy for lack of progress , which he saw as a stark contrast to the dramatic advances in the natural sciences since the Renaissance . Among Moore's most famous works are his Principia Ethica , [ 20 ] and his essays, "The Refutation of Idealism", " A Defence of Common Sense ", and "A Proof of the External World".

Moore was an important and admired member of the secretive Cambridge Apostles , a discussion group drawn from the British intellectual elite.  At the time another member, 22-year-old Bertrand Russell, wrote "I almost worship him as if he were a god. I have never felt such an extravagant admiration for anybody", [ 7 ] and would later write that "for some years he fulfilled my ideal of genius. He was in those days beautiful and slim, with a look almost of inspiration as deeply passionate as Spinoza 's".

[ 21 ] From 1918 to 1919, Moore was chairman of the Aristotelian Society , a group committed to the systematic study of philosophy, its historical development and its methods and problems.

[ 22 ] He was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1951.

[ 23 ] Moore died in England in the Evelyn Nursing Home on 24 October 1958.

[ 24 ] He was cremated at Cambridge Crematorium on 28 October 1958 and his ashes interred at the Parish of the Ascension Burial Ground in the city. His wife, Dorothy Ely (1892–1977), was buried there. Together, they had two sons, the poet Nicholas Moore and the composer Timothy Moore.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Ethics [ edit ] The title page of Principia Ethica His influential work Principia Ethica is one of the main inspirations of the reaction against ethical naturalism (see ethical non-naturalism ) and is partly responsible for the twentieth-century concern with meta-ethics .

[ 27 ] Naturalistic fallacy [ edit ] Main article: Naturalistic fallacy Moore asserted that philosophical arguments can suffer from a confusion between the use of a term in a particular argument and the definition of that term (in all arguments). He named this confusion the naturalistic fallacy . For example, an ethical argument may claim that if an item has certain properties, then that item is 'good.' A hedonist may argue that 'pleasant' items are 'good' items. Other theorists may argue that 'complex' things are 'good' things. Moore contends that, even if such arguments are correct, they do not provide definitions for the term 'good'. The property of 'goodness' cannot be defined. It can only be shown and grasped. Any attempt to define it (X is good if it has property Y) will simply shift the problem (Why is Y-ness good in the first place?).

Open-question argument [ edit ] Main article: Open-question argument Moore's argument for the indefinability of 'good' (and thus for the fallaciousness in the "naturalistic fallacy") is often termed the open-question argument ; it is presented in §13 of Principia Ethica . The argument concerns the nature of statements such as "Anything that is pleasant is also good" and the possibility of asking questions such as "Is it good that x is pleasant?". According to Moore, these questions are open and these statements are significant ; and they will remain so no matter what is substituted for "pleasure". Moore concludes from this that any analysis of value is bound to fail. In other words, if value could be analysed, then such questions and statements would be trivial and obvious. Since they are anything but trivial and obvious, value must be indefinable.

Critics of Moore's arguments sometimes claim that he is appealing to general puzzles concerning analysis (cf. the paradox of analysis ), rather than revealing anything special about value. The argument clearly depends on the assumption that if 'good' were definable, it would be an analytic truth about 'good', an assumption that many contemporary moral realists like Richard Boyd and Peter Railton reject.  Other responses appeal to the Fregean distinction between sense and reference , allowing that value concepts are special and sui generis , but insisting that value properties are nothing but natural properties (this strategy is similar to that taken by non-reductive materialists in philosophy of mind ).

Good as indefinable [ edit ] Moore contended that goodness cannot be analysed in terms of any other property. In Principia Ethica , he writes: It may be true that all things which are good are also something else, just as it is true that all things which are yellow produce a certain kind of vibration in the light. And it is a fact, that Ethics aims at discovering what are those other properties belonging to all things which are good. But far too many philosophers have thought that when they named those other properties they were actually defining good; that these properties, in fact, were simply not "other," but absolutely and entirely the same with goodness. ( Principia , § 10 ¶ 3 ) Therefore, we cannot define 'good' by explaining it in other words. We can only indicate a thing or an action and say "That is good". Similarly, we cannot describe to a person born totally blind exactly what yellow is. We can only show a sighted person a piece of yellow paper or a yellow scrap of cloth and say "That is yellow".

Good as a non-natural property [ edit ] In addition to categorising 'good' as indefinable, Moore also emphasized that it is a non-natural property. This means that it cannot be empirically or scientifically tested or verified—it is not analyzable by "natural science".

Moral knowledge [ edit ] Moore argued that, once arguments based on the naturalistic fallacy had been discarded, questions of intrinsic goodness could be settled only by appeal to what he (following Sidgwick ) termed "moral intuitions": self-evident propositions which recommend themselves to moral thought, but which are not susceptible to either direct proof or disproof ( Principia , § 45 ). As a result of his opinion, he has often been described by later writers as an advocate of ethical intuitionism . Moore, however, wished to distinguish his opinions from the opinions usually described as "Intuitionist" when Principia Ethica was written: In order to express the fact that ethical propositions of my first class [propositions about what is good as an end in itself] are incapable of proof or disproof, I have sometimes followed Sidgwick's usage in calling them 'Intuitions.' But I beg that it may be noticed that I am not an 'Intuitionist,' in the ordinary sense of the term. Sidgwick himself seems never to have been clearly aware of the immense importance of the difference which distinguishes his Intuitionism from the common doctrine, which has generally been called by that name. The Intuitionist proper is distinguished by maintaining that propositions of my second class—propositions which assert that a certain action is right or a duty —are incapable of proof or disproof by any enquiry into the results of such actions. I, on the contrary, am no less anxious to maintain that propositions of this kind are not 'Intuitions,' than to maintain that propositions of my first class are Intuitions.

— G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica , Preface ¶ 5 Moore distinguished his view from the opinion of deontological intuitionists, who claimed that "intuitions" could determine questions about what actions are right or required by duty . Moore, as a consequentialist , argued that "duties" and moral rules could be determined by investigating the effects of particular actions or kinds of actions ( Principia , § 89 ), and so were matters for empirical investigation rather than direct objects of intuition ( Principia , § 90 ). According to Moore, "intuitions" revealed not the rightness or wrongness of specific actions, but only what items were good in themselves, as ends to be pursued .

Asymmetrical value interpretation [ edit ] Some interpretations of Moore's ethical framework suggest that it accommodates an asymmetry between suffering and happiness. According to this view, the moral importance of preventing or relieving intense suffering may be greater than that of promoting comparable states of happiness. In Principia Ethica , Moore emphasizes that “the consciousness of intense pain… can be maintained to be a great evil,” and contrasts this with the more limited moral significance of intense pleasure. This perspective has been taken to support the idea that improvements at the negative end of the experiential spectrum carry greater axiological weight than equivalent improvements at the positive end.

[ 28 ] Right action, duty and virtue [ edit ] Moore holds that right actions are those producing the most good.

[ 29 ] The difficulty with this is that the consequences of most actions are too complex for us to properly take into account, especially the long-term consequences. Because of this, Moore suggests that the definition of duty is limited to what generally produces better results than probable alternatives in a comparatively near future.

[ 30 ] : §109 Whether a given rule of action is also a duty depends to some extent on the conditions of the corresponding society but duties agree mostly with what common-sense recommends.

[ 30 ] : §95 Virtues, like honesty, can in turn be defined as permanent dispositions to perform duties.

[ 30 ] : §109 Proof of an external world [ edit ] Main article: Here is one hand One of the most important parts of Moore's philosophical development was his differing with the idealism that dominated British philosophy (as represented by the works of his former teachers F. H. Bradley and John McTaggart ), and his defence of what he regarded as a "common sense" type of realism . In his 1925 essay " A Defence of Common Sense ", he argued against idealism and scepticism toward the external world, on the grounds that they could not give reasons to accept that their metaphysical premises were more plausible than the reasons we have for accepting the common sense claims about our knowledge of the world, which sceptics and idealists must deny. He famously put the point into dramatic relief with his 1939 essay "Proof of an External World", in which he gave a common sense argument against scepticism by raising his right hand and saying "Here is one hand" and then raising his left and saying "And here is another", then concluding that there are at least two external objects in the world, and therefore that he knows (by this argument) that an external world exists. Not surprisingly, not everyone preferring sceptical doubts found Moore's method of argument entirely convincing; Moore, however, defends his argument on the grounds that sceptical arguments seem invariably to require an appeal to "philosophical intuitions" that we have considerably less reason to accept than we have for the common sense claims that they supposedly refute. The "Here is one hand" argument also influenced Ludwig Wittgenstein , who spent his last years working out a new method for Moore's argument in the remarks that were published posthumously as On Certainty .) Moore's paradox [ edit ] Moore is also remembered for drawing attention to the peculiar inconsistency involved in uttering a sentence such as "It is raining, but I do not believe it is raining", a puzzle now commonly termed " Moore's paradox ". The puzzle is that it seems inconsistent for anyone to assert such a sentence; but there doesn't seem to be any logical contradiction between "It is raining" and "I don't believe that it is raining", because the former is a statement about the weather and the latter a statement about a person's belief about the weather, and it is perfectly logically possible that it may rain whilst a person does not believe that it is raining.

In addition to Moore's own work on the paradox, the puzzle also inspired a great deal of work by Ludwig Wittgenstein , who described the paradox as the most impressive philosophical insight that Moore had ever introduced. It is said [ by whom?

] that when Wittgenstein first heard this paradox one evening (which Moore had earlier stated in a lecture), he rushed round to Moore's lodgings, got him out of bed and insisted that Moore repeat the entire lecture to him.

Organic wholes [ edit ] Moore's description of the principle of the organic whole is extremely straightforward, nonetheless, and a variant on a pattern that began with Aristotle: The value of a whole must not be assumed to be the same as the sum of the values of its parts ( Principia , § 18 ).

According to Moore, a moral actor cannot survey the 'goodness' inherent in the various parts of a situation, assign a value to each of them, and then generate a sum in order to get an idea of its total value. A moral scenario is a complex assembly of parts, and its total value is often created by the relations between those parts, and not by their individual value. The organic metaphor is thus very appropriate: biological organisms seem to have emergent properties which cannot be found anywhere in their individual parts. For example, a human brain seems to exhibit a capacity for thought when none of its neurons exhibit any such capacity. In the same way, a moral scenario can have a value different than the sum of its component parts.

To understand the application of the organic principle to questions of value, it is perhaps best to consider Moore's primary example, that of a consciousness experiencing a beautiful object. To see how the principle works, a thinker engages in "reflective isolation", the act of isolating a given concept in a kind of null context and determining its intrinsic value. In our example, we can easily see that, of themselves, beautiful objects and consciousnesses are not particularly valuable things. They might have some value, but when we consider the total value of a consciousness experiencing a beautiful object, it seems to exceed the simple sum of these values.  Hence the value of a whole must not be assumed to be the same as the sum of the values of its parts.

Works [ edit ] The gravestone of G. E. Moore and his wife Dorothy Moore in the Ascension Parish Burial Ground , Cambridge G. E. Moore, " The Nature of Judgment " (1899) G. E. Moore (1903).

"IV.—Experience and Empiricism" .

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society .

3 : 80– 95.

doi : 10.1093/aristotelian/3.1.80 .

G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica (1903) G. E. Moore, " Review of Franz Brentano's The Origin of the Knowledge of Right and Wrong " (1903) G. E. Moore, " The Refutation of Idealism " (1903) G. E. Moore (1904).

"VII.—Kant's Idealism" .

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society .

4 : 127– 140.

doi : 10.1093/aristotelian/4.1.127 .

G. E. Moore, " The Nature and Reality of the Objects of Perception " (1905–6) G. E. Moore (1908).

"III.—Professor James' "Pragmatism" " .

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society .

8 : 33– 77.

doi : 10.1093/aristotelian/8.1.33 .

G. E. Moore (1910).

"II.—The Subject-Matter of Psychology" .

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society .

10 : 36– 62.

doi : 10.1093/aristotelian/10.1.36 .

G. E. Moore, Ethics (1912) G. E. Moore, " Some Judgments of Perception " (1918) G. E. Moore, Philosophical Studies (1922) [papers published 1903–21] G. E. Moore, " The Conception of Intrinsic Value " G. E. Moore, " The Nature of Moral Philosophy " G. E. Moore, " Are the Characteristics of Things Universal or Particular?

" (1923) G. E. Moore, " A Defence of Common Sense " (1925) G. E. Moore and F. P. Ramsey , Facts and Proposition (Symposium) (1927) W. Kneale and G. E. Moore, "Symposium: Is Existence a Predicate?" (1936) G. E. Moore, "An Autobiography," and "A reply to my critics," in: The Philosophy Of G. E. Moore . ed. Schilpp, Paul Arthur (1942).

G. E. Moore, Some Main Problems of Philosophy (1953) [lectures delivered 1910–11] G. E. Moore, Ch. 3, " Propositions " G. E. Moore, Philosophical Papers (1959) G. E. Moore, Ch. 7: " Proof of an External World " "Margin Notes by G. E. Moore on The Works of Thomas Reid (1849: With Notes by Sir William Hamilton)" .

G. E. Moore, The Early Essays , edited by Tom Regan , Temple University Press (1986).

G. E. Moore, The Elements of Ethics , edited and with an introduction by Tom Regan, Temple University Press, (1991).

G. E. Moore, 'On Defining "Good,'" in Analytic Philosophy: Classic Readings, Stamford, CT: Wadsworth, 2002, pp. 1–10.

ISBN 0-534-51277-1 .

See also [ edit ] The Right and the Good References [ edit ] ^ Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"James Ward" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

by Pierfrancesco Basile.

^ Alice Ambrose , Morris Lazerowitz (eds.), G. E. Moore: Essays in Retrospect, Volume 3 , Psychology Press, 2004, p. 25.

^ G. E. Moore (15 December 1919), "External and Internal Relations" , Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 20 (1919–20): 40–62.

^ G. E. Moore, " The Refutation of Idealism " (1903), p. 37.

^ Robert Hanna, Kant, Science, and Human Nature . Clarendon Press, 2006, p. 60.

^ Preston, Aaron [in Swedish] .

"George Edward Moore (1873—1958)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ a b Monk, Ray (3 April 2020).

"He was the most revered philosopher of his era. So why did GE Moore disappear from history?" .

Prospect . London . Retrieved 21 June 2021 .

^ Levy, Paul (1979).

Moore: G.E. Moore and the Cambridge Apostles . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. p. 319.

ISBN 0297775766 .

^ Stern, David G.; Rogers, Brian; Citron, Gabriel, eds. (2016).

Wittgenstein: Lectures, Cambridge 1930–1933: From the Notes of G. E. Moore . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781316432136 . Retrieved 29 April 2020 .

^ Ahmed, Arif (6 September 2013).

"The Moral Sciences Club (A Short History)" .

Faculty of Philosophy . University of Cambridge . Retrieved 29 April 2020 .

^ " Annual Reports of the Ethical Union " (1946-1967).

British Humanist Association , Series: Congress Minutes and Papers, 1913-1991, File: Minute Book. London: Bishopsgate Institute Special Collections and Archives.

^ a b Levy, Paul (1979).

Moore: G. E. Moore and the Cambridge Apostles . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. pp.

28– 30.

ISBN 0297775766 .

^ Gwynn, Frederick L. (1951).

Sturge Moore and the Life of Art (PDF) . Lawrence, Kansas: University of Kansas Press. p. 9.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 February 2022 .

^ "Father Daniel" .

The National Archives . Cambridge University Library: Department of Manuscripts and University Archives . Retrieved 16 February 2022 .

^ Eminent Old Alleynians : Academe Archived 25 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine at dulwich.org.uk, accessed 24 February 2009 ^ Baldwin, Tom (26 March 2004).

"George Edward Moore" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Center for the Study of Language and Information (CSLI), Stanford University . Retrieved 29 October 2015 .

^ Sheila Hodges, 1981, God's Gift: A Living History of Dulwich College , pp. 87–88, Heinemann: London.

^ "Moore, George Edward (MR892GE)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell (Volume I, 1872-1914), George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1971, p. 64. He added: "He had a kind of exquisite purity. I have never but once succeeded in making him tell a lie, and that was a subterfuge. 'Moore', I said, 'do you always speak the truth?' 'No' he replied. I believe this to be the only lie he ever told." ^ Moore, G. E. (1903).

Principia Ethica . Cambridge: University Press.

ISBN 0879754982 . Retrieved 29 October 2015 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Baldwin, Thomas (25 September 2020).

"G. E. Moore: A great philosopher?" .

The Times Literary Supplement . London . Retrieved 13 October 2021 .

^ The Aristotelian Society – The Council ^ "Three New Barons in Honours List" .

The West Australian . Perth, WA. 7 June 1951. p. 3 . Retrieved 3 April 2023 .

^ Baldwin, Thomas (23 September 2004). "Moore, George Edward (1873–1958)". In Matthew, H. C. G.

; Harrison, Brian (eds.).

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 38 (online ed.). Oxford University Press. pp.

936–939 .

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/35090 .

ISBN 0-19-861411-X .

OCLC 54778415 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Yau, John (11 January 2015).

"Nicholas Moore, Touched by Poetic Genius" .

Hyperallergic . Retrieved 29 October 2015 .

^ Marshall, Nicholas (10 March 2003).

"Timothy Moore" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 March 2014 .

^ Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Metaethics" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

by Geoff Sayre-McCord.

^ Vinding, Magnus (2020).

Suffering-Focused Ethics: Defense and Implications . Independent. p. 33.

^ Schneewind, J. B.

(1997).

Singer, Peter (ed.).

A Companion to Ethics . Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p.

153 .

ISBN 0-631-18785-5 .

^ a b c Moore, George Edward (1903).

Principia Ethica . Project Gutenberg.

Further reading [ edit ] White, Alan R.

(1958) G. E. Moore , Blackwell ISBN 978-0313208058 Klemke, E. D. (1969) The Epistemology of G. E. Moore , Northwestern University Press.

doi : 10.21985/N2TQ6G O’Connor, David (1982) The Metaphysics of G. E. Moore .

D. Reidel ISBN 978-90-277-1352-0 Regan, Tom (1986).

Bloomsbury's Prophet: G. E. Moore and the Development of His Moral Philosophy , Temple University Press.

ISBN 978-0877224464 Klemke, E. D. (1999).

A Defense of Realism: Reflections on the Metaphysics of G. E. Moore . Humanity Books.

ISBN 1-57392-732-5 .

Sosa, Ernest (2001).

"G. E. Moore (1873–1958)" in A Companion to Analytic Philosophy (eds., A. P. Martinich and David Sosa ).

doi : 10.1002/9780470998656.ch4 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to G. E. Moore .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: George Edward Moore George Edward Moore – philosophypages.com The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy George Edward Moore Moore's Moral Philosophy Works by G. E. Moore in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by G. E. Moore at Project Gutenberg Works by or about G. E. Moore at the Internet Archive Works by G. E. Moore at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Trinity College Chapel G. E. Moore and the Cambridge School of Analysis , Thomas Baldwin , The Oxford Handbook of The History of Analytic Philosophy Open Access papers by Moore published in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society and Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume.

Links to related articles v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Bloomsbury Group Core members Clive Bell Vanessa Bell E. M. Forster Roger Fry Duncan Grant John Maynard Keynes Desmond MacCarthy Lytton Strachey Leonard Woolf Virginia Woolf Old Bloomsbury Cambridge Apostles and G. E. Moore Adrian Stephen Karin Stephen Saxon Sydney-Turner Mary MacCarthy Associated others Quentin Bell Dora Carrington Angelica Garnett David Garnett Lady Ottoline Morrell Frances Partridge Ralph Partridge Vita Sackville-West Thoby Stephen Projects Dreadnought hoax Hogarth Press Omega Workshops Notable addresses 33 Fitzroy Square 46 Gordon Square Charleston Farmhouse Monk's House Topics List of Bloomsbury Group people Bloomsbury Group in LGBT history v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐666f86d675‐lgn68
Cached time: 20250817050618
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.983 seconds
Real time usage: 1.206 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9441/1000000
Revision size: 34522/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 347486/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 96190/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 173563/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.577/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15639182/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  957.315      1 -total
 23.21%  222.239      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 16.41%  157.088      1 Template:Reflist
 14.35%  137.414      1 Template:Navboxes
 13.24%  126.739     10 Template:Navbox
 11.79%  112.831      4 Template:Cite_journal
  7.72%   73.946      2 Template:Sister_project
  7.58%   72.532      2 Template:Side_box
  6.78%   64.897      1 Template:Wikisource
  6.54%   62.632      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11959:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050618 and revision id 1299467038. Rendering was triggered because: diff-page Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=G._E._Moore&oldid=1299467038 " Categories : 1873 births 1958 deaths 19th-century British philosophers 20th-century British philosophers Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge Analytic philosophers British ethicists Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club Consequentialists English agnostics British epistemologists Fellows of the British Academy Fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge Linguistic turn Members of the Order of Merit Metaphysicians Moral realists People educated at Dulwich College British philosophers of mind Presidents of the Aristotelian Society Mind (journal) editors Bertrand Russell Professors of Philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 interwiki-linked names Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2021 Articles with hCards Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2020 Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 15:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents G. E. Moore 44 languages Add topic

