Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Education Resources Information Center 5 languages العربية Čeština Español Français עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from ERIC (identifier) ) US Department of Education online repository "ERIC" redirects here. For other uses, see Eric (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Education Resources Information Center" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Education Resources Information Center" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Education Resources Information Center old ERIC logo Founded May 15, 1964 Area served Global Parent Institute of Education Sciences within the United States Department of Education URL eric.ed.gov The Education Resources Information Center ( ERIC ) is an online digital library of education research and information. ERIC is sponsored by the Institute of Education Sciences of the United States Department of Education .

Description [ edit ] The mission of ERIC is to provide a comprehensive, easy-to-use, searchable, Internet-based bibliographic and full-text database of education research and information for educators, researchers, and the general public. Education research and information are essential to improving teaching, learning, and educational decision-making.

ERIC provides access to 1.5 million bibliographic records ( citations , abstracts , and other pertinent data) of journal articles and other education-related materials, with hundreds of new records added every week. A key component of ERIC is its collection of grey literature in education, which is largely available in full text in Adobe PDF format . Approximately one quarter of the complete ERIC Collection is available in full text. Materials with no full text available (primarily journal articles) can often be accessed using links to publisher websites and/or library holdings. ERIC usually includes education related articles in its database. Sample articles include "The Economic, Social and Administrative Pharmacy (ESAP) Discipline in US Schools and Colleges of Pharmacy", [ 1 ] "Aesthetics in Young Children's Lives: From Music Technology Curriculum Perspective", [ 2 ] and "Digital Game's Impacts on Students' Learning Effectiveness of Correct Medication".

[ 3 ] The ERIC Collection, begun in 1966, contains records for a variety of publication types, including: journal articles books research syntheses conference papers technical reports dissertations policy papers, and other education-related materials ERIC provides the public with a centralized Web site for searching the ERIC collection and submitting materials to be considered for inclusion in the collection. Users can also access the collection through commercial database vendors, statewide and institutional networks, and Internet search engines. To help users find the information they are seeking, ERIC produces a controlled vocabulary , the Thesaurus of ERIC Descriptors. This is a carefully selected list of education-related words and phrases used to tag materials by subject and make them easier to retrieve through a search.

Prior to January 2004, the ERIC network consisted of sixteen subject-specific clearinghouses, various adjunct and affiliate clearinghouses, and three support components. The program was consolidated into a single entity, with upgraded systems, and paper-based processes converted to electronic, thus streamlining operations and speeding delivery of content.

[ 4 ] In March 2025, it was announced that the number of sources catalogued by ERIC was to be reduced by 45%.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] List of academic databases and search engines References [ edit ] ^ Alkhateeb, Fadi M.; Latif, David A.; Adkins, Rachel (30 November 2012).

The Economic, Social and Administrative Pharmacy (ESAP) Discipline in US Schools and Colleges of Pharmacy . Vol. 2. pp.

187– 204.

^ Ko, Chia-Hui; Chou, Mei-Ju (30 November 2012).

Aesthetics in Young Children's Lives: From Music Technology Curriculum Perspective . Vol. 2. pp.

265– 273.

^ Shiue, Ya-Ming; Hsu, Yu-Chiung (30 November 2016).

Digital Game's Impacts on Students' Learning Effectiveness of Correct Medication . Vol. 6. pp.

157– 165.

^ "Fifty Years of ERIC: 1964-2014" (PDF) .

ERIC . 2014.

^ "Changes to ERIC - 2025" .

guides.libraries.uc.edu . CECH Library, University of Cincinnati . Retrieved 24 April 2025 .

External links [ edit ] ERIC website ERIC Digests Archived 2021-04-16 at the Wayback Machine , a repository for materials produced by the former ERIC Clearinghouse system up to 2003 v t e United States Department of Education Headquarters: 400 Maryland Avenue SW (Education Department Building) Linda McMahon , Secretary of Education Vacant , Deputy Secretary of Education Secretary of Education Office for Civil Rights Institute of Education Sciences ( National Center for Education Statistics ) Deputy Secretary of Education Office of Innovation and Improvement (defunct) Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services ( Rehabilitation Services Administration Office of Special Education Programs ) Office of English Language Acquisition Office of Elementary and Secondary Education ( Office of Safe and Healthy Students Office of Migrant Education ) Under Secretary of Education Federal Student Aid Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education Office of Postsecondary Education TRiO White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and Universities White House Initiative on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for Hispanics White House Initiative on American Indian and Alaska Native Education White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for African Americans Programs National Library of Education Education Resources Information Center National Assessment of Educational Progress Presidential Scholars Program What Works Clearinghouse Independent organizations Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance National Institute for Literacy National Assessment Governing Board National Board for Education Sciences Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Portugal 2 Greece Korea Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Education_Resources_Information_Center&oldid=1306258661 " Categories : Educational research Educational materials United States Department of Education Government-owned websites of the United States Government databases in the United States Public domain databases Bibliographic databases and indexes Full-text scholarly online databases American digital libraries Discipline-oriented digital libraries Aggregation-based digital libraries Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2016 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2010 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 20:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Education Resources Information Center 5 languages Add topic

