Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The gardens 2 Comprehensive monitoring plan 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Classical Gardens of Suzhou 35 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kernowek Magyar Македонски Malti 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 31°19′N 120°27′E ﻿ / ﻿ 31.317°N 120.450°E ﻿ / 31.317; 120.450 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese Classical garden in Jiangsu province Classical Gardens of Suzhou UNESCO World Heritage Site Lingering Garden in Suzhou Location Suzhou, Jiangsu , China Criteria Cultural: (i)(ii)(iii)(iv)(v) Reference 813bis Inscription 1997 (21st Session ) Extensions 2000 Area 11.922 ha (29.46 acres) Buffer zone 26.839 ha (66.32 acres) Coordinates 31°19′N 120°27′E ﻿ / ﻿ 31.317°N 120.450°E ﻿ / 31.317; 120.450 Location of Classical Gardens of Suzhou in Jiangsu Show map of Jiangsu Classical Gardens of Suzhou (China) Show map of China The Classical Gardens of Suzhou ( Chinese : 苏州园林 ; pinyin : Sūzhōu yuánlín ; Suzhounese ( Wugniu ): sou 1 -tseu 1 yoe 2 -lin 2 ) are a group of gardens in the city of Suzhou , in Jiangsu , China, which have been added to the UNESCO World Heritage List .

Spanning a period of almost one thousand years, from the Northern Song to the late Qing dynasties (11th-19th century), these gardens, most of them built by scholars, standardized many of the key features of classical Chinese garden design with constructed landscapes mimicking natural scenery of rocks, hills and rivers with strategically located pavilions and pagodas .

[ 1 ] The elegant aesthetics and subtlety of these scholars' gardens and their delicate style and features are often imitated by various gardens in other parts of China, including the various Imperial Gardens, such as those in the Chengde Mountain Resort .

[ 2 ] According to UNESCO , the gardens of Suzhou "represent the development of Chinese landscape garden design over more than two thousand years," [ 3 ] and they are the "most refined form" of garden art.

[ 3 ] These landscape gardens flourished in the mid-Ming to early-Qing dynasties, resulting in as much as 200 private gardens.

[ 1 ] Today, there are 69 preserved gardens in Suzhou, [ 4 ] and all of them are designated as protected "National Heritage Sites." [ 5 ] In 1997 and 2000, eight of the finest gardens in Suzhou along with one in the nearby ancient town of Tongli were selected by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site to represent the art of Suzhou-style classical gardens.

[ 4 ] Famous Suzhou garden designers include Zhang Liang, Ji Cheng , Ge Yuliang, and Chen Congzhou.

The gardens [ edit ] Image Name Inscription date Humble Administrator's Garden (拙政园/拙政園; Zhuōzhèng Yuán) 1997 Lingering Garden (留园/留園; Liú Yuán) 1997 Master of the Nets Garden (网师园/網師園; Wǎngshī Yuán) 1997 Mountain Villa with Embracing Beauty (环秀山庄/環秀山莊; Huánxiù Shānzhuāng) 1997 Couple's Retreat Garden (耦园/耦園; Ŏu Yuán) 2000 Garden of Cultivation (艺圃/藝圃; Yì Pǔ) 2000 Great Wave Pavilion (沧浪亭/滄浪亭; Cāng Làng Tíng) 2000 Lion Grove Garden (狮子林园/獅子林園; Shī Zǐ Lín Yuán) 2000 Retreat & Reflection Garden (退思园/退思園; Tuìsī Yuán) 2000 Comprehensive monitoring plan [ edit ] The site is monitored following a comprehensive monitoring plan and there is provision for both the routine maintenance and
programmed conservation projects for all of the gardens. The Suzhou Municipal Administrative Bureau of Gardens is responsible for this.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Gardens portal Chinese garden Five Peaks Garden References [ edit ] ^ a b "Classical Gardens" . Chinavista.com. Archived from the original on 2012-08-24 . Retrieved 2012-12-01 .

^ Liu, Dunzhen and Joseph C. Wang (1993).

Chinese classical gardens of Suzhou .

McGraw-Hill . p. 12.

^ a b "World Heritage List (Suzhou)". UNESCO Advisory Body Evaluation. 1996-07-26.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b Robert Ivy, FAIA.

"I.M. Pei returns to his family's hometown in China and designs the Suzhou Museum for a sensitive, historic site" .

Architectural Record .

^ "Flowing Serenity - The Chinese Garden" .

Emel magazine Issue 73 October 2010.

^ "UNESCO World Heritage Centre" . Whc.unesco.org . Retrieved 2012-12-01 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Classical Gardens of Suzhou .

Classical Gardens of Suzhou - UNESCO World Heritage v t e Classical Gardens of Suzhou This UNESCO World Heritage Site is inscribed as a single property, but composed of 9 separate gardens in Suzhou Prefecture Lingering Garden Garden of Cultivation Humble Administrator's Garden Master of the Nets Garden Mountain Villa with Embracing Beauty Canglang Pavilion Lion Grove Garden Couple's Retreat Garden The Retreat & Reflection Garden Category v t e World Heritage Sites in China East Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City Classical Gardens of Suzhou Fujian tulou Lushan Huangshan Migratory Bird Sanctuaries along the Coast of Yellow Sea – Bohai Sea of China (Phase I) Mount Sanqing Mount Tai Wuyi Mountains Temple and Cemetery of Confucius and Kong Family Mansion in Qufu Xidi , and Hongcun West Lake Kulangsu South Central Ancient Building Complex in the Wudang Mountains Historic Centre of Macau Shennongjia Kaiping Diaolou and Villages Longmen Grottoes Historic Monuments of Dengfeng , including the Shaolin Monastery and Gaocheng Observatory Zuojiang Huashan Rock Art Wulingyuan Yinxu Southwestern Chengjiang Fossil Site Dazu Rock Carvings Fanjingshan Honghe Hani Rice Terraces Huanglong Jiuzhaigou Lijiang Mount Emei and Leshan Giant Buddha Mount Qingcheng and Dujiangyan Potala Palace , including the Jokhang and Norbulingka Sichuan Giant Panda Sanctuaries Three Parallel Rivers North Mount Wutai Chengde Mountain Resort , including Putuo Zongcheng Temple , Xumi Fushou Temple and Puning Temple Forbidden City Zhoukoudian Ancient City of Pingyao Summer Palace Temple of Heaven Xanadu Yungang Grottoes Beijing Central Axis Northeast Koguryo sites Mukden Palace Northwestern Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor Mogao Caves Xinjiang Tianshan Qinghai Hoh Xil Western Xia mausoleums Multiple regions Great Wall China Danxia Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties South China Karst Grand Canal Silk Roads Tusi Sites Migratory Bird Sanctuaries along the Coast of Yellow Sea – Bohai Sea of China Badain Jaran Desert v t e East Asian traditional gardens and landscape design Styles Chinese garden Japanese garden Korean garden Jiangnan style Classical Gardens of Suzhou Yu Garden Gardens around the West Lake Zhan Garden Mochou Lake Royal style Huaqing Pool Beihai Park Zhongnanhai Summer Palace Old Summer Palace Fragrant Hills Chengde Mountain Resort Rear Garden of Changdeokgung Katsura Imperial Villa Shugakuin Imperial Villa Hayama Imperial Villa Suzaki Imperial Villa North China style Garden of the Prince Gong Mansion Gardens in Peking University Lingnan style Ke Yuan Qing Hui Yuan Yu Yin Shan Fang Sichuanese style Du Fu Thatched Cottage Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classical_Gardens_of_Suzhou&oldid=1290212220 " Categories : Classical Gardens of Suzhou Gardens in China Buildings and structures in Suzhou World Heritage Sites in China Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 May 2025, at 11:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Classical Gardens of Suzhou 35 languages Add topic

