Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient Texts 1.2 Renaissance 2 Catoptric telescopes 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Catoptrics 7 languages বাংলা Deutsch Français Ido Norsk nynorsk Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of the relationship between light and mirrors Light path of a Newtonian (catoptric) telescope Catoptrics (from Ancient Greek : κατοπτρικός katoptrikós , "specular", [ 1 ] from Ancient Greek : κάτοπτρον katoptron "mirror") [ 2 ] deals with the phenomena of reflected light and image-forming optical systems using mirrors . A catoptric system is also called a catopter ( catoptre ).

History [ edit ] Ancient Texts [ edit ] Catoptrics is the title of two texts from ancient Greece : The Pseudo-Euclidean Catoptrics . This book is attributed to Euclid , [ 3 ] although the contents are a mixture of work dating from Euclid's time together with work which dates to the Roman period.

[ 4 ] It has been argued that the book may have been compiled by the 4th century mathematician Theon of Alexandria .

[ 4 ] The book covers the mathematical theory of mirrors, particularly the images formed by plane and spherical concave mirrors.

Hero's Catoptrics . Written by Hero of Alexandria , this work concerns the practical application of mirrors for visual effects. In the Middle Ages, this work was falsely ascribed to Ptolemy . It only survives in a Latin translation.

[ 5 ] The Latin translation of Alhazen 's (Ibn al-Haytham) main work, Book of Optics ( Kitab al-Manazir ), [ 6 ] exerted a great influence on Western science: for example, on the work of Roger Bacon , who cites him by name.

[ 7 ] His research in catoptrics (the study of optical systems using mirrors) centred on spherical and parabolic mirrors and spherical aberration . He made the observation that the ratio between the angle of incidence and refraction does not remain constant, and investigated the magnifying power of a lens . His work on catoptrics also contains the problem known as " Alhazen's problem ".

[ 8 ] Alhazen's work influenced Averroes ' writings on optics, [ citation needed ] and his legacy was further advanced through the 'reforming' of his Optics by Persian scientist Kamal al-Din al-Farisi (d. ca. 1320) in the latter's Kitab Tanqih al-Manazir ( The Revision of [Ibn al-Haytham's] Optics ).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Renaissance [ edit ] 16th-century Jewish-Ferraresi physicist Rafael Mirami wrote a treatise on the subject, Compendiosa introduttione alla prima parte della specularia , which became influential in a revival of the field, and contributed towards Pope Gregory XIII 's astronomical calculations that led to the creation of the Gregorian Calendar .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Catoptric telescopes [ edit ] The first practical catoptric telescope (the " Newtonian reflector ") was built by Isaac Newton as a solution to the problem of chromatic aberration exhibited in telescopes using lenses as objectives ( dioptric telescopes).

See also [ edit ] Dioptrics Catadioptrics Optical telescope List of telescope types Image-forming optical system Fresnel lens Lighthouse lens References [ edit ] ^ Jannaris, Antonius Nicholas (1895).

A Concise Dictionary of the English and Modern Greek Languages: As Actually Written and Spoken : English-Greek (in Greek). J. Murray.

^ "Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, An Intermediate Greek-English Lexicon, κάτοπτρον" . Retrieved 2015-03-13 .

^ Calvert, J.B. (2000).

"Reading Euclid" .

Duke University . Retrieved 23 October 2007 .

^ a b O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Catoptrics" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews , accessed 31 January 2013 ^ A. Mark Smith, (1999), Ptolemy and the Foundations of Ancient Mathematical Optics , pages 16-17. American Philosophical Society.

ISBN 0871698935 ^ Grant, Edward (1974).

A Source Book in Medieval Science . Harvard University Press. p. 392.

ISBN 978-0-674-82360-0 .

^ Lindberg 1996 , p. 11passim ^ Al Deek 2004 .

^ El-Bizri 2005a .

^ El-Bizri 2005b .

^ Sebastian, Matias de Aguierre y (1654).

Navidad de Zaragoza repartida en quatro noches (in Spanish). Juan de Ybar. p. 48.

^ Sachar, Abram Leon (1995).

Brandeis University: A Host at Last . UPNE. p. 115.

ISBN 978-0-87451-585-5 .

Bibliography [ edit ] El-Bizri, Nader (2005a), "A Philosophical Perspective on Alhazen's Optics ", Arabic Sciences and Philosophy , 15 (2), Cambridge University Press : 189– 218, doi : 10.1017/S0957423905000172 , S2CID 123057532 El-Bizri, Nader (2005b), "Ibn al-Haytham", in Wallis, Faith (ed.), Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia , New York & London: Routledge , pp.

237– 40, ISBN 0-415-96930-1 , OCLC 218847614 Al Deek, Dr. Mahmoud (2004), "Ibn Al-Haitham: Master of Optics, Mathematics, Physics and Medicine" , Al Shindagah (November–December 2004), archived from the original on 2008-06-17 , retrieved 2013-09-04 Grant, Edward (1974), A Source Book in Medieval Science , Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-82360-0 Lindberg, David C. (1996), Roger Bacon and the Origins of Perspectiva in the Middle Ages , Clarendon Press v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Catoptrics&oldid=1299139060 " Categories : Optics Mirrors Hidden categories: CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 19:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Catoptrics 7 languages Add topic

