Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Greek and Roman tradition 2 Indian tradition 3 Ceremonial magic 4 Modern witchcraft 5 See also 6 Notes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Water (classical element) 16 languages العربية বাংলা Bikol Central Català Español Français Հայերեն Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu Papiamentu Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One of four primary substances in antiquity Classical elements Hellenistic Air Water Aether Fire Earth Hinduism / Jainism / Buddhism Vayu Ap Akasha Agni Prithvi Chinese Wood ( 木 ) Water ( 水 ) Fire ( 火 ) Metal ( 金 ) Earth ( 土 ) Japanese Wind ( 風 ) Water ( 水 ) Void ( 空 ) Fire ( 火 ) Earth ( 地 ) European alchemy Air Water Fire Aether Earth Sulphur Mercury Salt v t e Water is one of the classical elements in ancient Greek philosophy along with air , earth and fire , in the Asian Indian system Panchamahabhuta , and in the Chinese cosmological and physiological system Wu Xing . In contemporary esoteric traditions , it is commonly associated with the qualities of emotion and intuition .

Greek and Roman tradition [ edit ] Water was one of many archai proposed by the Pre-socratics, most of whom tried to reduce all things to a single substance. However, Empedocles of Acragas (c. 495 – c. 435 BC) selected four archai for his four roots: air, fire, water and earth. Empedocles' roots became the four classical elements of Greek philosophy.

Plato (427–347 BC) took over the four elements of Empedocles. In the Timaeus , his major cosmological dialogue, the Platonic solid associated with water is the icosahedron which is formed from twenty equilateral triangles. This makes water the element with the greatest number of sides, which Plato regarded as appropriate because water flows out of one's hand when picked up, as if it is made of tiny little balls.

[ 1 ] Plato's student Aristotle (384–322 BC) developed a different explanation for the elements based on pairs of qualities. The four elements were arranged concentrically around the center of the Universe to form the sublunary sphere .  According to Aristotle, water is both cold and wet and occupies a place between air and earth among the elemental spheres.

[ 2 ] ▽, the alchemical symbol for water In ancient Greek medicine , each of the four humours became associated with an element.

Phlegm was the humor identified with water, since both were cold and wet. Other things associated with water and phlegm in ancient and medieval medicine included the season of Winter, since it increased the qualities of cold and moisture, the phlegmatic temperament, the feminine and the western point of the compass.

In alchemy , the chemical element of mercury was often associated with water and its alchemical symbol was a downward-pointing triangle.

Indian tradition [ edit ] Main article: Ap (water) This section may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the section . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ap ( áp- ) is the Vedic Sanskrit term for water, in Classical Sanskrit occurring only in the plural is not an element.v, āpas (sometimes re-analysed as a thematic singular, āpa- ), whence Hindi āp . The term is from PIE h x ap water.

In Hindu philosophy , the term refers to 
water as an element, one of the Panchamahabhuta , or "five great elements". In Hinduism , it is also the name of the deva , a personification of water, (one of the Vasus in most later Puranic lists). The element water is also associated with Chandra or the moon and Shukra , who represent feelings, intuition and imagination.

According to Jain tradition, water itself is inhabited by spiritual Jīvas called apakāya ekendriya .

[ 3 ] Ceremonial magic [ edit ] Water and the other Greek classical elements were incorporated into the Golden Dawn system.

[ 4 ] The elemental weapon of water is the cup.

[ 5 ] Each of the elements has several associated spiritual beings. The archangel of water is Gabriel , the angel is Taliahad, the ruler is Tharsis, the king is Nichsa and the water elementals are called Ondines .

[ 6 ] It is referred to the upper right point of the pentagram in the Supreme Invoking Ritual of the Pentagram.

[ 7 ] Many of these associations have since spread throughout the occult community.

Modern witchcraft [ edit ] Water is one of the five elements that appear in most Wiccan traditions.

Wicca in particular was influenced by the Golden Dawn system of magic and Aleister Crowley 's mysticism, which was in turn inspired by the Golden Dawn.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Water Sea and river deity Cancer (astrology) Scorpio (astrology) Pisces (astrology) Notes [ edit ] ^ Plato, Timaeus , chap. 22–23; Gregory Vlastos , Plato’s Universe , pp. 66–82.

^ G. E. R. Lloyd , Aristotle , chapters 7–8.

^ University of Calcutta: Department of Letters (1921).

"Journal of the Department of Letters" .

Journal of the Department of Letters .

5 . Calcutta University Press, originally from University of Chicago : 352.

^ Israel Regardie, The Golden Dawn , pp. 154–65.

^ Regardie, Golden Dawn , p.322; Kraig, Modern Magick , pp. 149–53.

^ Regardie, Golden Dawn , p. 80.

^ Regardie, Golden Dawn , pp. 280–286; Kraig, Modern Magick , pp. 206–209.

^ Hutton, Triumph of the Moon , pp. 216–23; Valiente, Witchcraft for Tomorrow, p. 17.

External links [ edit ] Different versions of the classical elements Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Water_(classical_element)&oldid=1305908398 " Categories : Classical elements Water in culture Esoteric cosmology History of astrology Technical factors of astrology Concepts in ancient Greek metaphysics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 20:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Water (classical element) 16 languages Add topic

