Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 History 3 Election results 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents German State Party 2 languages Deutsch 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "German State Party" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Political party in Germany German State Party Deutsche Staatspartei Founded July 1930 ; 95 years ago ( July 1930 ) Dissolved 28 June 1933 ; 92 years ago ( 28 June 1933 ) Merger of German Democratic Party Young German Order (original) [ 1 ] Merged into Free Democratic Party (not legal successor) Ideology Liberalism Corporatism Nationalism Political position Centre to centre-right Politics of Germany Political parties Elections The German State Party ( German : Deutsche Staatspartei or DStP ) was a short-lived German political party of the Weimar Republic . The party was formed on 28 July 1930 by the merger of the German Democratic Party with the People's National Reich Association (the political wing of the Young German Order ).

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] The merger of the social liberalism of the DDP with the nationalist corporatism of the Young German Order did not prove a successful one: the party lost seats drastically in the 1930 election from its showing in 1928, and the People's National Reich Association's Reichstag delegates soon seceded from the party, leaving it essentially the DDP under a new name.

History [ edit ] The party continued to compete in parliamentary elections, with little success. By the November 1932 election , the party was reduced to two seats. After all requests to merge with other parties were turned down, it ran on a joint list with the Social Democratic Party of Germany in the March 1933 election . However, this saw little change in the party's fortunes; it only won five seats.

The party supported the Enabling Act of 1933 which gave Adolf Hitler of the Nazi Party dictatorial powers. Following the passage of the Enabling Act, the party was the target of severe harassment, as was the case with the other remaining parties.  Pro-DStP civil servants defected to the Nazis out of fear for their jobs. Soon after the government banned the SPD, it stripped the State Party of its Reichstag seats, taking the line that since they ran on the SPD list, they were effectively SPD deputies. What remained of the party dissolved on 28 June.

Election results [ edit ] Election Votes % Seats +/– 1930 1,322,034 3.78 (7th) 20 / 577 5 July 1932 371,800 1.01 (8th) 4 / 608 16 November 1932 336,447 0.95 (9th) 2 / 584 2 March 1933 334,242 0.85 (9th) 5 / 647 3 See also [ edit ] Liberalism Contributions to liberal theory Liberalism worldwide List of liberal parties Liberal democracy Liberalism in Germany References [ edit ] ^ Werner Stephan: Aufstieg und Verfall des Linksliberalismus 1918–1933. Die Geschichte der Deutschen Demokratischen Partei , S. 473f.

^ Larry Eugene Jones (2020).

The German Right, 1918–1930: Political Parties, Organized Interests, and Patriotic Associations in the Struggle against Weimar Democracy . Cambridge University Press. p. 564.

ISBN 978-1-108-49407-6 .

v t e Political parties in Germany in the Weimar Republic (1918–1933) Communist Communist Party of Germany (KPD) Communist Workers Party of Germany (KAPD) Communist Party Opposition (KPO) Socialist , Social Democratic and Democratic Socialist Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany (MSPD) Old Social Democratic Party of Germany (ASPD) Socialist Workers' Party of Germany (SAPD) Agrarian Bavarian Peasants' League (BB) Agricultural League Schleswig-Holstein Farmers and Farmworkers Democracy (SHBLD) Christian National Peasants' and Farmers' Party (CNBL) German Farmers' Party (DBP) Catholic Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Centre Party (Zentrum) Christian People's Party (CVP) Liberal German Democratic Party (DDP) German People's Party (DVP) German State Party (DStP) Conservative German National People's Party (DnVp) Economic Party (WP) People's Justice Party (VRP) Christian Social People's Service (CSVD) Conservative People's Party (KVP) German-Hanoverian Party (DHP) Völkische and Nazi German Workers' Party (DAP) German Social Party (DtSP) German Socialist Party (DSP) Greater German People's Community (GVG) National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP) German Völkisch Freedom Party (DVFP) National Socialist Freedom Movement (NSFB) Tannenberg Union (TB) Related topics: Weimar paramilitary groups Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX This article related to a European Liberal party is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=German_State_Party&oldid=1263404836 " Categories : Defunct liberal political parties Defunct political parties in Germany Political parties established in 1930 Political parties disestablished in 1933 Political parties in the Weimar Republic Liberal parties in Germany 1930 establishments in Germany 1933 disestablishments in Germany European Liberal party stubs Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 16 December 2024, at 13:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents German State Party 2 languages Add topic

