Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of heritage Toggle Types of heritage subsection 1.1 Cultural property 1.2 Intangible culture 1.3 Natural heritage 1.4 Digital heritage 2 Protection of cultural heritage Toggle Protection of cultural heritage subsection 2.1 History 3 Ethics and rationale 4 World heritage movement 5 National and regional heritage movements 6 Issues in cultural heritage 7 Management of cultural heritage 8 Cultural heritage digital preservation 9 See also Toggle See also subsection 9.1 Digital methods in preservation 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Cultural heritage 63 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Bikol Central Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Papiamentu Patois Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Physical artifact or intangible attribute of a society inherited from past generations Roman ruins with a prophet , by Giovanni Pannini , 1751. The artistic cultural heritage of the Roman Empire served as a foundation for later Western culture , particularly via the Renaissance and Neoclassicism (as exemplified here).

Cultural heritage is the tangible and intangible legacy of a group or society that is inherited from past generations. Not all legacies of past generations are "heritage"; rather, heritage is a product of selection by society.

[ 1 ] Cultural heritage includes tangible culture (such as buildings, monuments , landscapes, archive materials, books, works of art, and artifacts), intangible culture (such as folklore, traditions, language, and knowledge), and natural heritage (including culturally significant landscapes, and biodiversity ).

[ 2 ] The term is often used in connection with issues relating to the protection of Indigenous intellectual property .

[ 3 ] The deliberate action of keeping cultural heritage from the present for the future is known as preservation (American English) or conservation (British English), which cultural and historical ethnic museums and cultural centers promote, though these terms may have more specific or technical meanings in the same contexts in the other dialect. Preserved heritage has become an anchor of the global tourism industry , a major contributor of economic value to local communities.

[ 1 ] Legal protection of cultural property comprises a number of international agreements and national laws.

United Nations , UNESCO and Blue Shield International deal with the protection of cultural heritage. This also applies to the integration of United Nations peacekeeping .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Types of heritage [ edit ] See also: Indigenous intellectual property Cultural property [ edit ] See also: Material culture Cultural property includes the physical, or "tangible" cultural heritage, such as artworks. These are generally split into two groups of movable and immovable heritage. Immovable heritage includes buildings (which themselves may include installed art such as organs, stained glass windows, and frescos), large industrial installations, residential projects, or other historic places and monuments . Moveable heritage includes books, documents, moveable artworks, machines, clothing, and other artifacts, that are considered worthy of preservation for the future. These include objects significant to the archaeology, architecture, science, or technology of a specified culture.

[ 2 ] Aspects and disciplines of the preservation and conservation of tangible culture include: Museology Archival science Conservation (cultural heritage) Art conservation Archaeological conservation Architectural conservation Film preservation Phonograph record preservation Digital preservation Intangible culture [ edit ] The Grandfather tells a story , by Albert Anker , c.

1884 .

Main article: Intangible cultural heritage See also: Cultural expressions "Intangible cultural heritage" consists of non-physical aspects of a particular culture, more often maintained by social customs during a specific period in history. The concept includes the ways and means of behavior in a society and the often formal rules for operating in a particular cultural climate. These include social values and traditions , customs and practices, aesthetic and spiritual beliefs, artistic expression , language and other aspects of human activity. The significance of physical artifacts can be interpreted as an act against the backdrop of socioeconomic, political, ethnic, religious, and philosophical values of a particular group of people. Naturally, intangible cultural heritage is more difficult to preserve than physical objects.

[ citation needed ] Aspects of the preservation and conservation of cultural intangibles include: folklore oral history language preservation Natural heritage [ edit ] See also: Conservation movement " Natural heritage " is also an important part of a society's heritage, encompassing the countryside and natural environment, including flora and fauna , scientifically known as biodiversity , as well as geological elements (including mineralogical, geomorphological, paleontological, etc.), scientifically known as geodiversity . These kinds of heritage sites often serve as an important component in a country's tourist industry , attracting many visitors from abroad as well as locally. Heritage can also include cultural landscapes (natural features that may have cultural attributes).

Aspects of the preservation and conservation of natural heritage include: Rare breeds conservation Heirloom plants Digital heritage [ edit ] See also: Digital preservation Digital heritage is made up of computer-based materials such as texts, databases, images, sounds and software being retained for future generations.

[ 10 ] Digital heritage includes physical objects such as documents which have been digitized for retention and artifacts which are "born digital", i.e. originally created digitally and having no physical form.

Protection of cultural heritage [ edit ] Main article: Historic preservation History [ edit ] There have been examples of respect for the cultural assets of enemies since ancient times. The roots of today's legal situation for the precise protection of cultural heritage also lie in some of the regulations of Austria's ruler Maria Theresa (1717 - 1780) and the demands of the Congress of Vienna (1814/15) not to remove works of art from their place of origin in the war.

[ 11 ] The 1863 Lieber code , a military legal code governing the wartime conduct of the Union Army also set rules for the protection of cultural heritage.

[ 12 ] The process continued at the end of the 19th century when, in 1874 (in Brussels), at least a draft international agreement on the laws and customs of war was agreed. 25 years later, in 1899, an international peace conference was held in the Netherlands on the initiative of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia , with the aim of revising the declaration (which was never ratified) and adopting a convention. The Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 also significantly advanced international law and laid down the principle of the immunity of cultural property. Three decades later, in 1935, the preamble to the Treaty on the Protection of Artistic and Scientific Institutions ( Roerich Pact ) was formulated. On the initiative of UNESCO, the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict was signed in 1954.

[ 13 ] Protection of cultural heritage or protection of cultural goods refers to all measures aimed at protecting cultural property against damage, destruction, theft, embezzlement, or other loss. The term "monument protection" is also used for immovable cultural property. Protection of cultural heritage relates in particular to the prevention of robbery digs at archaeological sites, the looting or destruction of cultural sites and the theft of works of art from churches and museums all over the world and basically measures regarding the conservation and general access to our common cultural heritage. Legal protection of cultural heritage comprises a number of international agreements and national laws.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] There is a close partnership between the UN , United Nations peacekeeping , UNESCO , the International Committee of the Red Cross and Blue Shield International .

[ 9 ] [ 19 ] Karl von Habsburg , on a Blue Shield International fact-finding mission in Libya The protection of cultural heritage should also preserve the particularly sensitive cultural memory, the growing cultural diversity, and the economic basis of a state, a municipality, or a region. Whereby there is also a connection between cultural user disruption or cultural heritage and the cause of flight. But only through fundamental cooperation, including the military units and the planning staff, with the locals can the protection of world heritage sites, archaeological finds, exhibits, and archaeological sites from destruction, looting, and robbery be implemented sustainably. The founding president of Blue Shield International Karl von Habsburg summed it up with the words: "Without the local community and without the local participants, that would be completely impossible".

[ 9 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Ethics and rationale [ edit ] Objects are a part of the study of human history because they provide a concrete basis for ideas, and can validate them. Their preservation demonstrates a recognition of the necessity of the past and of the things that tell its story.

[ 23 ] In The Past is a Foreign Country , David Lowenthal observes that preserved objects also validate memories . While digital acquisition techniques can provide a technological solution that is able to acquire the shape and the appearance of artifacts with unprecedented precision [ 24 ] in human history, the actuality of the object, as opposed to a reproduction, draws people in and gives them a literal way of touching the past. This poses a danger as places and things are damaged by the hands of tourists, the light required to display them, and other risks of making an object known and available. The reality of this risk reinforces the fact that all artifacts are in a constant state of chemical transformation so that what is considered to be preserved is actually changing – it is never as it once was.

[ 25 ] Similarly changing is the value each generation may place on the past and on the artifacts that link it to the past.

The equality or inseparability of cultural preservation and the protection of human life has been argued by several agencies and writers, [ 26 ] for example, former French president François Hollande stated in 2016 Our responsibility is to save lives and also to save the stones -- there is no choice to be made, because today both are destroyed.

[ 27 ] Kautilya Society in Varanasi - When heritage protection becomes a fight for legality and participation → "They harass me because I demand civil society participation to public policies and I contrast the misuse of privileges" Classical civilizations, especially Indian, have attributed supreme importance to the preservation of tradition. Its central idea was that social institutions, scientific knowledge, and technological applications need to use a "heritage" as a "resource".

[ 28 ] Using contemporary language, we could say that ancient Indians considered, as social resources, both economic assets (like natural resources and their exploitation structure) and factors promoting social integration (like institutions for the preservation of knowledge and for the maintenance of civil order).

[ 29 ] Ethics considered that what had been inherited should not be consumed, but should be handed over, possibly enriched, to successive generations. This was a moral imperative for all, except in the final life stage of sannyasa .

What one generation considers "cultural heritage" may be rejected by the next generation, only to be revived by a subsequent generation.

[ according to whom?

] World heritage movement [ edit ] Plaque stating the designation of Carthage as a World Heritage Site.

The Convention Concerning the Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage was adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO in 1972. As of 2011, there are 936 World Heritage Sites : 725 cultural, 183 natural, and 28 mixed properties, in 153 countries. Each of these sites is considered important to the international community.

Underwater cultural heritage is protected by the UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage .

[ 30 ] In addition, UNESCO has begun designating masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity . The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights sitting as part of the United Nations Economic and Social Council with article 15 of its Covenant had sought to instill the principles under which cultural heritage is protected as part of a basic human right.

Key international documents and bodies include: Athens Charter , 1931 Roerich Pact , 1935 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict , 1954, (with a definition of cultural heritage item adopted by some national law) Venice Charter , 1964 Barcelona Charter , 2002 (regarding maritime vessel preservation) ICOMOS The Blue Shield , a network of committees of dedicated individuals across the world that is " committed to the protection of the world's cultural property, and is concerned with the protection of cultural and natural heritage, tangible and intangible, in the event of armed conflict, natural- or human-made disaster ." International Institute for Conservation The U.S. Government Accountability Office issued a report describing some of the United States' cultural property protection efforts.

[ 31 ] National and regional heritage movements [ edit ] Rediscovery of the Muisca Indigenous Heritage El redescubrimiento de la tradición indígena Youth and Heritage in Syria Passing on traditional values Much of heritage preservation work is done at the national, regional, or local levels of society. Various national and regional regimes include: Australia: Burra Charter Heritage Overlay in Victoria, Australia Bosnia KONS Brazil: National Institute of Historic and Artistic Heritage Canada Heritage conservation in Canada Chile National Monuments Council (Chile) China State Administration of Cultural Heritage Egypt Supreme Council of Antiquities Estonia Ministry of Culture (Estonia) National Heritage Board (Estonia) [ 32 ] Ghana Ghana's material cultural heritage Honduras Secretary of State for Culture, Arts and Sports Hong Kong Heritage conservation in Hong Kong India Ministry of Culture (India) National Archives of India Archaeological Survey of India Anthropological Survey of India Culture of India Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage National Museum Institute of the History of Art, Conservation and Museology List of World Heritage Sites in India Heritage structures in Hyderabad Iran Cultural Heritage, Handcrafts and Tourism Organization Japan Cultural Properties of Japan Kenya National Museums of Kenya International Inventories Programme North Macedonia Institute for Protection of Cultural Monuments Malaysia The National Heritage Act Namibia National Heritage Council of Namibia National Monuments Council New Zealand New Zealand Historic Places Trust Pakistan Lahore Museum of Art and Cultural History Lok Virsa Heritage Museum National Museum of Pakistan Pakistan Monument and Heritage Museum Philippines National Commission for Culture and the Arts National Historical Commission of the Philippines Poland National Ossoliński Institute [ 33 ] Serbia Immovable Cultural Heritage of Exceptional Importance Immovable Cultural Heritage of Great Importance South Africa South African Heritage Resources Agency Provincial heritage resources authorities Amafa aKwaZulu-Natali Heritage Western Cape Northern Cape Heritage Resources Authority National Monuments Council Historical Monuments Commission United Kingdom Conservation in the United Kingdom English Heritage English Heritage Archive National Trust Cadw Northern Ireland Environment Agency Historic Environment Scotland National Trust for Scotland United States of America National Park Service National Register of Historic Places National Historic Site (United States) List of national memorials of the United States National Military Park Zambia National Heritage Conservation Commission National Museums Board Zimbabwe National Monuments of Zimbabwe Issues in cultural heritage [ edit ] Emblem used to clearly identify cultural property under protection of the Hague Convention of 1954 , regarding cultural property during armed conflicts.

Broad philosophical, technical, and political issues and dimensions of cultural heritage include: Cultural heritage repatriation Cultural heritage management Cultural property law Heritage tourism Virtual heritage Sustainable preservation Climate change and World Heritage Management of cultural heritage [ edit ] Issues in cultural heritage management include: Exhibition of cultural heritage objects Radiography of cultural objects Storage of cultural heritage objects Collections maintenance Disaster preparedness Cultural heritage digital preservation [ edit ] Ancient archaeological artefacts and archaeological sites are naturally prone to damage due to their age and environmental conditions. Also, there have been tragic occurrences of unexpected human-made disasters, such as in the cases of a fire that took place in the 200 years old National Museum of Brazil and the UNESCO World Heritage Site of the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris.

Therefore, there is a growing need to digitize cultural heritage in order to preserve them in the face of potential calamities such as climate change, natural disaster, poor policy or inadequate infrastructure. For example, the Library of Congress has started to digitize its collections in a special program called the National Digital Library Program .

[ 34 ] The Smithsonian has also been actively digitizing its collection with the release of the "Smithsonian X 3D Explorer," allowing anyone to engage with the digitized versions of the museum's millions of artifacts, of which only two percent are on display.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] 3D scanning devices used for heritage preservation produce a high-precision digital reference model that not only digitizes condition but also provides a 3D virtual model for replication. The high cost and relative complexity of 3D scanning technologies made it quite impractical in the past, but technology advances and lower relative costs have made even mobile based scanning applications able to create a virtual museum.

There is still a low level of digital archiving of archaeological data obtained via excavation, [ 37 ] even in the UK where the lead digital archive for archaeology, the Archaeology Data Service , was established in the 1990s. Across the globe, countries are at different stages of dealing with digital archaeological archives, [ 38 ] all dealing with differences in statutory requirements, legal ownership of archives and infrastructure.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Antiquarian Architectural Heritage Collecting Heritage film Heritage for Peace International Council on Monuments and Sites Values (heritage) Digital methods in preservation [ edit ] DigiCULT ERPANET Intellectual property issues in cultural heritage (IPinCH) References [ edit ] ^ a b Logan, William S. (2007). "Closing Pandora's Box: Human Rights Conundrums in Cultural Heritage". In Silverman, Helaine; Ruggles, D. Fairchild (eds.).

Cultural heritage and human rights . New York, NY: Springer.

ISBN 9780387713137 .

OCLC 187048155 .

^ a b Ann Marie Sullivan, Cultural Heritage & New Media: A Future for the Past, 15 J. MARSHALL REV. INTELL. PROP. L. 604 (2016) https://repository.jmls.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1392&context=ripl ^ "Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property (ICIP) (AITB)" .

Arts Law Centre of Australia . 18 April 2011 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ "UNESCO Legal Instruments: Second Protocol to the Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict 1999" .

^ UNESCO convenes Libyan and international experts meeting for the safeguard of Libya's cultural heritage. UNESCO World Heritage Center – News, 21. Oktober 2011.

^ Roger O'Keefe, Camille Péron, Tofig Musayev, Gianluca Ferrari "Protection of Cultural Property. Military Manual." UNESCO, 2016, S. 73ff.

^ Eric Gibson: The Destruction of Cultural Heritage Should be a War Crime.

In: The Wall Street Journal, 2 March 2015.

^ UNESCO Director-General calls for stronger cooperation for heritage protection at the Blue Shield International General Assembly.

UNESCO, 13 September 2017.

^ a b c "Action plan to preserve heritage sites during conflict" .

UNIFIL . 12 April 2019.

^ Unesco, Concept of digital herigate , accessed 9 May 2023 ^ "Schutz des kulturellen Erbes (German - Protection of cultural heritgage), Austrian Armed Forces" (PDF) .

^ Titi, Catharine (2023).

The Parthenon Marbles and International Law . Springer. p. 248.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-26357-6 .

ISBN 978-3-031-26356-9 .

^ Fiankan-Bokonga, Catherine (October–December 2017).

"A historic resolution to protect cultural heritage" .

The UNESCO Courier .

^ Corine Wegener, Marjan Otter: Cultural Property at War: Protecting Heritage during Armed Conflict. In: The Getty Conservation Institute, Newsletter 23.1, Spring 2008.

^ Roger O’Keefe, Camille Péron, Tofig Musayev, Gianluca Ferrari "Protection of Cultural Property. Military Manual." UNESCO, 2016.

^ Eden Stiffman "Cultural Preservation in Disasters, War Zones. Presents Big Challenges" in The Chronicle Of Philanthropy, 11 May 2015.

^ "UNESCO Director-General calls for stronger cooperation for heritage protection at the Blue Shield International General Assembly.", UNESCO - 13 September 2017.

^ Friedrich Schipper: "Bildersturm: Die globalen Normen zum Schutz von Kulturgut greifen nicht" (German - The global norms for the protection of cultural property do not apply), In: Der Standard, 6 March 2015.

^ "The ICRC and the Blue Shield signed a Memorandum of Understanding | International Committee of the Red Cross" .

www.icrc.org . 26 February 2020.

^ "Austrian Armed Forces Mission in Lebanon" (in German). 28 April 2019.

^ Hosagrahar, Jyoti (April–June 2017).

"Culture: at the heart of SDGs" . Wide Angle.

The UNESCO Courier .

ISSN 2220-2293 .

^ Rick Szostak: The Causes of Economic Growth: Interdisciplinary Perspectives.

Springer Science & Business Media, 2009, ISBN 9783540922827 .

^ Tanselle, G. Thomas (1998), Literature and Artifacts , Charlottesville, VA: Bibliographical Society of the University of Virginia, ISBN 1-883631-06-8 , OCLC 39223648 ^ Paolo Cignoni; Roberto Scopigno (June 2008), "Sampled 3D models for CH applications: A viable and enabling new medium or just a technological exercise?" (PDF) , ACM Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage , 1 (1): 1, doi : 10.1145/1367080.1367082 , S2CID 16510261 .

^ Lowenthal, David (1985), The Past is a Foreign Country , New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-22415-2 , OCLC 12052097 ^ Open University, The ethics of cultural heritage: 1 The inseparability thesis , accessed 7 May 2023 ^ UNESCO, With President Francois Hollande, UNESCO Director-General inaugurates the exhibition "Eternal Sites" at the Grand Palais , accessed 8 May 2023 ^ Proposing Varanasi for the World Heritage List of UNESCO (PDF) , Varanasi Development Authority .

^ Singh, Rana P.B., Vrinda Dar and S. Pravin, Rationales for including Varanasi as heritage city in the UNESCO World Heritage List , National Geographic Journal of India (varanasi) 2001, 47:177-200 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) .

^ Roberts, Hayley (2018).

"The British Ratification of the Underwater Heritage Convention: Problems and Prospects" .

International & Comparative Law Quarterly .

67 (4): 833– 865.

doi : 10.1017/S0020589318000210 .

ISSN 0020-5893 .

S2CID 149780539 .

^ "Cultural Property: Protection of Iraqi and Syrian Antiquities" . 20 July 2017.

^ "Tere tulemast" .

register.muinas.ee . Retrieved 21 September 2018 .

^ Mariusz Dworsatschek, ed. (2017).

Nie tylko książki. Ossolińskie kolekcje i ich opiekunowie (in Polish) (1 ed.). Wrocław: Osso Wczoraj i Dziś.

ISBN 978-83-65588-31-9 .

"not just books. The Ossolineum's collections and their custodians".

^ "Library of Congress National Digital Library Program" .

memory.loc.gov . Retrieved 23 March 2022 .

^ Opam, Kwame (13 November 2013).

"The Smithsonian is now sharing 3D scans of artifacts with the public" .

The Verge . Retrieved 23 March 2022 .

^ "3D Digitization |" .

3d.si.edu . Retrieved 23 March 2022 .

^ Richards, J.D. (2021).

"Archiving Archaeological Data in the United Kingdom" .

Internet Archaeology (58).

doi : 10.11141/ia.58.21 .

^ Richards, J.D.; Jakobsson, U.; Novák, D.; Štular, B.; Wright, H. (2021).

"Digital Archiving in Archaeology: The State of the Art. Introduction" .

Internet Archaeology (60).

doi : 10.11141/ia.58.23 .

^ Geser, G.; Richards, J.D.; Massara, F.; Wright, H. (2022).

"Digital Archiving in Archaeology: The State of the Art. Introduction" .

Internet Archaeology (60).

doi : 10.11141/ia.59.2 .

hdl : 20.500.11755/5c7739fb-c5e1-4dd2-95a7-6e11a2b6b0cf .

^ Tsang, C. (2021).

"Red Sky at Night: digital archiving in England 2020" .

Internet Archaeology (58).

doi : 10.11141/ia.58.6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Michael Falser.

Cultural Heritage as Civilizing Mission. From Decay to Recovery . Heidelberg, New York: Springer (2015), ISBN 978-3-319-13638-7 .

Michael Falser, Monica Juneja (eds.). ' Archaeologizing' Heritage? Transcultural Entanglements between Local Social Practices and Global Virtual Realities . Heidelberg, New York: Springer (2013), ISBN 978-3-642-35870-8 .

Fiankan-Bokonga, Catherine (17 October 2017).

"A historic resolution to protect cultural heritage" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 3 August 2021 .

Savoy, Bénédicte (2025). Objects of Desire, Desire for Objects. Translated by Liz Libbrecht. Paris: Collège de France.

Objects of Desire, Desire for Objects : Inaugural lecture delivered at the Collège de France on Thursday 30 March 2017 .

Ann Marie Sullivan, Cultural Heritage & New Media: A Future for the Past, 15 J. MARSHALL REV. INTELL. PROP. L. 604 (2016) [1] Barbara T. Hoffman, Art and cultural heritage: law, policy, and practice , Cambridge University Press, 2006 Leila A. Amineddoleh, "Protecting Cultural Heritage by Strictly Scrutinizing Museum Acquisitions," Fordham Intellectual Property, Media & Entertainment Law Journal, Vol. 24, No. 3. Available at: Protecting Cultural Heritage by Strictly Scrutinizing Museum Acquisitions by Leila Amineddoleh :: SSRN Paolo Davide Farah, Riccardo Tremolada, Desirability of Commodification of Intangible Cultural Heritage: The Unsatisfying Role of IPRs, in TRANSNATIONAL DISPUTE MANAGEMENT, Special Issues "The New Frontiers of Cultural Law: Intangible Heritage Disputes", Volume 11, Issue 2, March 2014, ISSN 1875-4120 Available at: Desirability of Commodification of Intangible Cultural Heritage: The Unsatisfying Role of Intellectual Property Rights by Paolo Davide Farah, Riccardo Tremolada :: SSRN Paolo Davide Farah, Riccardo Tremolada, Intellectual Property Rights, Human Rights and Intangible Cultural Heritage, Journal of Intellectual Property Law, Issue 2, Part I, June 2014, ISSN 0035-614X , Giuffrè, pp. 21–47. Available at: Diritti di Proprietà Intellettuale, Diritti Umani e Patrimonio Culturale Immateriale (Intellectual Property Rights, Human Rights and Intangible Cultural Heritage) by Paolo Davide Farah, Riccardo Tremolada :: SSRN Nora Lafi, Building and Destroying Authenticity in Aleppo: Heritage between Conservation, Transformation, Destruction, and Re-Invention in Christoph Bernhardt, Martin Sabrow, Achim Saupe. Gebaute Geschichte. Historische Authentizität im Stadtraum, Wallstein, pp.206-228, 2017 Dallen J. Timothy and Gyan P. Nyaupane, Cultural heritage and tourism in the developing world : a regional perspective , Taylor & Francis, 2009 Peter Probst, "Osogbo and the Art of Heritage: Monuments, Deities, and Money", Indiana University Press, 2011 Constantine Sandis (ed.), Cultural Heritage Ethics: Between Theory and Practice , Open Book Publishers, 2014 Zuckermann, Ghil'ad et al., ENGAGING - A Guide to Interacting Respectfully and Reciprocally with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People, and their Arts Practices and Intellectual Property , Australian Government: Indigenous Culture Support, 2015 Walters, Diana; Laven, Daniel; Davis, Peter (2017).

Heritage & Peacebuilding . Suffolk, UK: Boydell Press.

ISBN 9781783272167 . Archived from the original on 31 March 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

Kocój E., Między mainstremem a undergroundem. Dziedzictwo regionalne w kulturze europejskiej – odkrywanie znaczeń, [w:] Dziedzictwo kulturowe w regionach europejskich. Odkrywanie, ochrona i (re)interpretacja, Seria wydawnicza:, Studia nad dziedzictwem i pamięcią kulturową", tom I, Kraków 2019, red. Ewa Kocój, Tomasz Kosiek, Joanna Szulborska-Łukaszewicz, pp. 10–35.

Dziedzictwo kulturowe w regionach europejskich. Odkrywanie, ochrona i (re)interpretacja, Seria wydawnicza:, Studia nad dziedzictwem i pamięcią kulturową", tom I, red. Ewa Kocój, Tomasz Kosiek, Joanna Szulborska-Łukaszewicz, Kraków 2019, p. 300.

Hudson-Ward, A., Widholm, J. R., & Scott, W. (Eds.). (2023).

Cultural Heritage and the Campus Community: Academic Libraries and Museums in Collaboration . ACRL.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cultural heritage .

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Cultural heritage .

Cultural heritage policy - history and resources Getty Museum - list of major international cultural heritage documents, charters, and treaties UNESCO World Heritage Centre – Official website of the United Nations organization for cultural heritage International Council on Monuments and Sites International Council of Museums International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property Cultural routes and landscapes, a common heritage of Europe (English and French language) EPOCH – European Research Network on Excellence in Processing Open Cultural Heritage Peace Palace Library - Research Guide Archived 12 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine National Council for Preservation Education Dédalo Open source management system for Cultural heritage Central European University (CEU) UNESCO UIS_cultural heritage v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category v t e Cultural heritage and historic preservation Topics and issues Agents of deterioration Archival processing Archaeological science Archaeology Archive Bioarchaeology Book Calendar (archives) Conservation and restoration of cultural property Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property Conservation science (cultural property) Collecting Collection (museum) Collection catalog Collections maintenance Collections management Collections management system Cultural heritage Cultural heritage management Cultural property Cultural property documentation Cultural property exhibition Cultural property imaging Cultural property storage Cultural resource management Database preservation Deaccessioning Digital library Digital photograph restoration Digital preservation Disaster preparedness (cultural property) Film preservation Finding aid Fonds Found in collection Heritage asset Heritage science Historic site Inherent vice Intangible cultural heritage Integrated pest management (cultural property) Inventory (library and archive) Inventory (museums) Media preservation Midden Mold control and prevention (library and archive) Museum Optical media preservation Preservation (library and archive) Preservation metadata Preservation survey Provenance Repatriation Ruins Sustainable preservation Treasure Web archiving Roles and expertise Archivist Art dealer Art handler Auctioneer Collection manager Conservator-restorer Conservation scientist Conservation technician Curator Exhibition designer Mount maker Objects conservator Paintings conservator Photograph conservator Preservationist Registrar (cultural property) Textile conservator Methods and techniques Aging (artwork) Anastylosis Arrested decay Cradling (paintings) Cultural property radiography Detachment of wall paintings Desmet method Display case Digital repository audit method based on risk assessment Historic paint analysis Inpainting Kintsugi Leafcasting Lining of paintings Mass deacidification Overpainting Paleo-inspiration Paper splitting Reconstruction (architecture) Rissverklebung Textile stabilization Transfer of panel paintings UVC-based preservation VisualAudio Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property by item type Archaeological sites Cultural venues Frescos Heritage railways Historic gardens Outdoor artworks Outdoor bronze objects Outdoor murals Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property by item type Aircraft Ancient Greek pottery Bone, horn, and antler objects Books, manuscripts, documents and ephemera Ceramic objects Clocks Copper-based objects Feathers Film Flags and banners Fur objects Glass objects Herbaria Human remains Illuminated manuscripts Insect specimens Iron and steel objects Ivory objects Judaica Lacquerware Leather objects Lighthouses Metals Musical instruments Neon objects New media art Paintings Painting frames Panel paintings Papyrus Parchment Performance art Photographs Photographic plates Plastic objects Rail vehicles Road vehicles Shipwreck artifacts Silver objects South Asian household shrines Stained glass Taxidermy Textiles Tibetan thangkas Time-based media art Totem poles Vinyl discs Woodblock prints Wooden artifacts Wooden furniture Intangible cultural heritage preservation Ancient music Applied folklore Dance notation Early music Endangered language Ethnochoreology Ethnomusicology Ethnopoetics Family folklore Folklore Folk art Folk dance Folk etymology Folk instrument Folk music Folk process Folk play Foodways Folklore studies Heritage language Heritage language learning Indigenous intellectual property Indigenous culture Indigenous language Language death Language preservation Language revitalization Living history Oral history preservation Preservation of meaning Prehistoric music Tradition preservation Traditional knowledge Traditional medicine Notable projects Conservation issues of Pompeii and Herculaneum Conservation-restoration of Ecce Homo by Elías García Martínez Conservation-restoration of The Gross Clinic by Thomas Eakins Conservation-restoration of Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper Pompeian frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Shroud of Turin Conservation-restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Statue of Liberty Conservation-restoration of the H.L. Hunley Conservation response to flood of Arno, Florence Modern and Contemporary Art Research Initiative Preservation Metadata: Implementation Strategies World Heritage Site v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Portal : Society Authority control databases International FAST National Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐rb9pr
Cached time: 20250814220618
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.957 seconds
Real time usage: 1.185 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4119/1000000
Revision size: 38800/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 207775/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4584/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 160637/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.525/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22200990/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  841.290      1 -total
 29.74%  250.210      1 Template:Reflist
 14.58%  122.636      1 Template:Conservatism
 11.86%   99.782     11 Template:Lang
 10.99%   92.432      4 Template:Cite_book
 10.07%   84.691      2 Template:Navbox
  9.71%   81.684      1 Template:Culture
  8.06%   67.825      1 Template:Short_description
  7.93%   66.738      2 Template:Sister_project
  7.71%   64.851      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3218648:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220618 and revision id 1304611728. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_heritage&oldid=1304611728 " Categories : Cultural heritage Museology Conservation and restoration of cultural heritage Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 03:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural heritage 63 languages Add topic

