Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 Political theory and later years 3 Death 4 Legacy 5 Theological beliefs 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Marsilius of Padua 35 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latina Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian philosopher (c. 1275–1342) Marsilius of Padua Born c.

1270 Commune of Padua Died c. 1342 Munich , Duchy of Upper Bavaria , Holy Roman Empire Education Education University of Paris Philosophical work Era 14th-century philosophy Medieval philosophy Region Western philosophy Main interests Politics Notable works Defensor pacis You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(June 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Marsilius von Padua]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Marsilius von Padua}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Miniature on the first page of a luxury manuscript of the Defensor pacis (15th century). Marsilius is shown presenting a copy to the Emperor Marsilius of Padua ( Italian : Marsilio da Padova ; born Marsilio Mainardi , Marsilio de i Mainardini or Marsilio Mainardini ; c.

1270 – c.

1342 ) was an Italian scholar, trained in medicine,  who practiced a variety of professions. He was also an important 14th-century political figure. His political treatise Defensor pacis (The Defender of Peace), an attempt to refute papal claims to a " plenitude of power " in affairs of both church and state, is seen by some scholars as the most revolutionary political treatise written in the later Middle Ages .

[ 1 ] It is one of the first examples of a trenchant critique of ultramontanism in Western Europe.

[ 2 ] Marsilius is sometimes seen as a forerunner of the Protestant reformation , because many of his beliefs were later adopted by Calvin and Luther.

[ 3 ] Early years [ edit ] Marsilius was born in Padua , an important city near Venice, circa the 1270s. He probably studied medicine at the University of Padua [ 4 ] and later went to the University of Paris , where he became a devoted admirer of Aristotle, whom he called 'the divine philosopher".

[ 5 ] He served as rector of the University of Paris approximately 1312–1313.

[ 6 ] It is probable that he taught at the University of Paris before and after his tenure as rector.

[ 6 ] Political theory and later years [ edit ] Marsilius wrote Defensor pacis in 1324.

[ 7 ] This treatise was written in the context of a power struggle between Pope John XXII and Louis of Bavaria (or Ludwig of Bavaria), the elected candidate for Holy Roman Emperor . Louis' policies in the Italian peninsula, where the Empire had important territories, threatened papal territorial sovereignty. In 1323 Louis had sent an army to Italy to protect Milan against the powerful Kingdom of Naples . Naples, along with France , was a strong ally of John XXII.  John excommunicated Louis and demanded that he relinquish his claim to the imperial crown. Louis responded to John XXII with fresh provocations.

In Defensor pacis , Marsilius sought to demonstrate, by arguments from reason (in Dictio I of the text) and by argument from authority (in Dictio II ) the independence of the Holy Roman Empire from the Papacy and the emptiness of the prerogatives alleged to have been usurped by the Roman pontiffs. A number of Marsilius's views were declared to be heretical by Pope John XXII in 1327.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Most of Defensor pacis is devoted to theology. Relying heavily on Scripture, Marsilius seeks to show that Jesus did not claim to possess any temporal power and that he did not intend his church to exercise any.

[ 9 ] On the contrary, Scripture teaches that the church should be thoroughly subordinate to the state in both secular and spiritual matters. All authority in the church lies with the whole body of the faithful, the secular ruler who acts as the people's representative, and general councils called by the secular ruler.

[ 10 ] Some of Marsilius's arguments on these themes had a marked influence during the Reformation.

[ 11 ] Today, Marsilius's Defensor pacis is best remembered not for its theology but for its political philosophy and legal theory. Marsilius agrees with Aristotle that the purpose of government is the rational fulfillment of humans' natural desire for a "sufficient life".

[ 12 ] However, he goes beyond Aristotle in embracing a form of republicanism that views the people as the only legitimate source of political authority.

Sovereignty lies with the people , and the people should elect, correct, and, if necessary, depose its political leaders.

[ 11 ] Democracy, Marsilius argues, is the best form of government because it tends to produce the wisest laws, protects the common benefit, promotes "sufficiency of life", and produces laws that are most likely to be obeyed.

[ 13 ] Marsilius and John of Jandun , who has sometimes been credited as a co-author of Defensor pacis , left France for Louis' court in Bavaria . Louis admitted Marsilius and John to his circle. Others were also under his protection, including Michael of Cesena and the philosopher William of Ockham , an advocate of an early form of church and state separation. In 1326, Marsilius accompanied Louis to Italy, where he preached or circulated written attacks against the pope.  The Lord of Milan Galeazzo I Visconti , suspected of conspiring with John XXII, was deposed and Louis was crowned King of Italy in Milan in 1327.

In January 1328 Louis entered Rome and had himself crowned emperor by the aged senator Sciarra Colonna , called captain of the Roman people . Three months later, Louis published a decree declaring "Jacque de Cahors"—Pope John XXII—deposed on grounds of heresy . He then installed the Franciscan Pietro Rainalducci as Nicholas V . Nicholas was deposed upon Louis's departure from Rome in 1329.

In Bavaria, as imperial vicar, Marsilius persecuted the clergy who had remained faithful to John XXII. In recompense for his services, he was appointed archbishop of Milan , [ 14 ] and John of Jandun obtained from Louis IV the bishopric of Ferrara .

Marsilius also composed a treatise De translatione [Romani] imperii , which some authorities consider is a rearrangement of a similar work by Landolfo Colonna [ Wikidata ] called De jurisdictione imperatoris in causa matrimoniali . This work, and Marsilius's variation, sought to justify the exclusive jurisdiction of the emperor in matrimonial affairs: Louis of Bavaria had recently annulled the marriage of the son of the King of Bohemia.

Death [ edit ] Marsilius died in Munich around 1342, still unreconciled to the Church.

Legacy [ edit ] Some authorities consider Defensor pacis one of the most important political and religious works of fourteenth-century Europe . In the Defensor minor , Marsilius completed and elaborated on different points in the doctrine laid down in the Defensor pacis . He dealt here with problems concerning ecclesiastical jurisdiction, penance , indulgences , crusades and pilgrimages , vows, excommunication , the general church council, marriage and divorce, and unity with the Greek Orthodox Church . In this work he even more clearly articulates imperial supremacy over the Church.

[ 15 ] Theological beliefs [ edit ] Marsilius believed that the pope doesn't have absolute authority, and that the scriptures are above the pope. Marsilius saw the scriptures as being above the church and believed the papacy to be of human arrangement instead of divine.

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ Mulieri, Alessandro (2023).

"Theorizing the multitude before Machiavelli. Marsilius of Padua between Aristotle and Ibn Rushd" .

European Journal of Political Theory .

22 (4): 542– 564.

doi : 10.1177/14748851221074104 .

ISSN 1474-8851 .

S2CID 246587791 .

^ Hahn, Scott & Wiker, Benjamin (2013).

Politicizing the Bible: The Roots of Historical Criticism and the Secularization of Scripture 1300-1700 . Chapter 2: "The First Cracks of Secularism: Marsilius of Padua and William of Ockham": Herder & Herder. pp. 17–59 passim .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ "Philip Schaff: History of the Christian Church, Volume VI: The Middle Ages. A.D. 1294-1517 - Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

ccel.org . Retrieved 2021-12-23 .

^ Alan Gewirth, "Marsilius of Padua," in Paul Edwards, ed., The Encyclopedia of Philosophy , vol. 5. New York: Macmillan, 1967, p. 166.

^ Marsilius of Padua, The Defender of Peace . Translated by Alan Gewirth. New York: Harper & Row, 1967, p. 38.

^ a b Sullivan, James (1897).

"Marsiglio of Padua and William of Ockam I" .

The American Historical Review .

2 (3): 409– 426.

doi : 10.2307/1833397 .

ISSN 0002-8762 .

JSTOR 1833397 .

^ a b Lee, Hwa-Yong, Political Representation in the Later Middle Ages: Marsilius in Context (New York etc., Lang, 2008) ^ Sullivan, James (1897).

"Marsiglio of Padua and William of Ockam II" .

The American Historical Review .

2 (4): 593– 610.

doi : 10.2307/1833978 .

ISSN 0002-8762 .

JSTOR 1833978 .

^ Marsilius of Padua, Defensor Pacis , pp. 113-126.

^ Marsilius of Padua, Defender of Peace , Discourse II.

^ a b Gewirth, "Marsilius of Padua," p. 167.

^ Marsilius of Padua, Defensor Pacis , p. 13.

^ Marsilius of Padua, The Defender of Peace , pp. 46-47.

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Marsilius of Padua" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Lee, Hwa-Yong, Political Representation in the Later Middle Ages: Marsilius in Context (New York etc., Lang, 2008) ^ "Philip Schaff: History of the Christian Church, Volume VI: The Middle Ages. A.D. 1294-1517 - Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

ccel.org . Retrieved 2021-12-23 .

Further reading [ edit ] The Defender of Peace , ed. Annabel Brett (Cambridge University Press, 2005).

Writings on the Empire: Defensor minor and De translatione imperii , ed. Cary J. Nederman (Cambridge University Press, 1993).

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Marsilius of Padua" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

A Companion to Marsilius of Padua , ed. Gerson Moreno-Riaño and Cary J. Nederman (Leiden: Brill, 2012).

Marsilius of Padua between History, Politics, and Philosophy , ed. Alessandro Mulieri, Serena Masolini and Jenny Pelletier (Turnhout: Brepols, 2023).

In Our Time BBC radio programme on Marsilius https://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/live:bbc_radio_fourfm?partner=uk.co.bbc&origin=share-mobile This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Marsilius of Padua ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 17 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

775– 776.

v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Proto-Protestantism 400–1100 AD People Jovinian Claudius of Turin Gottschalk of Orbais Ratramnus Berengar of Tours Sects and groups Pataria Berengarians 1100–1400 AD People Tanchelm Peter of Bruys Henry of Lausanne Arnold of Brescia Peter Waldo Milíč of Kroměříž John Wycliffe Matthias of Janov Marsilius of Padua Sects and groups Arnoldists Waldensians Lollardy Strigolniki Friends of God Petrobrusians 1400–1500 AD People Jan Hus Jan Žižka Mikuláš of Pelhřimov Petr Chelčický Johannes von Goch Johann Ruchrat von Wesel Wessel Gansfort Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples Lorenzo Valla Girolamo Savonarola Luke of Prague Sects and groups Bohemian Reformation Hussites Taborites Utraquism Czech Brethren Piagnoni Events Oldcastle Revolt Hussite Wars Compacts of Basel Peace of Kutná Hora Mérindol massacre Savoyard–Waldensian wars Piedmontese Easter Literature Wycliffe Bible Hussite Bible Jistebnice hymn book Ecclesiae Regimen Twelve Conclusions of the Lollards Triumph of the Cross (Girolamo Savonarola) Other Comparison of Catharism and Protestantism Italics indicate their inclusion to be controversial or disputed.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marsilius_of_Padua&oldid=1295262025 " Categories : 1270s births 1340s deaths University of Paris alumni People excommunicated by the Catholic Church Physicians from Padua Scholastic philosophers 14th-century writers in Latin 14th-century Italian writers Writers from Padua 14th-century Italian philosophers Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Biography articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing Italian-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 17:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marsilius of Padua 35 languages Add topic

