Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Writing 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Damo (philosopher) 14 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Italiano മലയാളം مصرى Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek pythagorean philosopher Damo Born c. 535 BCE Croton , Italy Died c. 475 BCE Athens , Greece Spouse Meno the Crotonian Philosophical work Era Pre-Socratic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Pythagoreanism Damo ( / ˈ d eɪ m oʊ / ; Ancient Greek : Δαμώ ; fl. c. 500 BC) was a Pythagorean philosopher said by many to have been the daughter of Pythagoras and Theano .

[ 1 ] Early life [ edit ] Tradition relates that she was born in Croton , Magna Graecia , and was the daughter of Pythagoras and Theano .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] According to Iamblichus , Damo married Meno the Crotonian.

[ 5 ] Some accounts refer to her as an only daughter, while others indicate that she had two sisters, Arignote and Myia (married to Milo of Croton ). With her brother Telauges , they became members of the Pythagorean sect founded by their father.

Writing [ edit ] References to Damo can be found in the works of Diogenes Laërtius , Athenaeus and Iamblichus , although little is known about her life. As the sect credited Pythagoras with authorship for members' work, it is likely that Damo contributed to the doctrines ascribed to the philosopher.

[ 6 ] According to one story, Pythagoras bequeathed his writings to Damo, and she kept them safe, refusing to sell them, believing that poverty and her father's solemn injunctions were more precious than gold.

[ 2 ] Damo, in turn, passed the writings (memoranda hypomnemata ) on to her daughter Bitale and Telauges , and to her mother's brother.

[ 5 ] [ 4 ] The writings, as well as those by Damo herself, are not known to have survived.  According to Iamblichus, she was a sister of Telauges.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Brooklyn Museum: Damo" .

www.brooklynmuseum.org . Retrieved 2020-10-13 .

^ a b Diogenes Laërtius, viii. 42-3 ^ Suda, Pythagoras π3120 ^ a b c Iamblichus, On the Pythagorean Life , 146 ^ a b Iamblichus (1918).

The life of Pythagoras . Translated by Thomas Taylor.

^ Hundleby, Catherine (2002). "Damo (fl. 6th c. BCE)". In Commire, Anne (ed.).

Women in World History: A Biographical Encyclopedia . Waterford, Connecticut: Yorkin Publications.

ISBN 0-7876-4074-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] Coppleston, Frederick , S.J.

A History of Philosophy . London: Search Press, 1946.

Guthrie, W.K.C. "Pythagoras and Pythagoreanism," in Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 7. Edited by Paul Edwards. NY: Macmillan, 1967.

Jamblichus, C.

Life of Pythagoras . London: John M. Watkins, 1926.

Kersey, Ethel M.

Women Philosophers: a Bio-critical Source Book . CT: Greenwood Press, 1989.

Philip, J.A.

Pythagoras and Early Pythagoreanism . Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1966.

Schure, Edouard.

The Ancient Mysteries of Delphi: Pythagoras . NY: Rudolf Steiner, 1971.

Waithe, Mary Ellen, ed.

A History of Women Philosophers. Vol. 1.

Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1987.

v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

This biography of a philosopher from ancient Greece is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Damo_(philosopher)&oldid=1298184500 " Categories : 6th-century BC Greek philosophers 5th-century BC Greek philosophers Presocratic philosophers Ancient Greek women philosophers Pythagoreans of Magna Graecia Ancient Crotonians 6th-century BC births 5th-century BC deaths 6th-century BC Greek women 5th-century BC Greek women Ancient Greek philosopher stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 00:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Damo (philosopher) 14 languages Add topic

