Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 UK 2 United States 3 Real estate 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Transfer tax 7 languages Deutsch עברית Latviešu Nederlands 日本語 Suomi Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the transfer of tax involving deceased parties, see Inheritance tax .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Transfer tax" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Taxation An aspect of fiscal policy Policies Economic justice Government revenue Property tax equalization Tax revenue Non-tax revenue Tax law Tax bracket Flat tax Tax threshold Taxation as theft Tax shift Tax cut Tax advantage Tax incentive Tax reform Double taxation Tax harmonization Tax competition Voluntary taxation Representation Economics General Theory Price effect Excess burden Tax efficiency Tax incidence Laffer curve Optimal tax Fiscal illusion Theories Optimal capital income taxation Distribution of Tax Tax rate Flat Progressive Regressive Proportional Collection Economic nexus in the United States Revenue service Revenue stamp Tax assessment Taxable income Tax lien Tax refund Tax shield Tax residence Tax preparation Tax protester Tax investigation Tax collector Tax withholding Private tax collection Noncompliance Legal tax avoidance Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Double Irish Single Malt CAIA Dutch Sandwich Estate planning Fuel dye Repatriation tax avoidance Share repurchase Tariff engineering Tax credit Tax deduction Tax exemption Taxpayer groups Tax holiday Tax inversion Tax farming Tax patent Tax shelter Illegal tax evasion Tax amnesty Black market Debtors' prison Tax exile Smuggling Tax resistance Transfer mispricing Unreported employment Locations Tax havens Corporate havens Offshore financial centres (OFCs) Offshore magic circle Conduit and sink OFCs Financial centres Financial Secrecy Index Major examples Ireland as a tax haven Ireland v. Commission Leprechaun economics Liechtenstein tax affair Luxembourg Leaks Offshore Leaks Paradise Papers Panama Papers Swiss Leaks United States as a tax haven Panama as a tax haven Types Direct Indirect Per unit Ad valorem Aviation Airport improvement Landing Solidarity Capital gains Expatriation Consumption Departure Hotel Sales Stamp Television Tourist Value-added Digital goods Dividend Environmental tax Carbon Eco-tariff Landfill Natural resources consumption Severance Steering Stumpage Excise Alcohol Cigarette Fat Meat Sin Sugary drink Tobacco General Georgist Gift Gross receipts Hidden Hypothecated Income Inheritance (estate) Land value Luxury On childlessness Payroll Pigouvian Property Resource rent Single Stealth Surtax Turnover Use User charge / fee Congestion Fuel Road / GNSS Toll Vehicle miles traveled Corporate profit Excess profits Windfall Negative (income) Wealth International Financial transaction tax ATTAC Currency transaction tax European Union Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (CCCTB) Global minimum corporate tax rate Robin Hood tax Tobin tax Spahn tax Tax equalization Tax treaty Exchange of Information Permanent establishment Transfer pricing European Union FTT Foreign revenue rule Trade Custom Duty Tariff Import Export Tariff war Free trade Free-trade zone Trade agreement ATA Carnet Research Academic Mihir A. Desai Dhammika Dharmapala James R. Hines Jr.

Ronen Palan Joel Slemrod Gabriel Zucman Advocacy groups Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP) Oxfam (UK) Tax Foundation (US) Tax Justice Network (TJN) Tax Policy Center (US) Religious Church tax Eight per thousand Teind Tithe Fiscus Judaicus Leibzoll Temple tax Tolerance tax Jizya Kharaj Khums Nisab Zakat By country All Countries List of countries by tax rates Tax revenue to GDP ratio Tax rates in Europe Individual Countries Albania Algeria Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brazil Bulgaria BVI Canada China Colombia Croatia Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Lithuania Malta Morocco Namibia Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Palestine Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Russia South Africa Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tanzania United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Business portal Money portal v t e A transfer tax is a tax on the passing of title to property from one person (or entity) to another.

In a narrow legal sense, a transfer tax is essentially a transaction fee imposed on the transfer of title to property from one entity to another. This kind of tax is typically imposed where there is a legal requirement for registration of the transfer, such as transfers of real estate , shares , or bond . Examples of such taxes include some forms of stamp duty , real estate transfer tax , and levies for the formal registration of a transfer. In some jurisdictions, transfers of certain forms of property require confirmation by a notary . While notarial fees may add to the cost of the transaction, they are not a transfer tax in the strict sense of the term.

UK [ edit ] In England and Northern Ireland, property transfers between living persons or other legal entities incur a Stamp Duty Land Tax . Similar provisions exist in Scotland and Wales.

When property is transferred from the estate of a deceased person, Inheritance tax is payable on the value of the estate including any property portfolio in that estate, subject to a minimum value threshold.

United States [ edit ] In some states, transfer tax is considered to be an excise tax.
Transfer taxes can be levied at the federal, state and local levels, depending on the type of property being transferred.

[ 1 ] Real estate [ edit ] Main article: Real estate transfer tax Real estate transfer tax can be appointed by the authorities of state, county or commune when a real estate property is being transferred within a certain jurisdiction. Subjected to the tax is usually the act of transfer of legal deeds, certificates and titles to a property that are being shifted between the seller and the buyer. The size of the tax is derived from value of the certain property, its classification and from how the property is going to be used, because the purpose of a property can often greatly affect its future value. Therefore, local and state government are permitted to collect the tax based not only on the size of a property, but also its intended purpose.

[ 2 ] Classification of properties allows states to put different taxes on different properties in a non-uniform manner. The different classifications are commonly based on either use or ownership. There are two main ways that a state uses to tax in a non-uniform manner and those are by imposing different rates of tax on different types of property, or a uniform rate of tax but giving different types of property a different percentage of value. In some states the buyer may be required to pay the tax if the seller either isn't able to pay themselves or is liberated from it.

[ 3 ] In the United States , the term transfer tax also refers to Estate tax and Gift tax . Both these taxes levy a charge on the transfer of property from a person (or that person's estate) to another without consideration.  In 1900, the United States Supreme Court in the case of Knowlton v. Moore , 178 U.S. 41 (1900), confirmed that the estate tax was a tax on the transfer of property as a result of a death and not a tax on the property itself. The taxpayer argued that the estate tax was a direct tax and that, since it had not been apportioned among the states according to population, it was unconstitutional. The Court ruled that the estate tax, as a transfer tax (and not a tax on property by reason of its ownership) was an indirect tax. In the wake of Knowlton the Internal Revenue Code of the United States continues to refer to the Estate tax and the related Gift tax as "Transfer taxes." The real estate tax is not imposed by five of the United States of America and those are Mississippi, Missouri, New Mexico, North Dakota, and Wyoming.

In this broader sense, estate tax, gift tax, capital gains tax , sales tax on goods (not services), and certain use taxes are all transfer taxes because they involve a tax on the transfer of title.

The United States had a tax on sales or transfers of stock from 1914 to 1966. This was instituted in The Revenue Act of 1914 (Act of Oct. 22, 1914 (ch. 331, 38 Stat. 745)), in the amount of 0.02% (2 basis points , bips). This was doubled to 0.04% (4 bips) in 1932, in the context of the Great Depression , then eliminated in 1966.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Currency transaction tax Financial transaction tax Inheritance tax Spahn tax Stamp duty Stamp duty in the United Kingdom Tobin tax Turnover tax References [ edit ] ^ Investopedia. (2019). Transfer Tax. [online] Available at: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/t/transfertax.asp [Accessed 29 Apr. 2019].

^ InvestorWords.com. (2019). What is Classified Property Tax? definition and meaning. [online] Available at: http://www.investorwords.com/19022/classified_property_tax.html [Accessed 29 Apr. 2019].

^ LILP. (2019). Property Tax Classification. [online] Available at: https://www.lincolninst.edu/research-data/data-toolkits/significant-features-property-tax/topics/property-tax-classification [Accessed 29 Apr. 2019].

^ Joseph J. Thorndike, “Speculation and Taxation: Time for a Transaction Tax?,” Tax Analysts , September 26, 2008.

http://www.taxhistory.org/thp/readings.nsf/ArtWeb/6062A8E3B6C9C7C585257480005BFEE6 Schedule A of Ch. 331 of 38 Stat. 745.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/63rd-congress/session-2/c63s2ch331.pdf External links [ edit ] Media related to Transfer tax at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transfer_tax&oldid=1295983537 " Category : Transfer tax Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2016 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 02:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transfer tax 7 languages Add topic

