Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of chapter titles 2 Chapter structure 3 Unusual numbering schemes 4 Book-like 5 Literature 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Chapter (books) 30 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Lingála Nederlands Norsk bokmål Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Section of text in a book This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chapter" books – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Books of Sahih Bukhari , featuring 3882 chapters.

A chapter (c apitula in Latin; sommaires in French) is any of the main thematic divisions within a writing of relative length, such as a book of prose , poetry , or law . A book with chapters (not to be confused with the chapter book ) may have multiple chapters that respectively comprise discrete topics or themes. In each case, chapters can be numbered, titled, or both. An example of a chapter that has become well known is "Down the Rabbit -Hole", which is the first chapter from Alice's Adventures in Wonderland .

History of chapter titles [ edit ] Many ancient books had neither word divisions nor chapter divisions.

[ 1 ] In ancient Greek texts, some manuscripts began to add summaries and make them into tables of contents with numbers, but the titles did not appear in the text, only their numbers. Some time in the fifth century CE, the practice of dividing books into chapters began.

[ 1 ] Jerome (d. 420) is said to use the term capitulum to refer to numbered chapter headings and index capitulorum to refer to tables of contents.

[ 2 ] Augustine did not divide his major works into chapters, but in the early sixth century, Eugippius did. Medieval manuscripts often had no titles, only numbers in the text and a few words, often in red, following the number.

Chapter structure [ edit ] The opening page of The Wood Beyond the World (1894) by William Morris. The chapter title is at the top, in red text.

Many novels of great length have chapters.

Non-fiction books, especially those used for reference, almost always have chapters for ease of navigation. In these works, chapters are often subdivided into sections . Larger works with a lot of chapters often group them in several 'parts' as the main subdivision of the book.

The chapters of reference works are almost always listed in a table of contents . Novels sometimes use a table of contents, but not always. If chapters are used they are normally numbered sequentially; they may also have titles, and in a few cases an epigraph or prefatory quotation. In older novels it was a common practice to summarise the content of each chapter in the table of contents and/or in the beginning of the chapter.

Unusual numbering schemes [ edit ] In works of fiction, authors sometimes number their chapters eccentrically, often as a metafictional statement.  For example: Seiobo There Below by László Krasznahorkai has chapters numbered according to the Fibonacci sequence .

The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time by Mark Haddon only has chapters which are prime numbers .

At Swim-Two-Birds by Flann O'Brien has only one chapter: the first page is titled Chapter 1 , but there are no further chapter divisions.

God, A Users' Guide by Seán Moncrieff is chaptered backwards (i.e., the first chapter is chapter 20 and the last is chapter 1). The novel The Running Man by Stephen King also uses a similar chapter numbering scheme.

Every novel in the series A Series of Unfortunate Events by Lemony Snicket has thirteen chapters, except the final instalment ( The End ), which has a fourteenth chapter formatted as its own novel.

Mammoth by John Varley has the chapters ordered chronologically from the point of view of a non-time-traveler, but, as most of the characters travel through time, this leads to the chapters defying the conventional order.

Ulysses by James Joyce has its 18 chapters labelled as episodes, with 3 books split between them.

Book-like [ edit ] In ancient civilizations, books were often in the form of papyrus or parchment scrolls , which contained about the same amount of text as a typical chapter in a modern book. This is the reason chapters in recent reproductions and translations of works of these periods are often presented as "Book 1", "Book 2" etc.

In the early printed era, long works were often published in multiple volumes, such as the Victorian triple decker novel , each divided into numerous chapters. Modern omnibus reprints will often retain the volume divisions. In some cases the chapters will be numbered consecutively all the way through, such that "Book 2" might begin with "Chapter 9", but in other cases the numbering might reset after each part (i.e., "Book 2, Chapter 1"). Even though the practice of dividing novels into separate volumes is rare in modern publishing, many authors still structure their works into "Books" or "Parts" and then subdivide them into chapters. A notable example of this is The Lord of the Rings which consists of six "books", each with a recognizable part of the story, although it is usually published in three volumes.

Literature [ edit ] Dames, Nicholas (2023).

The Chapter: A Segmented History from Antiquity to the Twenty-First Century . Princeton: Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9780691135199 .

See also [ edit ] Asterism (typography) Chapter book Chapters and verses of the Bible Index (publishing) Section (typography) Table of contents References [ edit ] ^ a b "Capituli: Some notes on summaries, chapter divisions and chapter titles in ancient and medieval manuscripts" .

www.roger-pearse.com . Retrieved 2021-03-20 .

^ Wordsworth, Christopher (1886).

The New Testament of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: In the Original Greek . Rivingtons.

v t e Book design Page layout and typography Annotation Footnote Gloss Marginal note Scholia Canons of page construction Catchword Column Footer Header Headpiece Illumination Initial Historiated Inhabited Margin Miniature Ornament Page numbering Pull quote Recto and verso Rubric Rubrication Typeface Font Front and back covers Anthropodermic bibliopegy Bookbinding Buckram Dust jacket Hardcover Leather Paperback Picture cover Treasure binding Endpapers Marbled Front matter Half-title bastard title Frontispiece Title page Edition notice Imprimi potest Nihil obstat Imprimatur Dedication Epigraph Table of contents Foreword Preface Acknowledgments Introduction Prologue Printer's mark Body matter Body text Chapters Illustrations Parts Sections Tipped-in pages Back matter Afterword Conclusion Epilogue Outro Postscript Addendum/Appendix Endnotes Glossary Bibliography Index Errata Colophon Postface Author page Other elements Book curse Bookplate ex-librīs Book rhyme Die-cutting Endband Extra-illustration Fore-edge painting Intentionally blank page Pop-ups Slipcase Thumb index v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal v t e Academic publishing Journals Academic journal Public health Papers Paper Abstract Review article Position paper Literature review Grey literature Working paper White paper Technical report Annual report Pamphlet Essay Lab notes Other publication types Thesis Collection of articles Patent Biological Chemical Book Monograph Chapter Treatise Poster session Proceedings Impact and ranking Acknowledgment index Altmetrics Article-level metrics Author-level metrics Bibliometrics C-score Journal ranking Eigenfactor g-index h -index Impact factor Rankings of academic publishers Science-wide author databases of standardized citation indicators Scientometrics SCImago Journal Rank Citation cartel Reform and access Academic journal publishing reform Open access Citation advantage Serials crisis Sci-Hub #ICanHazPDF Versioning Preprint Postprint Version of record Erratum Retraction Indexes and search engines Google Scholar AMiner BASE CORE Semantic Scholar Scopus Web of Science Paperity OpenAlex Index Copernicus ERIH PLUS Sherpa Romeo OpenAIRE Related topics Imprint Scientific writing Peer review Scholarly communication Scientific literature Learned society Open research Open scientific data ORCID Electronic publishing Ingelfinger rule Least publishable unit " Publish or perish " Lists Academic databases and search engines Academic journals Copyright policies Highly Cited Researchers Open-access journals Preprint policies Scientific journals Style/formatting guides University presses Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chapter_(books)&oldid=1284155774 " Categories : Book design Book terminology Components of intellectual works Narrative units Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 22:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chapter (books) 30 languages Add topic

