Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tragedy 2 Comedy 3 Literature and modern usage Toggle Literature and modern usage subsection 3.1 Mystery 3.2 Modern usage 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Anagnorisis 22 languages Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano Latina Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский سنڌي Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Moment of critical discovery in literature For the black/death metal band, see Anagnorisis (band) . For the German musician, see Anagnorisis (Sariola) .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(December 2024) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,134 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Anagnorisis]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Anagnorisis}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Anagnorisis ( / ˌ æ n ə ɡ ˈ n ɒr ɪ s ɪ s / ; Ancient Greek : ἀναγνώρισις ) is a moment in a play or other work when a character makes a critical discovery. Anagnorisis originally meant recognition in its Greek context, not only of a person but also of what that person stood for. Anagnorisis was the hero 's sudden awareness of a real situation, the realization of things as they stood, and finally, the hero's insight into a relationship with an often antagonistic character in Aristotelian tragedy .

[ 1 ] Tragedy [ edit ] In his Poetics , Aristotle discussed peripeteia . In this work, he defined anagnorisis as "a change from ignorance to knowledge, producing love or hate between the persons destined by the poet for good or bad fortune" (1452a). Anagnorisis is often discussed along with Aristotle's concept of catharsis .

"Lear and Cordelia" by Ford Madox Brown :  Lear, driven out by his older daughters and rescued by his youngest, realizes their true characters.

In the Aristotelian definition of tragedy, it was the discovery of one's own identity or true character (e.g. Cordelia, Edgar, Edmund, etc. in Shakespeare 's King Lear ) or of someone else's identity or true nature (e.g. Lear's children, Gloucester's children) by the tragic hero.

Aristotle was the first writer to discuss the uses of anagnorisis, with peripeteia caused by it. He considered it the mark of a superior tragedy, as when Oedipus killed his father and married his mother in ignorance, and later learned the truth, or when Iphigeneia in Tauris realizes in time that the strangers she is to sacrifice are her brother and his friend, and refrains from sacrificing them.  Aristotle considered these complex plots superior to simple plots without anagnorisis or peripeteia, such as when Medea resolves to kill her children, knowing they are her children, and does so.

Another prominent example of anagnorisis in tragedy is in Aeschylus 's "The Choephoroi" (" Libation Bearers ") when Electra recognizes her brother, Orestes , after he has returned to Argos from his exile, at the grave of their father, Agamemnon , who had been murdered at the hands of Clytemnestra , their mother.

Electra convinces herself that Orestes is her brother with three pieces of evidence: a lock of Orestes's hair on the grave, his footprints next to the grave, and a piece of weaving that she embroidered herself.  The footprints and the hair are identical to her own. Electra's awareness is of her brother's presence, who is the one person who can help her by avenging the death of their father.

[ 2 ] Comedy [ edit ] Poster for a performance of The Comedy of Errors :  When the twins, confused with each other throughout the play, recognize each other's existence, the play reaches its happy ending.

The section of Aristotle's Poetics dealing with comedy did not survive, but many critics also discuss recognition in comedies.  A standard plot of the New Comedy was the final revelation, by birth tokens, that the heroine was of respectable birth and so suitable for the hero to marry. This was often brought about by the machinations of the tricky slave .  This plot appears in Shakespeare's The Winter's Tale , where a recognition scene in the final act reveals that Perdita is a king's daughter rather than a shepherdess, and so suitable for her prince lover.

[ 3 ] Literature and modern usage [ edit ] Mystery [ edit ] The earliest use of anagnorisis in a murder mystery was in " The Three Apples ", a classical Arabian Nights tale, where the device is employed to great effect in its twist ending .

[ citation needed ] The protagonist of the story, Ja'far ibn Yahya , is ordered by Harun al-Rashid to find the culprit behind a murder mystery within three days or else be executed. It is only after the deadline has passed, and as he prepares to be executed, that he discovers that the culprit was his slave all along.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Modern usage [ edit ] Anagnorisis, however, is not limited to classical or Elizabethan sources. Author and lecturer Ivan Pintor Iranzo points out that contemporary auteur M. Night Shyamalan uses similar revelations in The Sixth Sense , in which child psychologist Malcolm Crowe successfully treats a child who is having visions of dead people, only to realize at the close of the film that Crowe himself is dead, as well as in Unbreakable , in which the character of David realizes that he survived a train crash that killed the other passengers, due to supernatural power.

[ 6 ] Another well-known example of anagnorisis from popular culture is the revelation that Darth Vader is the father of Luke Skywalker in The Empire Strikes Back . An extensive account of the history and application of anagnorisis is provided by Terence Cave in his book Recognitions .

[ 7 ] A humorous definition is included in 'The Banner: mock-heroic verse epic, Part 1: Sid' by Robin Gordon: In any moment of such crisis / 
one thinks, of course, of those devices / 
which Aristotle said were needed / 
in any poem.  We have heeded / 
Aristotle, and our plot, / 
(beginning, middle, end), has got / 
complications too, and error / 
fit to rouse cathartic terror, / 
protagonists, antagonists, / 
peripiteia, turns, and twists. / 
The poet's comments form the choruses, / 
but now it's time for anagnorisis. / 
When Oedipus sees the bird he's bedded / 
is his own father's lawful wedded / 
wife, in fact, she is his mother, / 
or Iphigenia finds her brother, / 
Discovery or Recognition / 
brings the plot to its fruition.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Aristotle – Ancient Greek philosopher and polymath (384–322 BC) Backstory – Events preceding a plot in a story Denouement – Structure of a dramatic work such as a play or film Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Epiphany – Sudden understanding of something's essence Peripeteia – Reversal of circumstances,  turning point Tragedy – Genre of drama based on human suffering References [ edit ] ^ Northrop Frye , "Myth, Fiction, And Displacement" p 25 Fables of Identity:  Studies in Poetic Mythology , ISBN 0-15-629730-2 ^ Aeschylus, and Robert Lowell. The Oresteia of Aeschylus. New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1978.

^ Northrop Frye, "Recognition in The Winter's Tale " p 108-9 Fables of Identity:  Studies in Poetic Mythology , ISBN 0-15-629730-2 ^ Pinault, David (1992), Story-Telling Techniques in the Arabian Nights , Brill Publishers , pp.

95– 6, ISBN 90-04-09530-6 ^ Marzolph, Ulrich (2006), The Arabian Nights Reader , Wayne State University Press , pp.

241– 2, ISBN 0-8143-3259-5 ^ Ivan Pintor Iranzo.

The naked and the dead. The Representation of the Dead and the Construction of the Other in contemporary cinema: The Case of M. Night Shyamalan Archived 2007-09-29 at the Wayback Machine , No. 4, 2005 ^ Recognitions: A Study in Poetics . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anagnorisis&oldid=1281967552 " Categories : Ancient Greek theatre Narratology Plot (narrative) Poetics Concepts in ancient Greek aesthetics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 23 March 2025, at 15:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anagnorisis 22 languages Add topic

