Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Early history 3 Economy 4 Characteristics 5 Leblon in popular culture 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Leblon 24 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano עברית Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 22°59′00″S 43°13′33″W ﻿ / ﻿ 22.98333°S 43.22583°W ﻿ / -22.98333; -43.22583 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the drug with trade name Leblon, see Pirenzepine . For the brand of cachaça, see Leblon Cachaça . For the 1898 French motor manufacturer, see Le Blon . For the pioneer driver and aviator, see Hubert Le Blon .

Neighborhood in Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Leblon Neighborhood Panoramic view of Leblon Leblon Location in Rio de Janeiro Show map of Rio de Janeiro Leblon Leblon (Brazil) Show map of Brazil Coordinates: 22°59′00″S 43°13′33″W ﻿ / ﻿ 22.98333°S 43.22583°W ﻿ / -22.98333; -43.22583 Country Brazil State Rio de Janeiro (RJ) Municipality/City Rio de Janeiro Zone South Zone Administrative Region Lagoa [ 1 ] Area • Total 2.15 km 2 (0.83 sq mi) Population (2010) [ 2 ] • Total 46,044 Leblon ( Portuguese pronunciation: [leˈblõ] ) is a neighborhood of Rio de Janeiro , Brazil. It is also the name of the local beach. The neighborhood is located in the South Zone of the city, between Lagoa Rodrigo de Freitas , Morro Dois Irmãos and the Jardim de Alah channel, bordering the Gávea , Ipanema , Lagoa , and Vidigal neighborhoods. It is regarded as a very affluent area.

Leblon began as a quilombo of escaped slaves created by a Portuguese abolitionist landowner.

Etymology [ edit ] The neighborhood is named for Carlos Leblon, a whaling empresario of French origin who possessed a chácara in the region since 1845. Before the area was urbanized it was known as Campo do Leblon (Leblon's Field).

Early history [ edit ] The Quilombo of Leblon was a quilombo (settlement of escaped African slaves) that existed at the end of the 19th century in the present-day region of Clube Campestre da Guanabara and surroundings from what is now Rua Timothy Da Costa to Morro Dois Irmãos (in English "Two Brothers Hill") in Rio de Janeiro .

[ 3 ] The creator of the quilombo was the Portuguese José de Seixas Magalhães , [ 4 ] who dedicated himself to the manufacture and trade of suitcases.

[ 5 ] and pod bags on Rua Gonçalves Dias, at the center of the city. His bags were made in a factory with steam engine . In addition to the luggage factory, Seixas also owned a farm in Leblon where he cultivated flowers with the help of slaves fugitives. Seixas hid the fugitives in the Leblon farm with the help of the main abolitionists from the capital of Empire , many of them members of Abolitionist Confederation . The Seixas flower farm was known as the "quilombo Leblon", a name that referred to the former owner of the region, the Frenchman Carlos Leblon. It was in the Quilombo do Leblon that Seixas cultivated his famous camellias , which were the symbol of the abolitionist movement.

The Quilombo do Leblon had the protection of Princess Isabel . As a token of gratitude, Seixas regularly supplied camellias to Isabel Palace , the princess’s residence in Laranjeiras (today, the seat of the government of the State of Rio de Janeiro ). The camellias of Seixas adorned the Princess’s work table and her private chapel , where she made her prayers. In addition to the camellias, Seixas also offered the golden penalty to the Princess Regent who, later, on 13 May 1888, would be used to sign the Golden Law . The quilombo gave rise to the current name of the neighborhood of Leblon.

Economy [ edit ] The average nominal monthly income of people aged 10 or over (with income) in Leblon is R$6,844.63 (according to the 2010 census by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics ). Leblon is one of the most sought-after neighborhoods in the city and the one that increases in value each year. It has the most expensive square meter in the country, costing R$ 18,332. In areas close to the beach, however, this value can reach R$20,000.

[ 6 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Leblon Beach.

Residential buildings. Leblon has the most expensive price per residential square meter in Latin America.

Map of Leblon.

It is located west of Ipanema . In the north, it is bordered by Gávea and, in the west, by a towering hill called Dois Irmãos, which translates as "two brothers", because of its split peak.

Leblon in popular culture [ edit ] Leblon beach and favela Vidigal.

Leblon is known for being a very wealthy and cosmopolitan neighborhood, with a lively nightlife across its bars, restaurants and nightclubs. Leblon has been either referenced or depicted in the following media: In television: Viver a Vida , a telenovela produced by Rede Globo , aired from September 2009 to May 2010; Páginas da Vida , a telenovela produced by Rede Globo, aired from July 2006 to March 2007; Mulheres Apaixonadas , a telenovela produced by Rede Globo, aired from February to October 2003; Laços de Familia , a telenovela produced by Rede Globo, aired from June 2000 to February 2001; Por Amor , a telenovela produced by Rede Globo, aired from October 1997 to May 1998; História de Amor , a telenovela produced by Rede Globo, aired from July 1995 to March 1996.

In music:
Leblon has been the subject of many songs, such as "Falso Leblon", "Choque de Ordem", "Haiti", "O namorado" and "O quereres" by Caetano Veloso ; "Óculos" by Paralamas do Sucesso ; "Inverno" by Adriana Calcanhotto ; "Sexo, amor, traição" by Luciana Mello ; "Andar, andar" and "Tesoura do desejo" by Alceu Valença ; "Aquilo bom (garotas do Leblon)" by Elba Ramalho ; "Daqui pro Méier" by Ed Motta ; "Balanço Zona Sul" by Tito Madi ; "Completamente Blue" by Cazuza ; "Virgem" by Marina Lima ; "A vida tem dessas coisas" by Ritchie "Tardes no Leblon" by Alberto Rosenblit.

In cinema
in the 22 de march de 2011 the premiere internacional in the rio (2011) he was in Leblon, Rio de Janeiro .

See also [ edit ] Rua General Urquiza References [ edit ] ^ "RA VI - Lagoa" (in Portuguese). Prefeitura da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro . Retrieved 25 September 2014 .

^ "Bairro: Leblon" (in Portuguese). Prefeitura da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro . Retrieved 25 September 2014 .

^ Robinson, Alex; Robinson, Gardênia (10 March 2014).

Footprint Focus - Rio de Janeiro . p. 61.

ISBN 978-1909268883 .

^ Gearini, Victória (30 May 2021).

"QUILOMBO DO LEBLON: CONHEÇA A HISTÓRIA DO LOCAL QUE FOI PALCO DO MOVIMENTO ABOLICIONISTA" (in Portuguese).

^ "Rio: Um olhar no tempo" .

Government of Brazil .

^ "Leblon - Guia do bairro Leblon -RJ Aqui você Encontra !" .

www.encontraleblon.com.br (in Brazilian Portuguese) . Retrieved 2025-02-26 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Leblon at Wikimedia Commons v t e Rio de Janeiro city neighbourhoods Central Zone Benfica Caju Catumbi Centro Cidade Nova Estácio Gamboa São Cristóvão Lapa Mangueira Paquetá Rio Comprido Santa Teresa Santo Cristo Saúde Vasco da Gama South Zone Botafogo Catete Copacabana Cosme Velho Flamengo Gávea Glória Humaitá Ipanema Jardim Botânico Lagoa Laranjeiras Leblon Leme Rocinha São Conrado Urca Vidigal North Zone Abolição Acari Água Santa Alto da Boa Vista Anchieta Andaraí Bancários Barros Filho Bento Ribeiro Bonsucesso Brás de Pina Cachambi Cacuia Cavalcanti Campinho Cascadura Cidade Universitária Cocotá Coelho Neto Colégio Complexo do Alemão Cordovil Costa Barros Del Castilho Encantado Engenheiro Leal Engenho da Rainha Engenho de Dentro Engenho Novo Freguesia (Ilha do Governador) Galeão Grajaú Guadalupe Higienópolis Honório Gurgel Irajá Inhaúma Jacaré Jacarezinho Jardim América Jardim Carioca Jardim Guanabara Lins de Vasconcelos Madureira Manguinhos Maracanã Maré Marechal Hermes Maria da Graça Méier Moneró Olaria Oswaldo Cruz Parada de Lucas Parque Anchieta Pavuna Penha Penha Circular Piedade Pilares Pitangueiras Praça da Bandeira Praia da Bandeira Portuguesa Quintino Bocaiuva Ramos Riachuelo Ribeira Ricardo de Albuquerque Rocha Rocha Miranda Sampaio São Francisco Xavier Tauá Tijuca Todos os Santos Tomás Coelho Turiaçu Vaz Lobo Vicente de Carvalho Vigário Geral Vila Cosmos Vila da Penha Vila Isabel Vila Kennedy Vista Alegre Zumbi West Zone Anil Bangu Barra da Tijuca Barra de Guaratiba Barra Olímpica Camorim Campo dos Afonsos Campo Grande Cidade de Deus Cosmos Curicica Deodoro Freguesia (Jacarepaguá) Gardênia Azul Gericinó Grumari Guaratiba Inhoaíba Itanhangá Jacarepaguá Jardim Sulacap Joá Magalhães Bastos Paciência Padre Miguel Pedra de Guaratiba Praça Seca Pechincha Realengo Recreio dos Bandeirantes Santa Cruz Santíssimo Senador Camará Senador Vasconcelos Sepetiba Tanque Taquara Vargem Grande Vargem Pequena Vila Militar Vila Valqueire Islands Ilha do Fundão Ilha do Governador Paquetá Villegaignon Favelas Cantagalo–Pavão–Pavãozinho Complexo do Alemão Morro da Babilônia Santa Marta Jacarezinho Mangueira Manguinhos Maré Morro da Providência Rocinha Tavares Bastos Vidigal Vila Vintém Unofficial Aldeia Campista Arpoador Bairro Araújo Bairro Peixoto Boca do Mato Buraco do Padre Castelo Colônia Consolação Dadur Distrito Industrial Bairro de Fátima Fazenda Botafogo Fazenda da Bica Fonte da Saudade Horto Jabour Jardim Boiúna Jardim Oceânico Largo do Machado Manguariba Mallet Mariópolis Mato Alto Muda Parque Colúmbia Península Praça do Carmo Providência Rio das Pedras Rio Grande Silvestre Terreirão do Rio Bonito Triagem Usina Vila Aliança Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National United States Israel Geographic MusicBrainz place Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leblon&oldid=1305333305 " Categories : Neighbourhoods in Rio de Janeiro (city) Beaches of Rio de Janeiro (city) Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Portuguese IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 12:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leblon 24 languages Add topic

