Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 China 2 Soviet Union 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Political rehabilitation 10 languages Български Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Кыргызча Norsk bokmål Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Regaining positive political reputation Political rehabilitation is the process by which a disgraced member of a political party or a government is restored to public respectability and thus political acceptability. The term is usually applied to leaders or other prominent individuals who regain their prominence after a period in which they have no influence or standing, including deceased people who are vindicated posthumously. Historically, the concept is usually associated with Communist states and parties where, as a result of shifting political lines often as part of a power struggle, leading members of the Communist Party find themselves on the losing side of a political conflict and out of favour, often to the point of being denounced, imprisoned or even executed.

These individuals may be rehabilitated either as a result of capitulating to the dominant political line and renouncing their former beliefs or allegiances to disgraced leaders, or they may be rehabilitated as a result of a change in the political leadership of the party, either a change in personnel or a change in political line, so that the views or associations which caused the individual, or group of individuals, to fall into disgrace are viewed more sympathetically.

Well-known figures who have been rehabilitated include Deng Xiaoping who fell into disgrace during the Cultural Revolution for being a "third roader" but was rehabilitated subsequently and became paramount leader of the People's Republic of China ; and Russia 's last Tsar , Nicholas II , and his family , who were all shot dead by Bolshevik revolutionaries in July, 1918, but were rehabilitated by the Russian Supreme Court on 1 October 2008.

[ 1 ] China [ edit ] Rehabilitation ( Chinese : 平反 ; pinyin : píngfǎn ) was carried out at many stages in the History of the People's Republic of China , but most significantly during the Boluan Fanzheng period, after the 3rd plenary session of the 11th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party that marked the Chinese economic reforms of Deng Xiaoping . Rehabilitation committees ( Chinese : 平反委员会 ; pinyin : Píngfǎn Wěiyuánhuì ) considered appeals from both the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party as well as from petitions —often in the form of big-character posters —by ordinary citizens. Reformer Hu Yaobang led a series of rehabilitations from 1978 to 1981 of people persecuted by the Gang of Four during the Cultural Revolution (1966–1976), including former chairman of China Liu Shaoqi .

[ 2 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] Main article: Rehabilitation (Soviet) In the context of the former Soviet Union , and the Post-Soviet states , rehabilitation ( Russian : реабилитация , transliterated in English as reabilitatsiya or academically rendered as reabilitacija ) was the restoration of a person who was criminally prosecuted without due basis, to the state of acquittal .

Mass amnesty of the victims of Soviet repressions started after the death of Joseph Stalin . Initially, in 1953, this did not entail any form of exoneration. This release became coupled with rehabilitations after Nikita Khrushchev 's denunciation of Stalinism in his 1956 speech On the Personality Cult and its Consequences . Several entire nationality groups that had been deported to Siberia, Kazakhstan, and Central Asia during population transfer were rehabilitated in the late 1950s.

Both the modern Russian Federation and Ukraine [ 3 ] have enacted laws "On the Rehabilitation of the Victims of Political Repressions", which provide the basis for the continued post-Stalinist rehabilitation of victims.

See also [ edit ] Self-criticism References [ edit ] ^ "Russia's last tsar rehabilitated" .

BBC News . 1 October 2008 . Retrieved 2009-01-19 .

^ Xu, Bin (2015). "Memory and reconciliation". In Kim, Mikyoung (ed.).

Routledge Handbook of Memory and Reconciliation in East Asia . Routledge. pp.

51– 53.

^ Law of Ukraine on "Rehabilitiona of victims of political repressions in Ukraine" Archived 2011-07-28 at the Wayback Machine v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Political_rehabilitation&oldid=1276858770 " Categories : Communist terminology Political repression Law of Russia Law of Ukraine Political repression in the Soviet Union Law of the Soviet Union Soviet phraseology Communist rehabilitations De-Stalinization Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use Canadian English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian English Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing Russian-language text This page was last edited on 21 February 2025, at 05:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Political rehabilitation 10 languages Add topic

