Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses Toggle Uses subsection 1.1 As an active work surface 1.2 Less frequent usage 2 Shape and form 3 Matching sets 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Credenza desk Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Modern wall-mounted secondary work surface for offices This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Credenza desk" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A credenza desk A credenza desk (often simply, credenza ) is a modern desk form usually placed next to a wall as a secondary work surface to that of another desk, such as a pedestal desk , in a typical executive or "corporate management" office.

[ 1 ] Uses [ edit ] As an active work surface [ edit ] A credenza is a work space whose "function" is for "very active and busy people." [ 1 ] In such instances, " proxemics " is important.

[ 1 ] When used as an active work surface, the credenza desk is often placed against the wall immediately behind or perpendicular to the main desk, but close enough that the user can reach it from the seated position at the main desk by simply swivelling and wheeling their office chair over to it. It would typically be used for extra storage as well as an open work surface for paperwork, filing, or other tasks taking up more room than would be practical at the main desk (often due to the presence of a computer).

The credenza desk is often used as a computer desk , thus leaving the possibility of keeping the surface of the main desk completely free, when this is required.  An executive desk is often the central artifact for a meeting between several persons.  A computer monitor or a printer or even a simple keyboard on the surface can be impediments to the exchange.

Less frequent usage [ edit ] When its planned use is to be less frequent, such as holding books or files which are not regularly referenced, or to act as an extra surface to help facilitate larger meetings, credenza desks are often placed on a wall in some other location of the office, such as adjacent to a conference table if one is present.  Many conference rooms that have meeting tables but not desks will also have a credenza desk against one wall.

Shape and form [ edit ] The credenza desk is sometimes flat, like a pedestal desk, but more often than not it has a stack of shelves, small drawers and other nooks above its main working surface.  The sum of these overhead amenities is usually called a hutch.  Hence, the credenza desk is often called a "credenza with hutch".

[ citation needed ] The credenza desk is comparable in form to but differs from the armoire desk in that it is seen for the most part in large office buildings (instead of home offices , like the armoire desk) and most of its storage spaces are wide open. However, a credenza can be used for a home office.

[ 2 ] Matching sets [ edit ] Credenza desks are often, but not always, part of a matching set that can include pieces such as a primary desk, a conference table, a cabinet for a whiteboard , a bookshelf, filing cabinets, chairs, or other items of furniture which are likely to be found in an office environment.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Credenza Law office management List of desk forms and types References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Karlen, Mark (2011).

Space Planning Basics . Wiley. p. 22.

ISBN 9781118174340 . Retrieved June 12, 2025 .

^ Kanarek, Lisa (2001).

Home Office Life: Making a Space to Work at Home . Rockport. p. 57.

ISBN 9781564967756 . Retrieved June 12, 2025 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Credenza_desk&oldid=1305062459 " Categories : Desks Environmental psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 20:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Credenza desk Add languages Add topic

