Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Pierre Lescot 29 languages Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French architect (c. 1515–1578) The Lescot Wing of the Palais du Louvre Pierre Lescot ( c.

1515 – 10 September 1578) was a French architect of the French Renaissance period. He is known for designing the Fontaine des Innocents and the Lescot wing of the Louvre in Paris. Lescot contributed to the incorporation of classical architectural elements into French architecture.

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Lescot was born in Paris.

King Francis I of France appointed him as the architect responsible for building projects at the Palais du Louvre , [ 2 ] transforming the old château into the renowned palace. A design proposed by the Italian architect and theorist Sebastiano Serlio was set aside in favor of Lescot's plan. His design envisioned enclosing three sides of a square courtyard with elaborate apartments, while the eastern side, facing the city as it then stood, was likely intended to be lightly enclosed with an arcade. Festive corner pavilions of impressive height, adorned with pillars and statues, were planned to replace the medieval towers. However, elsewhere in the Louvre, little progress was made beyond demolishing parts of the old feudal structure.

The Henri II staircase at the north end of the Lescot Wing of the Louvre After the death of King Francis I, Lescot was confirmed in his role by his successor, Henry II , and continued working on the Louvre project until his death. Despite this, only the west side and part of the south side were completed, forming the present southwest wing of the Cour Carré , known as the Aile Lescot , or "Lescot Wing" ( illustration ).

[ 3 ] Constructed between 1546 and 1551, this structure set the standard for French classicism.

The wing features two stories with an attic adorned with Jean Goujon 's richly detailed bas-relief panels and is topped by a sloping roof, a traditional French architectural element suited to a rainy climate. The ground floor's deeply recessed arch-headed windows create the impression of an arcade, while the central and end pavilions project outward, each crowned by small round oeil de boeuf windows. On the second floor, slender fluted pilasters divide the windows, which alternate between triangular and arched pediments.

Goujon's sculptural work and architectural decorations are skillfully integrated into the overall design. The ground-floor Salle des Caryatides (1546–1549), named for Goujon's four caryatid figures supporting the musicians' gallery , is a notable surviving feature. Other remnants of Lescot's contributions to the Louvre include the Salle des Gardes and the Henry II staircase.

Lescot's Fontaine des nymphes 1549, rededicated as Fontaine des innocents Lescot's earliest works, completed between 1540 and 1545, included the rood screen at Saint-Germain l'Auxerrois , though only some sculptures by Jean Goujon have survived. In Paris, he designed the Hôtel de Ligneris (1548–1550), now known as the Musée Carnavalet , which was later extensively modified by François Mansart .

In the Fountain of Nymphs (1547–1549), Lescot’s architectural contributions play a more subdued role compared to the prominence of Goujon's sculptures.

[ 4 ] Lescot was also responsible for the design of the Château de Vallery .

Lescot's career is poorly documented, leaving it uncertain whether he ever visited Italy or if his understanding of Italian architectural practices came solely from the architecture and engravings associated with the School of Fontainebleau . All of Lescot's known works feature sculptural decoration by Trebatti and Jean Goujon , who collaborated with him on the Louvre.

Unlike many architects of the French Flamboyant Gothic and Renaissance periods, Lescot did not come from a lineage of masons with practical experience. Instead, he was the son of a seigneur. His father, also named Pierre Lescot, was the sieur of Lissy-en-Brie and Clagny , near Versailles—lands that Lescot inherited.

According to a eulogistic poem by Ronsard , [ 5 ] Lescot devoted his early youth to drawing and painting and, after the age of twenty, turned his attention to mathematics and architecture. However, his wealth and official responsibilities seem to have limited his artistic pursuits later in life. Beyond his recognized works, no other documented projects are attributed to him. A dismissive mention in the memoirs of the duc de Nevers , published long after Lescot's death, refers to "Magny" (likely Clagny) as "a painter who used to make inventions of masquerades and tourneys," [ 6 ] reflecting the expectation for court architects of the 15th to 17th centuries to design such spectacles.

Upon Lescot's death, Jean Baptiste Androuet du Cerceau succeeded him as the architect of the Louvre.

See also [ edit ] Architecture of Paris Cour Carrée French Renaissance architecture Other outstanding architects of the French Renaissance: Philibert Delorme Jean Bullant Androuet du Cerceau , a dynasty of designers and architects Jean Goujon Notes [ edit ] ^ "the man who was first responsible for the implantation of pure and correct classical architecture in France."David Thomson, "A Note on Pierre Lescot, the Painter" The Burlington Magazine 120 No. 907 (October 1978, pp. 666-667) p 666; see Henri Zerner, L'art de la Renaissance en France. L'invention du classicisme (Paris: Flammarion) 1996. Lescot ^ The contract is of 1551. The project is analyzed in the context of Parisian urbanism in David Thomson, Renaissance Paris: Architecture and Growth, 1475-1600 (Berkeley: University of California Press) 1984, figs. 60-70.

^ Cour Carrée illustration .

^ The Fontaine des nymphes replaced an ancioent public fountain for the entry of Henry II into Paris, 1549.It stood against a wall; when it was rearranged in 1788 as a free-standing fountain, Augustin Pajou sculpted a fourth face. ( Insecula Archived 2007-05-12 at the Wayback Machine ).

^ Ronsard's poem, Discours à Pierre Lescot , was written in 1555 and subsequently modified (Thomson 1978:667).

^ "un Peintre qui souloit faire des inventions pour les masquerades & tournois nommé Magny, resident à Paris..." , noted in Thomson 1978:667 and note.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pierre Lescot .

Catholic Encyclopedia 1908 : "Pierre Lescot" Imago Mundi: Pierre Lescot (in French) v t e The Louvre and Tuileries Musée du Louvre Branch museums The Louvre-Lens The Louvre Abu Dhabi Palais du Louvre Sections in detail Louvre Castle Lescot Wing Pavillon du Roi Petite Galerie of the Louvre Grande Galerie Pavillon de Flore Cour Carrée Pavillon de l'Horloge Galerie d'Apollon Salon Carré Pavillon de Marsan Louvre Colonnade Napoleon III's Louvre expansion Escalier Daru Grand Louvre Louvre Pyramid Carrousel du Louvre Louvre Inverted Pyramid Architects Raymond du Temple Pierre Lescot Pierre II Chambiges Louis Métezeau Jacques Androuet II Du Cerceau Jacques Lemercier Louis Le Vau François d'Orbay Claude Perrault Ange-Jacques Gabriel Jacques-Germain Soufflot Maximilien Brebion Auguste Cheval de Saint-Hubert Jean-Arnaud Raymond Charles Percier Pierre-François-Léonard Fontaine Félix Louis Jacques Duban Louis-Tullius-Joachim Visconti Hector-Martin Lefuel Edmond Jean Baptiste Guillaume Gaston Redon Victor-Auguste Blavette Camille Lefèvre Albert Ferran I. M. Pei Palais des Tuileries Sections in detail Pavillon de Flore Pavillon de Marsan Théâtre des Tuileries Architects Philibert de l'Orme Jean Bullant Louis Le Vau Jardin des Tuileries Sections in detail Musée de l'Orangerie Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume Architects André Le Nôtre ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN KulturNav People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pierre_Lescot&oldid=1305005012 " Categories : 1510s births 1578 deaths Architects from Paris 16th-century French architects Renaissance architects 16th-century French painters French male painters Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 13:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pierre Lescot 29 languages Add topic

