Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Mythology Toggle Mythology subsection 2.1 Mother of the Moirai 3 In philosophical thought 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ananke 42 languages Alemannisch العربية Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Македонски ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek goddess of necessity For other uses, see Ananke (disambiguation) .

Ananke as represented by a modern illustration of Plato 's Republic .

Part of a series on Ancient Greek religion Origins Ancient Greek religion Mycenaean Greece , Mycenaean religion and Mycenaean deities Minoan Civilization , Minoan religion Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece , Hellenistic religion Sacred places Sacred islands Delos Ithaca Naxos Kythira Samothrace Crete Lemnos Sacred mountains Mount Lykaion Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Olympus Mount Kyllini Mount Othrys Sanctuaries Aornum Delphi Didyma Dion Dodona Eleusis Olympia Other Cave of Zeus Troy Deities Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Chthonic deities Hades Persephone Erinyes Gaia Hecate Iacchus Melinoë Triptolemus Trophonius Lesser deities Alpheus Amphitrite Asclepius Boreas Circe Cybele Deimos Eileithyia Enyo Eos Eris Eros Harmonia Hebe Hecate Helios Heracles Iris Leto Maia Metis Nemesis Nereus Nike Nyx Pan Persephone Phobos Priapus Proteus Rhea Scamander Selene Thanatos Themis Thetis Triton Zephyrus Concepts Worldview Greek mythology Orphic Egg Underworld and afterlife Miasma Daimon Ages of Man , Golden Age , Heroic Age Divine and reality Apeiron Monism Polytheism Pantheism Form of the Good Theory of forms Mind Anamnesis Ataraxia Apatheia Episteme Epoche Eudaimonia Katalepsis Logos Nous Phronesis Soul Anima mundi Metempsychosis Henosis Plato's theory of soul Ethics Agape Arete Asebeia Eusebeia Hubris Xenia Ethic of Reciprocity Delphic maxims Adiaphora Kathekon Oikeiosis Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Orphism Dionysian Mysteries Practices Worship Agalma Dithyramb Paean Orgion Hiera Orgas Hero Cult Oracle and Pythia Sacrifices and offerings Holokaustos Libation Votive offering Animal Sacrifice Temples and holy sites Temple Temenos Priesthood and religious service Hiereia Meditation and charity Eusebeia Meditation Euergetism Rites of passage Amphidromia Marriage Funeral Rites Festivals Thesmophoria Dionysia Daphnephoria Anthesteria Arrephoria Kronia Genesia Elaphebolia Pyanopsia Khalkeia Haloa Halieia Thargelia Monthly festivals Noumenia Religious games Panathenaia Herakleia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Nemean Games Pythian Games Isthmian Games Philosophy Pythagoreanism Neopythagoreanism Platonism Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Philosophers Ancient Hesiod Homer Pherecydes of Syros Pythagoras Xenophanes Parmenides Empedocles Socrates Plato Aratus Plutarch Plotinus Iamblichus Julian (emperor) Texts Argonautica Bibliotheca Corpus Hermeticum Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Epic Cycle Homeric Hymns Iliad Odyssey Orphic Hymns Theogony Works and Days Other topics Pilgrimage sites Calendar Decline of Greco-Roman polytheism Julian restoration Modern Restoration Religion portal Ancient Greece portal v t e Greek deities series Titans and Olympians Water deities Chthonic deities Personified concepts Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Ourea Phanes Pontus Tartarus Uranus v t e Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Water deities Chthonic deities Personifications List Achlys Adephagia Adikia Agon Aidos Alala Alastor Algos Alke Amechania Amphillogiai Anaideia Ananke Androktasiai Angelia Apate Arae Arete Atë Bia Caerus Charites Deimos Dike Dyssebeia Dysnomia Eirene Ekecheiria Eleos Elpis Epiales Epidotes Epiphron Eris Eros Eunomia Eupraxia Gelos Geras Harmonia Hebe Hedone Hedylogos Homados Homonoia Horae Horkos Horme Hybris Hygeia Hypnos Hysminai Ioke Kakia Keres Koalemos Koros Kratos Kydoimos Lampetia Lethe Limos Litae Lyssa Machai Maniae Methe Metis Mnemosyne Moirai Momus Moros Neikea Nemesis Nike Nomos Oizys Olethros Oneiroi Palioxis Peitharchia Phaethusa Peitho Penia Penthus Pheme Philotes Phobos Phonoi Phthonus Pistis Plutus Polemos Ponos Porus Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Ptocheia Soteria Telete Thanatos Themis Thrasos Tyche Zelus v t e In ancient Greek religion , Ananke ( / ə ˈ n æ ŋ k iː / ; Ancient Greek : Ἀνάγκη ), from the common noun ἀνάγκη ("force, constraint, necessity"), is the Orphic personification of inevitability, compulsion, and necessity . She is customarily depicted as holding a spindle . One of the Greek primordial deities , the births of Ananke and her brother and consort, Chronos (the personification of time , not to be confused with the Titan Cronus ), were thought to mark the division between the eon of Chaos and the beginning of the cosmos . Ananke is considered the most powerful dictator of fate and circumstance. Mortals and gods alike respected her power and paid her homage. She is also considered the mother of the Fates , hence she is thought to be the only being to overrule their decisions [ 1 ] (according to some sources, excepting Zeus also). According to Daniel Schowalter and Steven Friesen, she and the Fates "are all sufficiently tied to early Greek mythology to make their Greek origins likely." [ 2 ] The ancient Greek traveller Pausanias wrote of a temple in ancient Corinth where the goddesses Ananke and Bia (meaning force, violence or violent haste) were worshiped together in the same shrine. Ananke is also frequently identified or associated with Aphrodite , especially Aphrodite Urania , the representation of abstract celestial love; the two were considered to be related, as relatively un anthropomorphised powers that dictated the course of life.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Her Roman counterpart is Necessitas ("necessity").

[ 7 ] Etymology [ edit ] "Ananke" is derived from the common Ancient Greek noun ἀνάγκη ( Ionic : ἀναγκαίη anankaiē ), meaning "force, constraint or necessity." The common noun itself is of uncertain etymology .

[ 8 ] Homer refers to her being as necessity, often abstracted in modern translation ( ἀναγκαίη πολεμίζειν , "it is necessary to fight") or force ( ἐξ ἀνάγκης , "by force").

[ 9 ] In Ancient Greek literature the word is also used meaning "fate" or " destiny " ( ἀνάγκη δαιμόνων , "fate by the daemons or by the gods"), and by extension "compulsion or torture by a superior." [ 10 ] She appears often in poetry, as Simonides does: "Even the gods don't fight against ananke ".

[ 11 ] The pre-modern is carried over and translated (by reduction) into a more modern philosophical sense as "necessity", "logical necessity", [ 12 ] or "laws of nature".

[ 13 ] Mythology [ edit ] In Orphic mythology, Ananke is a self-formed being who emerged at the dawn of creation with an incorporeal , serpentine form, her outstretched arms encompassing the cosmos. Ananke and Chronos are mates, mingling together in serpent form as a tie around the universe. Together, they have crushed the primal egg of creation of which constituent parts became earth, heaven and sea to form the ordered universe.

[ 14 ] Ananke is the mother (or another identity) of Adrasteia , the distributor of rewards and punishments.

[ 15 ] In the Orphic Hymns , Aphrodite Urania is described as the mother of Ananke and ruler of the three Moirai: Ourania, illustrious, laughter-loving queen, sea-born, night-loving, of an awful mien; Crafty, from whom Ananke first came, producing, nightly, all-connecting dame: 'Tis thine the world with harmony to join, for all things spring from thee, O pow'r divine.

The triple Moirai are rul'd by thy decree, and all productions yield alike to thee — Orphic hymn LIV.

[ 16 ] Mother of the Moirai [ edit ] The Greek philosopher Plato in his Republic discussed the parentage of the Moirai or the Fates in the following lines: [ 17 ] And there were another three who sat round about at equal intervals, each one on her throne, the Moirai (Moirae, Fates), daughters of Ananke, clad in white vestments with filleted heads, Lakhesis ( Lachesis ), and Klotho ( Clotho ), and Atropos (Atropus), who sang in unison with the music of the Seirenes , Lakhesis singing the things that were, Klotho the things that are, and Atropos the things that are to be . . . Lakhesis, the maiden daughter of Ananke (Necessity).

Ananke the personification of Necessity, above the Moirai , the Fates.

Aeschylus , the famous tragedian, gave an account in his Prometheus Bound where the Moirai were called the helmsman of the goddess Ananke along with the three Erinyes : [ 18 ] Prometheus: Not in this way is Moira (Fate), who brings all to fulfillment, destined to complete this course. Only when I have been bent by pangs and tortures infinite am I to escape my bondage. Skill is weaker by far than Ananke (Necessity).

Chorus: Who then is the helmsman of Ananke (Necessity)?

Prometheus: The three-shaped (trimorphoi) Moirai (Moirae, Fates) and mindful (mnêmones) Erinyes (Furies).

Chorus: Can it be that Zeus has less power than they do?

Prometheus: Yes, in that even he cannot escape what is foretold.

Chorus: Why, what is fated for Zeus except to hold eternal sway?

Prometheus: This you must not learn yet; do not be over-eager.

Chorus: It is some solemn secret, surely, that you enshroud in mystery.

Here Prometheus speaks of a secret prophecy, rendered ineluctable by Ananke, that any son born of Zeus and Thetis would depose the god. (In fact, any son of Thetis was destined to be greater than his father.) In philosophical thought [ edit ] In the Timaeus , Plato has the character Timaeus (not Socrates) argue that in the creation of the universe, there is a uniting of opposing elements, intellect ('nous') and necessity ('ananke'). Elsewhere, Plato blends abstraction with his own myth making: "For this ordered world ( cosmos ) is of a mixed birth: it is the offspring of a union of Necessity and Intellect . Intellect prevailing over Necessity by persuading (from Peitho, goddess of persuasion) it to direct most of the things that come to be toward what is best, and the result of this subjugation of Necessity to wise persuasion is the initial formation of the universe".

[ 19 ] In Victor Hugo 's novel Notre-Dame of Paris , the word "Ananke" is written upon a wall of Notre-Dame by the hand of Dom Claude Frollo . In his Toute la Lyre , Hugo also mentions Ananke as a symbol of love. In 1866, he wrote: Religion, society, nature; these are the three struggles of man. These three conflicts are, at the same time, his three needs: it is necessary for him to believe, hence the temple; it is necessary for him to create, hence the city; it is necessary for him to live, hence the plow and the ship. But these three solutions contain three conflicts. The mysterious difficulty of life springs from all three. Man has to deal with obstacles under the form of superstition, under the form of prejudice, and under the form of the elements. A triple "ananke" (necessity) weighs upon us, the "ananke" of dogmas, the "ananke" of laws, and the "ananke" of things. In Notre-Dame de Paris the author has denounced the first; in Les Misérables he has pointed out the second; in this book ( Toilers of the Sea ) he indicates the third. With these three fatalities which envelop man is mingled the interior fatality, that supreme ananke , the human heart.
Hauteville House, March, 1866. Victor Hugo, Toilers of the Sea , 1866, p. 5 [ 20 ] — Victor Hugo Sigmund Freud in Civilization and Its Discontents (p. 140) said: "We can only be satisfied, therefore, if we assert that the process of civilization is a modification which the vital process experiences under the influence of a task that is set it by Eros and instigated by Ananke — by the exigencies of reality ; and that this task is one of uniting separate individuals into a community bound together by libidinal ties." Wallace Stevens , in a poem of the 1930s, writes: "The sense of the serpent in you, Ananke, / And your averted stride / Add nothing to the horror of the frost / That glistens on your face and hair." [ 21 ] This connects with Stevens's sense of necessity or fate in his later work, especially in the collection The Auroras of Autumn .

Robert Bird's essay "Ancient Terror", [ 22 ] inspired by Léon Bakst 's painting Terror Antiquus , speculates on the evolution of Greek religion, tracing it to an original belief in a single, supreme goddess.

Vyacheslav Ivanov suggests that the ancients viewed all that is human and all that is revered as divine as relative and transient: "Only Fate (Eimarmene), or universal necessity (Ananke), the inevitable ' Adrasteia ,' the faceless countenance and hollow sound of unknown Destiny, was absolute." Before the goddess, who is both indestructible Force of Love and absolute Fate the Destroyer, Life-Giver and Fate-Death, as well as incorporating Mnemosyne (Memory) and Gaia (Mother Earth), masculine daring and warring are impotent and transient, and the masculine order imposed by Zeus and the other Olympian Gods is artificial.

[ 23 ] References [ edit ] ^ Abril Cultural, ed. (1973).

Dicionário de Mitologia Greco-Romana (in Portuguese). Editora Victor Civita. p. 134.

OCLC 45781956 .

^ Schowalter, Daniel N.; Friesen, Steven J. (2005).

Urban Religion in Roman Corinth: Interdisciplinary Approaches Issue 53 of Harvard theological studies . Harvard Theological Studies, Harvard Divinity School. p. 147.

ISBN 9780674016606 .

^ Papaioannou, Sophia; Serafim, Andreas; Demetriou, Kyriakos (25 October 2021).

Rhetoric and Religion in Ancient Greece and Rome . Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG.

ISBN 978-3-11-069970-8 . Retrieved 10 April 2024 .

^ Ivanov, Vi͡acheslav Ivanovich; Bird, Robert; Wachtel, Michael (2001).

Selected Essays . Northwestern University Press. p. 154.

ISBN 9780810115224 .

^ Portmann, Adolf; Ritsema, Rudolf (Jan 1, 1977).

Avenir Et Devenir Des Normes . Brill Archive. p. 100.

ISBN 9789004048805 .

^ Stroud, Ronald (Sep 30, 2013).

The Sanctuary of Demeter and Kore: The Inscriptions XVIII.6 . American School of Classical Studies at Athens. p. 84.

ISBN 9781621390138 .

^ Dräger, Paul (2006). "Ananke".

Brill's New Pauly .

doi : 10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e119980 .

^ Beekes, R. S. P.

(2009).

Etymological Dictionary of Greek , p. 97. Brill.

^ Iliad 4.300, Odyssey 4.557: Lidell, Scott: A Greek English Lexicon : ἀνάγκη ^ E.Ph.1000, Xenophon , Hiero 9.4 ^ Simonides Fr. 4.20 Diehl: C. M. Bowra (1958), The Greek Experience . W. P. Publishing company, Cleveland and New York, p. 61 ^ Aristotle , Metaph.

1026.b28, 1064.b33: Lidell, Scott: A Greek English Lexicon : ἀνάγκη ^ Xenophon , Memorabilia 1.11.1: Lidell, Scott: A Greek English Lexicon : ἀνάγκη ^ The Uroboric Serpent: Water and Being and the Mythos Unthought in Metaphysics . 2008.

ISBN 9780549685210 .

^ Jonte-Pace, Diane; Parsons, Jr., William B.; Gómez, Luis O. (2002).

Religion and Psychology: Mapping the Terrain . Routledge. p. 220.

ISBN 9781134625352 .

^ Mierzwicki, Tony (2018).

Hellenismos: Practicing Greek Polytheism Today . Llewellyn Worldwide. p. 93.

ISBN 9780738743752 .

^ Plato, Republic 617c (trans. Shorey) (Greek philosopher C4th B.C.): ^ Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 510 ff ^ 48a, trans. John M. Cooper ^ Victor Hugo, Toilers of the Sea , 1866, p. 5 ^ Stevens, Wallace (1990).

Collected Poems . Alfred A. Knopf. p. 152.

ISBN 9780679726692 .

^ Bird, Robert (2007).

The Russian Prospero: The Creative Universe of Viacheslav Ivanov . Univ of Wisconsin Press. p. 154.

ISBN 9780299218331 .

^ Ivanov, Vi͡acheslav Ivanovich; Bird, Robert; Wachtel, Michael (2001).

Selected Essays . Northwestern University Press. pp.

153– 159.

ISBN 9780810115224 .

External links [ edit ] Multi-lingual Dictionary v t e Time in religion and mythology Aeon Calendar Deities Destiny Divination Eschatology Eternity Aevum Heortology Golden Age Prophecy Wheel of the Year Yuga v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis Portals : Ancient Greece Myths Ananke at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ananke&oldid=1269788478 " Categories : Destiny Greek goddesses Personifications in Greek mythology Time and fate goddesses Greek primordial deities Snake goddesses Personifications Hidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch This page was last edited on 16 January 2025, at 11:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ananke 42 languages Add topic

