Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses 2 Manufacture 3 Reputation 4 Examples 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Opus Anglicanum 7 languages Беларуская Català Español Hrvatski Italiano Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fine needlework of Medieval England Section of a 15th-century English chasuble Embroidered bookbinding for the Felbrigge Psalter in couched gold thread and split stitch, likely worked by Anne de Felbrigge, a nun in the convent of Minoresses at Bruisyard , Suffolk, during the latter half of the fourteenth century.

[ 1 ] Opus Anglicanum or English work is fine needlework of Medieval England done for ecclesiastical or secular use on clothing , hangings or other textiles , often using gold and silver threads on rich velvet or linen grounds. Such English embroidery was in great demand across Europe, particularly from the late 12th to mid-14th centuries and was a luxury product often used for diplomatic gifts.

Uses [ edit ] Most of the surviving examples of Opus Anglicanum were designed for liturgical use.  These exquisite and expensive embroidery pieces were often made as vestments , such as copes , chasubles and orphreys , or else as antependia , shrine covers or other church furnishings. Secular examples, now known mostly just from contemporary inventories, included various types of garments, horse-trappings, book covers and decorative hangings.

Manufacture [ edit ] Opus Anglicanum was usually embroidered on linen or, later, velvet , in split stitch and couching with silk and gold or silver-gilt thread .

[ 2 ] Gold-wound thread, pearls and jewels are all mentioned in inventory descriptions.
Although often associated with nunneries, by the time of Henry III (reg. 1216–72), who purchased a number of items for use within his own court and for diplomatic gifting , the bulk of production was in lay workshops, mainly centred in London. The names of various (male) embroiderers of the period appear in the Westminster royal accounts .

[ 3 ] Reputation [ edit ] The Butler-Bowden Cope , 1330–50, V&A Museum English needlework had become famous across Europe during the Anglo-Saxon period (though very few examples survive) and remained so throughout the Gothic era.  A Vatican inventory of 1295  lists over 113 pieces from England, more than from any other country; [ 4 ] a request by Pope Innocent IV , who had envied the gold-embroidered copes and mitres of English priests, that Cistercian religious houses send more is reported  by the Benedictine chronicler Matthew Paris of St Albans : "This command of my Lord Pope did not displease the London merchants who traded in these embroideries and sold them at their own price." [ 5 ] The high water mark of style and refinement is normally considered to have been reached in the work of the 13th and early 14th centuries. An influential exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum from September–November 1963 displayed several examples of Opus Anglicanum from this period alongside contemporary works of wood and stone sculpture, metalwork and ivories.

[ 6 ] Examples [ edit ] Opus Anglicanum example in the care of the Berne Historical Museum in Switzerland.

Survival rates for Opus Anglicanum are low (especially for secular works) as is clear from comparing the large number listed in contemporary inventories with the handful of examples still existing. Sometimes ecclesiastical garments were later modified for different uses, such as altar coverings or book covers. Others were buried with their owners, as with the vestments of the mid-13th century Bishops, Walter de Cantilupe and William de Blois , fragments of which were recovered when their tombs in Worcester Cathedral were opened in the 18th century. The majority however were lost to neglect, destroyed by iconoclasts or else unpicked or burnt to recover the precious metals from the gold and silver threads.
Although fragmentary examples can be found in a number of museums, the most important specialised collections of Opus Anglicanum garments are at the Cloisters Museum in New York, the Victoria and Albert Museum in London and in the Treasury of Sens Cathedral .

Only a few Anglo-Saxon pieces have survived, including three pieces at Durham that had been placed in the coffin of St Cuthbert , probably in the 930s, after being given by King Athelstan ; they were however made in Winchester between 909 and 916. These are works "of breathtaking brilliance and quality", according to Wilson, including figures of saints, and important early examples of the Winchester style, though the origin of their style is a puzzle; they are closest to a wall-painting fragment from Winchester, and an early example of acanthus decoration.

[ 7 ] The earliest group of survivals, now re-arranged and with the precious metal thread mostly picked out, are bands or borders from vestments, incorporating pearls and glass beads, with various types of scroll and animal decoration. These are probably 9th century and now in a church in Maaseik in Belgium.

[ 8 ] A further style of textile is a vestment illustrated in a miniature portrait of Saint Aethelwold in his Benedictional , which shows the edge of what appears to be a huge acanthus "flower" (a term used in several documentary records) covering the wearer's back and shoulders.  Other written sources mention other large-scale compositions.

[ 9 ] Chichester-Constable Chasuble (front), from a set of vestments embroidered in opus anglicanum , from southern England, 1330-1350. Red velvet with silk and metallic thread and seed pearls; length 5ft. 6in. (167.6cm), width 30in. (76.2cm). The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

One particularly fine example is The Adoration of the Magi chasuble from c. 1325 in red velvet embroidered in gold thread and pearls at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.  It depicts a nativity scene with emphasis on decorative motifs, flowers, animals, birds, beasts, and angels.

The Butler-Bowden Cope at the Victoria and Albert Museum is another surviving example; the same collection has a late cope made for a set of vestments given by Henry VII to Westminster Abbey .

Life of the Virgin, Chichester-Constable Chasuble (back), from a set of vestments embroidered in opus anglicanum , from southern England, 1330-1350. Red velvet with silk and metallic thread and seed pearls; length 5ft. 6in. (167.6cm), width 30in. (76.2cm). The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Another exemplary work of Opus Anglicanum is the Chichester-Constable Chasuble, currently held in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.

[1] This piece of needlework is covered with illustrations of Christian iconography and derives its name from the Constable Chasuble family, its former owners.

[ 10 ] Rendered in silk and gold threads, its craftsmanship exhibits techniques such as underside couching, split stitch, laid and couched work, and raised work, all stitched onto a lush velvet base.

[ 11 ] On the front of the chasuble, the artwork predominantly features the Apostles , each seated on faldstools . At the top, depictions of St. John the Evangelist and St. John the Baptist are visible. St. John the Evangelist is seated on a faldstool with the handles designed as heads of eagles instead of heads of dogs like the rest.

[ 12 ] An eagle is John’s evangelist symbol. John the Baptist is holding a golden orb containing “ Agnus Dei ,” meaning lamb of God. The middle section showcases St. Peter holding a sword and Paul holding two keys, both of whom are holding books in their opposite hands. On the bottom, St. Andrew sits cross legged holding a cross next to St. James, both of whom are also holding books.

[ 13 ] St. James is depicted as a pilgrim , complete with a hat and staff. In his hand, he also holds a bag with a distinctive cockleshell badge, symbolic of his pilgrimage . Looking at the back of the chasuble, three scenes are carefully embroidered onto the velvet. From the bottom up, they represent the Annunciation , the Adoration of the Magi , and the Coronation of the Virgin .

[ 14 ] The Annunciation depicts an angel with partly furled wings holding a long scroll and Mary, who appears surprised with an off-balance posture while holding a sliver page. The hollow in the middle of both figures' cheeks shows English embroidery stylization. The Coronation depicts the Virgin with clasped hands and Christ sitting on a throne. Christ is giving a gesture of blessing with one hand while the other rests on a globe.

[ 15 ] The Adoration of the Magi is particularly interesting as the three kings may also represent (from left to right) Edward the Confessor , Edward II and Edward III . There are further motifs of English royalty like the use of stars. There is a star above the head of the child in the Adoration of the Magi, and there are angles throughout the work holding stars. The star motif was used to represent English royalty and more specifically King Henry III . At the time, Edward III tried to claim the French throne starting the Hundred Years' War , leading to displays of power through extravagant art.

[ 16 ] There are two beautiful examples of Opus Anglicanum, which came as the end pieces of an altarpendium ( antependium ) in the care of the Bern Historical Museum in Switzerland. A detailed example of the stitching is shown to the right, the image of a leaf on red fabric.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Davenport, Cyril, English Embroidered Bookbindings , edited by Alfred Pollard, London, 1899 ^ Levey, S. M. and D. King, The Victoria and Albert Museum's Textile Collection Vol. 3: Embroidery in Britain from 1200 to 1750 , Victoria and Albert Museum, 1993, ISBN 1-85177-126-3 ^ Article: Opus Anglicanum, Grove Dictionary of Art , Oxford, 1996 ^ Remnant 1964:111; Bonnie Young, "Opus Anglicanum" The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin , New Series, 29 .7 (March 1971:291–298) p. 291; the article was occasioned by an exhibition at The Cloisters.

^ Quoted Young 1971:291.

^ King, David (ed), Opus Anglicanum (exhibition catalogue), London, V&A Press, 1963.

^ Wilson, 154–156, quote 155; Dodwell (1993), 26; Golden Age, 19, 44, though neither these nor any textiles could be lent for the exhibition.

^ Wilson, 108; Dodwell (1993), 27, who gives details of further fragments.

^ Dodwell (1982), 183–185; portrait of Saint Aethelwold ^ Christie, A.H. (1927). "An Unknown English Medieval Chasuble".

The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs .

51 (297): 285.

^ Young, Bonnie (1971). "Opus Anglicanum".

The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin .

29 (7): 298.

^ Young, Bonnie (1971). "Opus Anglicanum".

The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin .

29 (7): 293.

^ Christie, A.H. (1927). "An Unknown English Medieval Chasuble".

The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs .

51 (297): 291.

^ Young, Bonnie (1971). "Opus Anglicanum".

The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin .

29 (7): 293.

^ Christie, A.H. (1927). "An Unknown English Medieval Chasuble".

The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs .

51 (297): 286.

^ Young, Bonnie (1971). "Opus Anglicanum".

The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin .

29 (7): 295– 296.

References [ edit ] Davenport, Cyril, English Embroidered Bookbindings , edited by Alfred Pollard, London, 1899 ( English Embroidered Bookbindings at Project Gutenberg ) "Dodwell (1982)": Dodwell, C. R., Anglo-Saxon Art, A New Perspective , 1982, Manchester UP, ISBN 0-7190-0926-X "Dodwell (1993)": Dodwell, C. R., The Pictorial arts of the West, 800–1200 , 1993, Yale UP, ISBN 0-300-06493-4 "Golden Age": Backhouse, Janet , Turner, D.H.

, and Webster, Leslie , eds.; The Golden Age of Anglo-Saxon Art, 966–1066 , 1984, British Museum Publications Ltd, ISBN 0-7141-0532-5 Levey, S. M. and D. King, The Victoria and Albert Museum's Textile Collection Vol. 3: Embroidery in Britain from 1200 to 1750 , Victoria and Albert Museum, 1993, ISBN 1-85177-126-3 Wilson, David M.

; Anglo-Saxon: Art From The Seventh Century To The Norman Conquest , Thames and Hudson (US edn. Overlook Press), 1984.

Further reading [ edit ] King, Donald: Opus Anglicanum: English Medieval Embroidery , London: HMSO, 1963.

Christie, A.G.I: English Medieval Embroidery , Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1938.

Staniland, K: Medieval Craftsmen: Embroiderers , London: British Museum Press, 1991.

Michael, M.A: The Age of Opus Anglicanum (London, Harvey Miller/Brepols, 2016.

Browne C., Davies, G & Michael, M.A: English Meidieval Embroidery, Opus Anglicanum , London and New Haven, Yale University Press, 2016.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Opus Anglicanum .

Opus Anglicanum at Historical Needlework Opus Anglicanum: English Work, or How to Paint With a Needle Medieval English embroidery at the Victoria and Albert Museum website Chasuble in Opus Anglicanum, Metropolitan Museum of Art v t e Embroidery Styles Assisi Bargello Berlin work Blackwork Broderie anglaise Broderie perse Candlewicking Clare embroidery Counted-thread Crewel Cross-stitch Cutwork Darning Drawn thread work Goldwork Hardanger Hedebo Machine Needlepoint Quillwork Smocking Stumpwork Surface Suzani Whitework Stitches Backstitch Blanket Box Buttonhole Chain stitch Couching and laid work Cross stitches Embroidery stitch Featherstitch Holbein Parisian Running Satin stitch Sashiko Shisha Straight stitch Tent stitch Tools and materials Aida cloth Embroidery hoop Embroidery thread Evenweave Perforated paper Plainweave Plastic canvas Sampler Slip Yarn Regional and historical Art needlework Balochi Brazilian Bunka shishu Burmese Chikan Chinese Cantonese Sichuan Suzhou Xiang English Indian Islamic Jacobean Sashiko Kogin-zashi Bunka shishu Kaitag Kantha Kasuti Korean Macedonian Mountmellick Nakshi kantha Persian Rasht Sermeh Sistan Zardozi Opus Anglicanum Rushnyk Sewed muslin Ukrainian Vietnamese Vyshyvanka Embroideries Butler-Bowden Cope Bayeux Tapestry Bradford carpet Great Tapestry of Scotland Great Tapestry of Scotland: People's Panel Hastings Embroidery Hestia tapestry Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Margaret Layton's jacket New World Tapestry Overlord Embroidery Oxburgh Hangings Prestonpans Tapestry Quaker Tapestry Scottish Diaspora Tapestry Fragments of a Cope with the Seven Sacraments Designers and embroiderers Emilie Bach Leon Conrad Beryl Dean Shahin Ebrahimzadeh-Pezeshki Kaffe Fassett Juanita Growing Thunder Fogarty Constance Howard Marilyn Leavitt-Imblum François Lesage Ann Macbeth May Morris Jessie Newbery Mahtab Norouzi Tetiana Protcheva Charles Germain de Saint Aubin Mary Elizabeth Turner Dimitri Vlachos - Castano Kathleen Whyte Erica Wilson Lily Yeats Organizations and museums Embroiderers' Guild (UK) Embroiderers' Guild of America Embroidery Software Protection Coalition Needlework Development Scheme Royal School of Needlework Wemyss School of Needlework Chung Young Yang Embroidery Museum Han Sang Soo Embroidery Museum Related Appliqué Crochet Knitting Lace Needlework Quilting v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Opus_Anglicanum&oldid=1299451970 " Categories : Christian art English embroidery English art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 13:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Opus Anglicanum 7 languages Add topic

