Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Revolution and ideology Toggle Revolution and ideology subsection 2.1 Anarchism 2.2 Communism 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Revolutionary 34 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gàidhlig Galego हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ ລາວ Latina Македонски मराठी नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person who participates in or advocates for a revolution "Revolutionist" redirects here. For the Hemingway short story, see The Revolutionist .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Revolutionary" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Revolution Characteristics Bourgeois Colour Communist Counter-revolutionary Democratic Nonviolent Passive Permanent Proletarian From above Wave Social Methods Boycott Civil disorder Civil war Class struggle Contentious politics Coup d'état Demonstration Human chain Direct action Guerrilla warfare Insurgency Mass mobilization Mutiny Protest Rebellion Resistance Nonviolent Civil Disobedience Riot Samizdat Strike action Tax resistance Terror Examples English Atlantic American Brabant Liège French Haitian Spanish American Serbian Greek 1820s 1830 July Belgian Texas 1848 Italian states February German Hungarian Eureka Bulgarian unification Philippine Iranian First Second Young Turk Mexican Chinese Xinhai Communist Cultural 1917–1923 Russian German Siamese Spanish August Guatemalan Hungarian (1956) Cuban Rwandan Nicaraguan Argentine Carnation Saur People Power 1989 Yogurt Velvet Romanian Singing Bolivarian Bulldozer Rose Orange Tulip Kyrgyz Arab Spring Tunisian Egyptian Yemeni Euromaidan Second Arab Spring Sudanese Politics portal v t e A revolutionary is a person who either participates in, or advocates for, a revolution .

[ 1 ] The term revolutionary can also be used as an adjective to describe something producing a major and sudden impact on society.

Definition [ edit ] The Red Guards , the group of Finnish revolutionaries during the 1918 Finnish Civil War in Tampere, Finland The term—both as a noun and adjective—is usually applied to the field of politics , but is also occasionally used in the context of science , invention or art . In politics, a revolutionary is someone who supports abrupt, rapid, and drastic change, usually replacing the status quo, while a reformist is someone who supports more gradual and incremental change, often working within the system. In that sense, revolutionaries may be considered radical, while reformists are moderate by comparison. Moments which seem revolutionary on the surface may end up reinforcing established institutions. Likewise, evidently small changes may lead to revolutionary consequences in the long term. Thus the clarity of the distinction between revolution and reform is more conceptual than empirical.

[ citation needed ] A conservative is someone who generally opposes such changes. A reactionary is someone who wants things to go back to the way they were before the change has happened (and when this return to the past would represent a major change in and of itself, reactionaries can simultaneously be revolutionaries). A revolution is also not the same as a coup d'état : while a coup usually involves a small group of conspirators violently seizing control of government, a revolution implies mass participation and popular legitimacy. Again, the distinction is often clearer conceptually than empirically.

[ citation needed ] Revolution and ideology [ edit ] According to sociologist James Chowning Davies , political revolutionaries may be classified in two ways: According to the goals of the revolution they propose. Usually, these goals are part of a certain ideology . In theory, each ideology could generate its own brand of revolutionaries. In practice, most political revolutionaries have been communists , socialists , Islamists , syndicalists , anarchists , or nationalists .

According to the methods they propose to use. This divides revolutionaries in two broad groups: Those who advocate a violent revolution, and those who are pacifists .

Anarchism [ edit ] See also: Anarchism Era Golden, aka Secretary Era, is an example of a contemporary anarchist revolutionary ( anarcho-syndicalist ). They quoted Sergey Nechayev but changed the pronouns to gender neutral in order to symbolically represent the inclusive nature of contemporary anarchist movements. They argue that anarcho nihilism is not a good representation of the values held by anarcho-communists generally both throughout history and in the modern day. Secretary Era argues that the quote is an accurate depiction of the type of person and experience that creates an anarchist revolutionary. Anarchist movements tend to feature utopian ideology.

[ citation needed ] Subcomandante Marcos [ 2 ] is an example of utilizing insurgency to advance a movement to remove what they perceive to be tyranny from power but ultimately the ideology and the individual seek to build rather than destroy, whether it be coalitions or institutions.

[ citation needed ] From Secretary Era's Revision of Catechism of a Revolutionary : "The revolutionary is a damned individual. They have no private interests, no affairs, sentiments, ties, property nor even a name of their own. Their entire being is devoured by one purpose, one thought, one passion - the revolution. Heart and soul, not merely by word but by deed, they have severed every link with the social order and with the entire civilized world; with the laws, good manners, conventions, and morality of that world. They are its merciless enemy and continue to inhabit it with only one purpose - to destroy it." [ 3 ] [ 4 ] From an interview with Subcomandante Marcos: “In our dreams we have seen another world, an honest world, a world decidedly more fair than the one in which we now live. We saw that in this world there was no need for armies; peace, justice and liberty were so common that no one talked about them as far-off concepts, but as things such as bread, birds, air, water, like book and voice.

” [ 5 ] Subcomandante Marcos and others often use insurgency and guerilla tactics to obstruct political opposition and remove hegemonic groups from power.

[ 6 ] utilize insurgency [ 7 ] Ultimately the ideology and the individual seek to build rather than destroy, whether it be coalitions or institutions.

[ citation needed ] Most anarcho-communist movements share this characteristic, but anarchism is a simple principle of opposition to hierarchy and is therefore idiosyncratic [ 8 ] with many other ideologies, whether positive or negative in their outlook.

[ citation needed ] Communism [ edit ] See also: Communist revolution According to Che Guevara , [ 9 ] "the true revolutionary is guided by a great feeling of love. It is impossible to think of a true revolutionary lacking in this quality." [ 10 ] According to the Marxist Internet Archive , a revolutionary "amplif[ies] the differences and conflicts caused by technological advances in society. Revolutionaries provoke differences and violently ram together contradictions within a society, overthrowing the government through the rising to power of the class they represent. After destructing the old order, revolutionaries help build a new government that adheres to the emerging social relationships that have been made possible by the advanced productive forces." [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] American Civil War 1911 Revolution American Revolution Armchair revolutionary Conservative Revolution Counter-revolutionary Counterculture of the 1960s Cuban Revolution Cultural Revolution February Revolution French Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Iranian Revolution Irish revolutionary period Mexican Revolution Nicaraguan Revolution National syndicalism October Revolution Permanent revolution Philippine revolution Reformation Revolutionary movement Revolutionary movement for Indian independence Revolutionary nationalism Revolutionary socialism Revolutionary song Revolutionary terror Revolutionary wave Russian Revolution Spanish Revolution of 1936 World revolution References [ edit ] ^ [1] [ usurped ] ^ https://www.tutor2u.net/politics/reference/anarchism-insurgency [ dead link ] ^ Nechayev Archived 2008-10-18 at the Wayback Machine , Spartacus Educational website by John Simkin ^ Sergey Nechayev (1869).

The Revolutionary Catechism Archived 2017-02-06 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Subcomandante Marcos Quotes (Author of Our Word is Our Weapon)" .

www.goodreads.com . Retrieved 2025-04-22 .

^ "Anarchism and Utopia" .

www.tutor2u.net . Retrieved 2025-04-22 .

^ "Beyond Resistance: Everything. An Interview with Subcomandante Insurgente Marcos" .

libcom.org . Retrieved 2025-04-22 .

^ "The Illusion of Anarchism" .

The Anarchist Library . Retrieved 2025-04-22 .

^ Killer Images: Documentary Film, Memory and the Performance of Violence by Joram ten Brink, Joshua Oppenheimer, Columbia University Press , 2012, page 84 ^ Guevara, Che (12 March 1965).

"From Algiers, for Marcha . The Cuban Revolution Today" . Letter to Quijano, Carlos. Marxist Internet Archive.

Archived from the original on 23 March 2008 . Retrieved 22 December 2022 .

^ "Glossary of Terms: Revolutionary" . Marxist Internet Archive . Retrieved 22 December 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Castro: Revolutionary as Celebrity Archived 2009-08-07 at the Wayback Machine – slideshow by LIFE magazine v t e Political spectrum Far-left Left Centre-left Centre Centre-right Right Far-right Political positions Post-leftism Ultra-leftism Anti-Stalinist left New Left Centrist Marxism Third Way Radical centrism New Right Political ideologies Anarchism Marxism Communism Socialism Social democracy Liberalism Christian democracy Conservatism Nationalism Fascism Nazism Religious politics Buddhist socialism Christian left Jewish left Islamic socialism Christian right Hindutva Islamism Religious Zionism Political pejoratives Baizuo Champagne socialist Hard left Liberal elite Limousine liberal Loony left Moonbat Red fascist Regressive left Social fascism Social imperialism Social justice warrior Soft left Wingnut Models Horseshoe theory Left–right political spectrum Nolan Chart Overton window Open–closed political spectrum Pournelle chart Right-wing authoritarianism See also Anti-authoritarianism Democratic transition Libertarianism Syndicalism Progressivism Green politics Identity politics Corporatism Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Revolutionary Reactionary Anti-establishment Collectivism Communitarianism The Establishment Individualism Hardline Populism Radical politics Triangulation v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐44shw
Cached time: 20250816093323
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.526 seconds
Real time usage: 0.674 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3106/1000000
Revision size: 10202/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 83732/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6375/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58480/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.341/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7117429/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  580.606      1 -total
 25.77%  149.595      1 Template:Reflist
 15.97%   92.729      5 Template:Cite_web
 15.31%   88.889      1 Template:Revolution_sidebar
 14.88%   86.406      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.31%   71.454      8 Template:Fix
 11.49%   66.720      6 Template:Citation_needed
 11.42%   66.289      1 Template:Short_description
  9.25%   53.702      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.52%   49.490      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:38584728:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816093323 and revision id 1293924493. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Revolutionary&oldid=1293924493 " Category : Revolutionaries Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2025 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 13:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Revolutionary 34 languages Add topic

