Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Notes 3 Works 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Diego de Zúñiga 6 languages العربية Asturianu Español Français Italiano Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish philosopher (1536–1597) To be distinguished from Diego López de Zúñiga (theologian) (d.1531) Diego de Zúñiga of Salamanca (sometimes Latinized as Didacus a Stunica) (1536–1597) was an Augustinian Hermit and academic. He is known for publishing an early acceptance of the Copernican theory , he was also the most important Augustinian scholastic thinker from the second half of the XVI century.

Life [ edit ] A student of Luis de León , he taught at the University of Osuna and the University of Salamanca .

[ 1 ] His In Job commentaria (Commentary on Job, 1584) addressed Job 9:6, in such a way as to assert that the Copernican heliocentric theory was an acceptable interpretation of Scripture.

[ 2 ] This publication made him one of a very small number of Catholic scholars of the sixteenth century who set out an explicit accommodation with the ideas of Copernicus.

[ 3 ] He did, however, subsequently change his views, on another front, philosophical rather than theological. In Philosophia prima pars , written at the end of his life, he rejected Copernicanism as incompatible with Aristotelian theory on natural philosophy .

[ 4 ] The Philosophia prima pars was a large-scale work on metaphysics, structured in accordance with current university practice, and aimed at a reform in the university teaching of philosophy. Written from an Aristotelian point of view, it aimed to fortify the Peripatetic philosophy, fending off sceptics and arguing for it as scientific. Against the skeptical attack, truth was treated under metaphysics.

[ 5 ] The work of Zúñiga was placed on the Church's Index , together with Copernicus' De revolutionibus , by a decree of the Sacred Congregation from March 5, 1616: (...) This Holy Congregation has also learned about the spreading and acceptance by many of the false Pythagorean doctrine, altogether contrary to the Holy Scripture, that the earth moves and the sun is motionless, which is also taught by Nicholaus Copernicus's 'On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres' and by Diego de Zúñiga's 'On Job'. (...) Therefore, in order that this opinion may not creep any further to the prejudice of Catholic truth, the Congregation has decided that the books by Nicolaus Copernicus ('On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres') and Diego de Zúñiga ('On Job') be suspended until corrected.

[ 6 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Robert S. Westman, The Copernicans and the Churches , p. 92-3 in David C. Lindberg, Ronald L. Numbers (editors), God and Nature: Historical Essays on the Encounter Between Christianity and Science (1986).

^ "Online translation of passage" . Archived from the original on 2007-07-03 . Retrieved 2009-01-11 .

^ John Hedley Brooke, Science and Religion: Some Historical Perspectives (1991), p. 90.

^ Stephen Gaukroger , The Emergence of a Scientific Culture: Science and the Shaping of Modernity, 1210-1685 (2006), p. 126.

^ Charles B. Schmitt, Quentin Skinner (editors), The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy (1990), p. 611 and p. 616.

^ See original Latin text and an English translation at the Wayback Machine (archived September 30, 2007). Also mentioned by W. R. Shea and M. Artigas in Galileo in Rome (2003), p. 84-85, ISBN 0-19-516598-5 Works [ edit ] Didaci a Stunica eremitae Agustiniani Philosophiae prima pars, qua perfecte et eleganter quatuor scientiae Metaphysica, Dialectica, Rhetorica et Physica declarantur, ad Clementem octavum Pontificem maximum De optimo genere tradendae totius Philosophiae et Sacrosanctae Scriturae explicandae De totius Dialectiacer constitutione contra Ramum pro Aristotele In Zachariam Prophetam Commentaria , 1577 In Job Commentaria , the first edition by Ioannes Rodericus was published in Toledo , 1584. The second edition by Franciscum Zanettum was published in Rome , 1591.

Further reading [ edit ] Rafael Chabrán, Diego de Zuñiga, Job and The Reception of Copernicus in Spain , Ometeca. Vol. 1 No. 2 & Vol. 2 No. 1 (1989–1990): pp. 61–68.

Victor Navarro Brotons, The Reception of Copernicus in Sixteenth-Century Spain: The Case of Diego de Zuniga , Isis, Vol. 86, No. 1 (Mar., 1995), pp. 52–78 External links [ edit ] The Birth of Ontology. A selection of Ontologists from 1560 to 1770 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Portugal Netherlands Sweden Vatican Catalonia Academics zbMATH People DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diego_de_Zúñiga&oldid=1234290930 " Categories : Augustinian friars 16th-century Spanish Roman Catholic theologians 1536 births 1597 deaths University of Salamanca alumni 16th-century Spanish philosophers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2024, at 15:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diego de Zúñiga 6 languages Add topic

