Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction of SWB 2 Components of SWB Toggle Components of SWB subsection 2.1 Affect 2.2 Life satisfaction 2.3 Eudaimonia 3 Measurement 4 Theories Toggle Theories subsection 4.1 Top-down perspective 4.2 Bottom-up perspective 5 Factors Toggle Factors subsection 5.1 Personality and genetics 5.2 Social influences 5.3 Social Media 5.4 Family 5.5 Wealth and Income 5.6 Health 5.7 Physical characteristics 5.8 Leisure 5.9 Cultural variations 5.10 Positive psychology 5.11 Nature 6 Use in happiness economics Toggle Use in happiness economics subsection 6.1 Economic factors 6.2 Workplace 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Subjective well-being 10 languages Afrikaans العربية Deutsch Español Français 한국어 עברית 日本語 Polski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Self-reported measure of well-being Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e Personal wellbeing in the UK 2012–13 Subjective well-being ( SWB ) is a concept of well-being (happiness) that focus on evaluations from the perspective of the people who's lives are being evaluated rather than from some objective viewpoint. SWB measures often rely on self-reports, but that does not make them SWB measures. Objective measures of wellbeing are also sometimes measured with self-reports and SWB can also be measured with informant ratings.

[ 1 ] Ed Diener defined SWB in terms of three indicators of subjective well-being: frequent positive affect , infrequent negative affect , and cognitive evaluations such as life satisfaction ." [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] SWB includes two different subjective measures of well-being that are based on different definitions of happiness. Experiences of positive affect (mood, emotions), and experiences of negative affect (mood, emotions) can be used to create a measure of the amount of positive and negative affect in people's lives. These hedonic balance scores measure subjective wellbeing from a hedonistic perspective that define happiness as high PA and low NA. Life-satisfaction is based on a subjective view of happiness. Accordingly, there is no objective way to define happiness and people have to define it for themselves. They then use their own definition of happiness to evaluate their actual.

[ 5 ] Therefore SWB is not a definition of happiness . Rather it is a label for two definitions of happiness, a hedonistic one and a subjective one. Both are based on subjective experiences, but the subjective experiences are different. Hedonism relies on aggregation of momentary affective experiences. Life-satisfaction relies on the recall and evaluation of past experiences.

Although SWB tends to be stable over the time [ 5 ] and is strongly related to personality traits , [ 6 ] the emotional component of SWB can be impacted by situations; for example, the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic , lowered emotional well-being by 74%.

[ 7 ] There is evidence that health and SWB may mutually influence each other, as good health tends to be associated with greater happiness, [ 8 ] and a number of studies have found that positive emotions and optimism can have a beneficial influence on health.

[ 9 ] Construction of SWB [ edit ] Diener argued that the various components of SWB represent distinct constructs that need to be understood separately, even though they are closely related. Hence, SWB may be considered "a general area of scientific interest rather than a single specific construct".

[ 5 ] Due to the specific focus on the subjective aspects of well-being, definitions of SWB typically exclude objective conditions such as material conditions or health , although these can influence ratings of SWB.

[ 1 ] Definitions of SWB therefore focus on how a person evaluates his/her own life, including emotional experiences of pleasure versus pain in response to specific events and cognitive evaluations of what a person considers a good life .

[ 10 ] Components of SWB relating to affect include positive affect (experiencing pleasant emotions and moods) and low negative affect (experiencing unpleasant, distressing emotions and moods), as well as "overall affect" or " hedonic balance", defined as the overall equilibrium between positive and negative affect, and usually measured as the difference between the two.

[ 6 ] High positive affect and low negative affect are often highly correlated, but not always.

[ 10 ] Components of SWB [ edit ] There are three components of SWB: affect (hedonic measures), life satisfaction (cognitive measures), and eudaimonia (a sense of meaning and purpose). Current research recognizes the importance of accurately assessing SWB within a society by focusing on how each component of SWB impacts the individual.

[ 11 ] Affect [ edit ] Affect refers to the emotions, moods, and feelings a person has. These can be all positive, all negative, or a combination of both positive and negative.

[ 12 ] Some research shows also that feelings of reward are separate from positive and negative affect.

[ 13 ] Research also recognizes that when evaluating subjective well-being, approaches to affect can be interchangeable between children and adults.

[ 14 ] Life satisfaction [ edit ] Life satisfaction (global judgments of one's life [ 15 ] ) and satisfaction with specific life domains (e.g. work satisfaction) are considered cognitive components of SWB.

[ 10 ] The term " happiness " is sometimes used in regards to SWB and has been defined variously as "satisfaction of desires and goals" (therefore related to life satisfaction), as a "preponderance of positive over negative affect" (therefore related to emotional components of SWB), [ 1 ] as "contentment", [ 16 ] and as a "consistent, optimistic mood state" [ 6 ] and may imply an affective evaluation of one's life as a whole.

[ 17 ] Life satisfaction can also be known as the "stable" component in one's life.

[ 1 ] Affective concepts of SWB can be considered in terms of momentary emotional states as well as in terms of longer-term moods and tendencies (i.e. how much positive and/or negative affect a person generally experiences over any given period of time).

[ 5 ] Life satisfaction and in some research happiness are typically considered over long durations, up to one's lifetime.

[ 6 ] " Quality of life " has also been studied as a conceptualization of SWB. Although its exact definition varies, it is usually measured as an aggregation of well-being across several life domains and may include both subjective and objective components.

[ 6 ] Eudaimonia [ edit ] Eudaimonic measures seek to quantify traits like virtue and wisdom as well as concepts related to fulfilling our potential such as meaning , purpose , and flourishing . Eudaimonic measures are often regarded as a core component of SWB, particularly in the field of positive psychology . However, it is unclear whether measures of meaning are really measures of wellbeing and little data has been collected on them.

[ 18 ] It is difficult to prove that eudaimonic measures of SWB are reliable, and more research is needed to increase the reliability of research methods which utilize this component of subjective well-being.

[ 11 ] As interdisciplinary research becomes more commonplace, a stronger understanding of previously overlooked eudaimonic experiences may arise from more reliable research methods.

[ 19 ] The importance of assessing an individual’s eudaimonia in understanding their subjective well-being can be seen as early as in research with elementary school students.

[ 14 ] Measurement [ edit ] Life satisfaction and Affect balance are generally measured separately and independently.

[ 20 ] Life satisfaction is generally measured using a self-report method. A common measurement for life satisfaction is questionnaires. In SWB research, evaluating life satisfaction is the most common practice.

[ 11 ] Affective balance is also generally measured using a self-report method. An example of a measurement of affective balance is the PANAS (Positive Affect Negative Affect Schedule).

[ 20 ] Sometimes a single SWB question attempts to capture an overall picture.

[ 21 ] For example, the World Happiness Report uses a Cantril ladder survey, in which respondents are asked to think of a ladder, with the best possible life for them being a 10, and the worst possible life being a 0, and are then asked to rate their own current lives on that 0 to 10 scale.

[ 22 ] The issue with such measurements of life satisfaction and affective balance is that they are self-reports. The problem with self-reports is that the participants may be lying or at least not telling the whole truth on the questionnaires. Participants may be lying or holding back from revealing certain things because they are either embarrassed or they may be filling in what they believe the researcher wants to see in the results. To gain more accurate results, other methods of measurement have been used to determine one's SWB.

Another way to corroborate or confirm that the self-report results are accurate is through informant reports.

[ 20 ] Informant reports are given to the participant's closest friends and family and they are asked to fill out either a survey or a form asking about the participants mood, emotions, and overall lifestyle. The participant may write in the self-report that they are very happy, however that participant's friends and family record that he/she is always depressed. This would obviously be a contradiction in results which would ultimately lead to inaccurate results. Informant reports are found to be ineffective to determine the subjective well-being of children.

[ 14 ] Another method of gaining a better understanding of the true results is through ESM, or the Experience Sampling Method.

[ 20 ] In this measure, participants are given a beeper/pager that will randomly ring throughout the day. Whenever the beeper/pager sounds, the participant will stop what he/she is doing and record the activity they are currently engaged in and their current mood and feelings. Tracking this over a period of a week or a month will give researchers a better understanding of the true emotions, moods, and feelings the participant is experiencing, and how these factors interact with other thoughts and behaviors.

[ 23 ] Measuring an individual's mood over time may also be a reliable indicator of how their SWB is influenced on a day-to-day basis.

[ 24 ] A third measurement to ensure validity is the Day Reconstruction Method.

[ 20 ] In this measure, participants fill out a diary of the previous days’ activities. The participant is then asked to describe each activity and provide a report of how they were feeling, what mood they were experiencing, and any emotions that surfaced. Thus to ensure valid results, a researcher may tend to use self-reports along with another form of measurement mentioned above. Someone with a high level of life satisfaction and a positive affective balance is said to have a high level of SWB.

[ 20 ] The research into the SWB of blue-collar immigrant employees offers an alternative to the self-report method by instead measuring resource loss and gain.

[ 25 ] In research showing how cognitive, affective, or eudemonic components of SWB relate to consumption, it becomes clear that eudemonia needs to be measured differently than affect or cognition when evaluating an individual’s subjective happiness. This research also highlights that an individual’s affect can be used to measure SWB in the short-term, while SWB in the long-term can be measured through the Cantril ladder, life satisfaction, or eudemonia. Research into the relationship between the components of SWB and consumption highlights the positive impact relational and experiential consumption have on an individual’s SWB, while clarifying how materialistic consumption prevents an individual from experiencing those positive effects.

[ 26 ] Research limitations that arise when measuring a person’s affect include a narrow focus only on the short term, while limitations from measuring life satisfaction can be overly broad in the scope of the results.

[ 27 ] Theories [ edit ] Theories of the causes of SWB tend to emphasize either top-down or bottom-up influences.

[ 1 ] Top-down perspective [ edit ] In the top-down view, global features of personality influence the way a person perceives events. Individuals may therefore have a global tendency to perceive life in a consistently positive or negative manner, depending on their stable personality traits.

[ 28 ] Top-down theories of SWB suggest that people have a genetic predisposition to be happy or unhappy and this predisposition determines their SWB "setpoint". Set Point theory implies that a person's baseline or equilibrium level of SWB is a consequence of hereditary characteristics and therefore, almost entirely predetermined at birth.

[ 29 ] Evidence for this genetic predisposition derives from behavior-genetic studies that have found that positive and negative affectivity each have high heritability (40% and 55% respectively in one study).

[ 5 ] Numerous twin studies confirm the notion of set point theory, however, they do not rule out the possibility that is it possible for individuals to experience long term changes in SWB.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Diener et al. note that heritability studies are limited in that they describe long-term SWB in a sample of people in a modern western society but may not be applicable to more extreme environments that might influence SWB and do not provide absolute indicators of genetic effects. Additionally, heritability estimates are inconsistent across studies.

Further evidence for a genetically influenced predisposition to SWB comes from findings that personality has a large influence on long-term SWB. This has led to the dynamic equilibrium model of SWB. This model proposes that personality provides a baseline for emotional responses. External events may move people away from the baseline, sometimes dramatically, but these movements tend to be of limited duration, with most people returning to their baseline eventually.

[ 5 ] Of the conclusions that can be drawn from assessing the development of subjective well-being across one's life span includes the extent to which the set point of SWB can be considered hereditary, which supports the top-down perspective.

[ 27 ] Bottom-up perspective [ edit ] From a bottom-up perspective, happiness is created from happy experiences.

[ 31 ] Bottom-up influences include external events, and broad situational and demographic factors, including health and marital status. Bottom-up approaches are based on the idea that there are universal basic human needs and that happiness results from their fulfilment. In support of this view, there is evidence that daily pleasurable events are associated with increased positive affect, and daily unpleasant events or hassles are associated with increased negative affect.

However, research suggests that external events account for a much smaller proportion of the variance in self-reports of SWB than top-down factors, such as personality.

[ 5 ] A theory proposed to explain the limited impact of external events on SWB is hedonic adaptation.

[ 10 ] Based originally on the concept of a " hedonic treadmill ", this theory proposes that positive or negative external events temporarily increase or decrease feelings of SWB, but as time passes people tend to become habituated to their circumstances and have a tendency to return to a personal SWB "setpoint" or baseline level.

The hedonic treadmill theory originally proposed that most people return to a neutral level of SWB (i.e. neither happy nor unhappy) as they habituate to events. However, subsequent research has shown that for most people, the baseline level of SWB is at least mildly positive, as most people tend to report being at least somewhat happy in general and tend to experience positive mood when no adverse events are occurring. Additional refinements to this theory have shown that people do not adapt to all life events equally, as people tend to adapt rapidly to some events (e.g. imprisonment), slowly to others (e.g. the death of a loved one), and not at all to others (e.g. noise and sex).

[ 10 ] The research behind the development of SWB across one’s life span concludes that despite the impact certain experiences may have on an individual’s subjective well-being their subjective well-being will eventually return to its set point over time, which supports the bottom-up perspective.

[ 27 ] Research describes homeostatically protected mood as the numeric set point where an individual’s SWB will consistently return, supporting the ideas presented by the bottom-up perspective.

[ 32 ] Factors [ edit ] Personality and genetics [ edit ] A number of studies have found that SWB constructs are strongly associated with a range of personality traits, including those in the five factor model .

[ 6 ] [ 17 ] [ 33 ] Findings from numerous personality studies show that genetics account for 20–48% of the variance in the Five-Factor Model and the variance in subjective well-being is also heritable.

[ 34 ] Specifically, neuroticism predicts poorer subjective well-being whilst extraversion , agreeableness , conscientiousness and openness to experience tend to predict higher subjective well-being. A Meta-analyses found that neuroticism, extraversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness were significantly related to all facets of SWB examined (positive, negative, and overall affect; happiness; life satisfaction; and quality of life). Meta-analytic research shows that neuroticism is the strongest predictor of overall SWB and is the strongest predictor of negative affect.

[ 6 ] A large number of personality traits are related to SWB constructs, although intelligence has negligible relationships.

[ 17 ] Positive affect is most strongly predicted by extraversion, to a lesser extent agreeableness, and more weakly by openness to experience. Happiness was most strongly predicted by extraversion, and also strongly predicted by neuroticism, and to a lesser extent by the other three factors. Life satisfaction was significantly predicted by neuroticism, extraversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. Quality of life was very strongly predicted by neuroticism, and also strongly predicted by extraversion and conscientiousness, and to a modest extent by agreeableness and openness to experience.

[ 6 ] One study found that subjective well-being was genetically indistinct from personality traits, especially those that reflected emotional stability (low Neuroticism), and social and physical activity (high Extraversion), and constraint (high Conscientiousness).

[ 35 ] DeNeve (1999) argued that there are three trends in the relationship between personality and SWB. Firstly, SWB is closely tied to traits associated with emotional tendencies ( emotional stability , positive affectivity, and tension). Secondly, relationship enhancing traits (e.g.

trust , affiliation) are important for subjective well-being. Happy people tend to have strong relationships and be good at fostering them. Thirdly, the way people think about and explain events is important for subjective well-being. Appraising events in an optimistic fashion, having a sense of control, and making active coping efforts facilitates subjective well-being. Trust, a trait substantially related to SWB, as opposed to cynicism involves making positive rather than negative attributions about others. Making positive, optimistic attributions rather than negative pessimistic ones facilitates subjective well-being.

[ 28 ] The related trait of eudaimonia or psychological well-being , is also heritable. Evidence from one study supports 5 independent genetic mechanisms underlying the Ryff facets of psychological well-being, leading to a genetic construct of eudaimonia in terms of general self-control , and four subsidiary biological mechanisms enabling the psychological capabilities of purpose, agency, growth, and positive social relations.

[ 36 ] In research assessing the relationship between health and SWB, psychological well-being emerges as the most inclusive terminology despite the determination of eudaimonia to be outside its scope.

[ 24 ] Autonomy is identified as one of the six factors that determine an individual’s psychological well-being. Research shows the close relationship that autonomy and eudaimonia have with self-determination theory , which identifies autonomy as a basic human need.

[ 37 ] Social influences [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2012 ) See also: Social determinants of mental health , Social determinants of health in poverty , and Social determinants of health A person's level of subjective well-being is determined by many different factors and social influences prove to be a strong one. Results from the famous Framingham Heart Study indicate that friends three degrees of separation away (that is, friends of friends of friends) can affect a person's happiness. From abstract: "A friend who lives within a mile (about 1.6 km) and who becomes happy increases the probability that a person is happy by 25%." [ 38 ] Quality of social connections has a much stronger effect on SWB than the quantity of those connections.

[ 39 ] Those with fewer but more intimate social contacts report higher levels of SWB than those who have many contacts but lower quality of connections.

One's level of perceived support plays a role in predicting SWB.

[ 40 ] Those who believe to have a strong support group tend to have higher levels of SWB than those who do not. High levels of negative affect has also been correlated with low perceived social support. Frequent, high quality social interactions coupled with perceived social support will contribute greatly to the SWB a person experiences. Research has consistently shown that social influences are a key mechanism in supporting the homeostasis of one's SWB, as these influences provide the individual with an immediate positive response to whatever situation they may be facing.

[ 32 ] By evaluating the research behind the experiences of blue-collar immigrant employees, it becomes clear that social influences have a direct impact on a person’s SWB.

[ 25 ] When looking beyond the aesthetic aspect of relational consumption, the strong relationship that social influence has with SWB also becomes clear.

[ 26 ] Research into the effect of social support on SWB shows that the social influence of family strongly impacts an individual’s SWB, while the social influence of a friend has little to no impact on their SWB. Other research has concluded that SWB is directly related to social influence but does not reliably measure the cause-and-effect relationship between the two, creating the need for future research.

[ 41 ] Social Media [ edit ] Social media often leads to comparison. When people compare their life experiences with those seen on social media (which are primarily good, happy, or exciting experiences), those people experience a decrease in their quality of life. Fan Xiaojun et al. point out that, because self-presentation on social media is very common, viewers of those pages can experience chronic pressure, leading to overall lower SWB.

[ 42 ] Social media increases the effects that relational and experiential consumption have on an individual’s overall SWB.

[ 26 ] The digital footprint left by an individual's social media use can be exploited to assess the SWB of an entire population. Because of the challenges associated with assessing a self-reporting questionnaire from everyone in a population, an opportunity for Twitter to satisfy this need was created by providing a method of collecting large-scale public data that reflects everyone’s reaction to their experiences within a population. Research highlights that the challenges associated with using word-level methods to assess subjective well-being can be overcome by utilizing data-driven methods to evaluate Twitter data and proves that the utilization of these methods can reliably predict future health and economic results.

[ 43 ] Family [ edit ] Research has not demonstrated that there are significant differences in subjective well-being between childless couples and couples with children. A research study by Pollmann-Schult (2014) found that when holding finances and time costs constant, parents are happier and show increased life satisfaction than non-parents.

[ 44 ] Research has found that unhappy married couples are at 3–25 times the risk of developing clinical depression.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Well-being within a family is determined by the relationship between their available resources and the family’s demands. The research behind the relationship SWB has with family dynamics shows that future research needs to incorporate the baseline level at which family dynamics positively influence the SWB and development of adolescents as they prepare to enter society as adults. A positive correlation between an adolescent’s SWB and the dynamics within their family is also reflected in research, supporting the idea that an adolescent’s SWB depends on their experience with family dynamics.

[ 48 ] Through examining research highlighting the complexity of gender experiences between countries, it becomes clear that almost all societies on the planet are constructed in a way that favors boys over girls. Girls are more concerned by their satisfaction with self, their satisfaction with peers, and their satisfaction with family, while boys are more concerned by their satisfaction with their performance in school or other objective measures.

[ 49 ] Wealth and Income [ edit ] Research indicates that wealth is related to many positive outcomes in life.

[ 50 ] Such outcomes include: improved health and mental health, [ 51 ] greater longevity, [ 52 ] lower rates of infant mortality, [ 53 ] experience fewer stressful life events, [ 54 ] and less frequently the victims of violent crimes [ 55 ] However, research suggests that wealth has a smaller impact on SWB than people generally think, even though higher incomes do correlate substantially with life satisfaction reports.

[ 56 ] Research by Professor Shigehiro Oishi and colleagues found that the income-happiness correlation grew stronger as income inequality increases.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Oishi's prior research on income inequality and happiness found that Americans were on average happier in the years with less national income inequality than in the years with more national income inequality.

[ 59 ] Moreover, nations with more progressive taxation on income had higher levels of subjective well-being (Oishi, Schimmack, & Diener, 2011).

[ 60 ] The relative influence of wealth together with other material components on overall subjective well-being of a person is being studied through new research. The Well-being Project at Human Science Lab investigates how material well-being and perceptual well-being works as relative determinants in conditioning our mind for positive emotions .

[ 61 ] In a study done by Aknin, Norton, & Dunn (2009), researchers asked participants from across the income spectrum to report their own happiness and to predict the happiness of others and themselves at different income levels.

[ 62 ] In study 1, predicted happiness ranged between 2.4 and 7.9, and actual happiness ranged between 5.2 and 7.7. In study 2, predicted happiness ranged between 15–80 and actual happiness ranged between 50 and 80. These findings show that people believe that money does more for happiness than it really does. However, some research indicates that while socioeconomic measures of status do not correspond to greater happiness, measures of sociometric status (status compared to people encountered face-to-face on a daily basis) do correlate to increased subjective well-being, above and beyond the effects of extroversion and other factors.

[ 63 ] The Easterlin Paradox also suggests that there is no connection between a society's economic development and its average level of happiness . Through time, the Easterlin has looked at the relationship between happiness and gross domestic product (GDP) across countries and within countries. There are three different phenomena to look at when examining the connection between money and Subjective well-being; rising GDP within a country, relative income within a country, and differences in GDP between countries.

[ 64 ] More specifically, when making comparisons between countries, a principle called the Diminishing Marginal Utility of Income (DMUI) stands strong. Veenhoven (1991) said, "[W]e not only see a clear positive relationship [between happiness and GNP per capita], but also a curvilinear pattern; which suggest that wealth is subject to a law of diminishing happiness returns." [ 65 ] Meaning a $1,000 increase in real income, becomes progressively smaller the higher the initial level of income, having less of an impact on subjective well-being. Easterlin (1995) proved that the DMUI is true when comparing countries, but not when looking at rising gross domestic product within countries.

[ 66 ] Health [ edit ] There are substantial positive associations between health and SWB so that people who rate their general health as "good" or "excellent" tend to experience better SWB compared to those who rate their health as "fair" or "poor". A meta-analysis found that self-ratings of general health were more strongly related to SWB than physician ratings of health.

[ 8 ] The relationship between health and SWB may be bidirectional. There is evidence that good subjective well-being contributes to better health.

[ 9 ] A review of longitudinal studies found [ 12 ] that measures of baseline subjective well-being constructs such as optimism and positive affect predicted longer-term health status and mortality. Conversely, a number of studies found that baseline depression predicted poorer longer-term health status and mortality. Baseline health may well have a causal influence on subjective well-being so causality is difficult to establish.
A number of studies found that positive emotions and optimism had a beneficial impact on cardiovascular health and on immune functioning. Changes in mood are also known to be associated with changes in immune and cardiovascular response.
There is evidence that interventions that are successful in improving subjective well-being can have beneficial effects on aspects of health. For example, meditation and relaxation training have been found to increase positive affect and to reduce blood pressure. The effect of specific types of subjective well-being is not entirely clear. For example, how durable the effects of mood and emotions on health are remains unclear. Whether some types of subjective well-being predict health independently of others is also unclear.

[ 9 ] Meditation has the power to increase happiness because it can improve self-confidence and reduces anxiety, which increases your well-being.

[ 67 ] Cultivating personal strengths and resources, like humour, social/animal company, and daily occupations, also appears to help people preserve acceptable levels of SWB despite the presence of symptoms of depression, anxiety, and stress.

[ 68 ] Research suggests that probing a patient's happiness is one of the most important things a doctor can do to predict that patient's health and longevity.

[ 12 ] In health-conscious modern societies, most people overlook the emotions as a vital component of one's health, while over focusing on diet and exercise. According to Diener & Biswas-Diener, people who are happy become less sick than people who are unhappy. There are three types of health: morbidity, survival, and longevity.

[ 12 ] Evidence suggests that all three can be improved through happiness: Morbidity, simply put, is whether or not someone develops a serious illness, such as the flu or cancer.

[ 12 ] In a 30-year longitudinal study, participants who were high in positive emotions were found to have lower rates of many health problems. Some of these illnesses/problems include lower death rates from heart disease, suicide, accidents, homicides, mental illnesses, drug dependency, and liver disease related to alcoholism. Additionally, results showed that depressed participants were more likely to have heart attacks and recurrences of heart attacks when compared to happy people.

Survival is the term used for what happens to a person after he/she has already developed or contracted a serious illness.

[ 12 ] Although happiness has been shown to increase health, with survival, this may not be the case. Survival may be the only area of health that evidence suggests happiness may actually be sometimes detrimental. It is unclear why exactly research results suggest this is the case, however Diener & Biswas-Diener offer an explanation. It is possible that happy people fail to report symptoms of the illness, which can ultimately lead to no treatment or inadequate treatment. Another possible reason may be that happy people tend to be optimistic, leading them to take their symptoms too lightly, seek treatment too late, and/or follow the doctor's instructions half-heartedly. And lastly, Diener & Biswas-Diener suggest that people with serious illnesses may be more likely to choose to live out the rest of their days without painful or invasive treatments.

[ 12 ] Longevity, the third area of health, is measured by an individual's age of death.

[ 12 ] Head researcher Deborah Danner of the University of Kentucky researched links between an individual's happiness and that individual's longevity. Danner recruited 180 Catholic nuns from a nearby convent as the participants of her study. She chose nuns because they live very similar lives. This eliminates many confounding variables that might be present in other samples, which can lead to inaccurate results. Such confounding variables could include substance use, diet, and sexual risk-taking. Since there are few differences among the nuns as far as the confounding variables, this sample offered the best option to match a controlled laboratory setting. Results showed that nuns who were considered [ by whom?

] happy or positive in their manner and language on average lived 10 years longer than the nuns who were considered unhappy or negative in their manner and language. A follow-up study by health researcher Sarah Pressman examined 96 famous psychologists to determine if similar results from the nun research would be seen as well. Pressman's results showed that the positive or happy psychologists lived, on average, 6 years longer. The psychologists who were considered [ by whom?

] negative or unhappy lived, on average, 5 years less.

[ 12 ] The positive emotions produced by SWB are shown through research to increase longevity over a 28-year period, while also providing a reliable measure of how SWB impacts an individual’s longevity by excluding aging populations that would not have provided an accurate measure of mortality, and by using a more comprehensive view of an individual’s SWB to determine the effect on longevity. The research behind how SWB impacts longevity also establishes a baseline for health within the population and supports other research conclusions which state that an individual’s social network creates a similar relationship with longevity to SWB.

[ 69 ] Physical characteristics [ edit ] A positive relationship has been found between the volume of gray matter in the right precuneus area of the brain, and the subject's subjective happiness score.

[ 70 ] A six-week mindfulness based intervention was found to correlate with a significant gray matter increase within the precuneus.

[ 71 ] Research that examines the relationship between age and subjective well-being shows that peak psychological well-being can be found in an individual’s old age, which also reflects the time in their life when self-discrepancy is least available and accessible to an individual. By understanding what maximizes the utility of an individual’s experiences, an individual can gain the ability to ensure that they age positively. Since this research shows the significant impact goal discrepancies have on an individual’s subjective well-being, it is also implied that managing an individual's goal discrepancies serves as a tool to maintain positive subjective well-being.

[ 72 ] The research behind the effect of leisure activities on SWB comes to the conclusion that SWB decreases in old age, adding that quality of life also begins to decrease for this demographic.

[ 73 ] Leisure [ edit ] There are a number of domains that are thought to contribute to subjective well-being. In a study by Hribernik and Mussap (2010), leisure satisfaction was found to predict unique variance in life satisfaction, supporting its inclusion as a distinct life domain contributing to subjective well-being.

[ 74 ] Additionally, relationship status interacted with age group and gender on differences in leisure satisfaction. The relationship between leisure satisfaction and life satisfaction, however, was reduced when considering the impact of core affect (underlying mood state). This suggests that leisure satisfaction may primarily be influenced by an individual's SWB level as represented by core affect. This has implications for possible limitations in the extent to which leisure satisfaction may be improved beyond pre-existing levels of well-being and mood in individuals. Multiple sources have examined the way that leisure activities can positively impact an individual’s SWB through assessing relational consumption.

[ 26 ] Research shows that regular leisure activities are positively correlated with SWB while the individual’s preferred activity itself may vary between gender and age groups, thus indicating the need for further study around SWB benefits provided by leisure activities in relation to gender and age. One leisure activity that research has shown to benefit both genders and all age groups is leisure activities involving family. Going forward, research examining the effects of adolescent’s engagement in leisure activities over a long period of time may show their long-term effects on an individual's SWB throughout their life.

[ 73 ] Cultural variations [ edit ] See also: Cross-cultural psychology § Differences in subjective well-being Although all cultures seem to value happiness, cultures vary in how they define happiness. There is also evidence that people in more individualistic cultures tend to rate themselves as higher in subjective well-being compared to people in more collectivistic cultures.

[ 75 ] In Western cultures , predictors of happiness include elements that support personal independence, a sense of personal agency, and self-expression. In Eastern cultures , predictors of happiness focus on an interdependent self that is inseparable from significant others. Compared to people in individualistic cultures, people in collectivistic cultures are more likely to base their judgments of life satisfaction on how significant others appraise their life than on the balance of inner emotions experienced as pleasant versus unpleasant. Pleasant emotional experiences have a stronger social component in East Asian cultures compared to Western ones. For example, people in Japan are more likely to associate happiness with interpersonally engaging emotions (such as friendly feelings), whereas people in the United States are more likely to associate happiness with interpersonally disengaging emotions (pride, for example).

[ 75 ] There are also cultural differences in motives and goals associated with happiness. For example, Asian Americans tend to experience greater happiness after achieving goals that are pleasing to or approved of by significant others compared to European Americans. There is also evidence that high self-esteem, a sense of personal control and a consistent sense of identity relate more strongly to SWB in Western cultures than they do in Eastern ones. However, this is not to say that these things are unimportant to SWB in Eastern cultures. Research has found that even within Eastern cultures, people with high self-esteem and a more consistent sense of identity are somewhat happier than those who are low in these characteristics. There is no evidence that low self-esteem and so on [ vague ] are actually beneficial to SWB in any known culture.

[ 75 ] A large body of research evidence has confirmed that people in individualistic societies report higher levels of happiness than people in collectivistic ones and that socioeconomic factors alone are insufficient to explain this difference.

[ 75 ] In addition to political and economic differences, individualistic versus collectivistic nations reliably differ in a variety of psychological characteristics that are related to SWB, such as emotion norms and attitudes to the expression of individual needs. Collectivistic cultures are based around the belief that the individual exists for the benefit of the larger social unit, whereas more individualistic cultures assume the opposite. Collectivistic cultures emphasize maintaining social order and harmony and therefore expect members to suppress their personal desires when necessary in order to promote collective interests. Such cultures therefore consider self-regulation more important than self-expression or than individual rights. Individualistic cultures by contrast emphasize the inalienable value of each person and expect individuals to become self-directive and self-sufficient. Although people in collectivistic cultures may gain happiness from the social approval they receive from suppressing self-interest, research seems to suggest that self-expression produces a greater happiness "payoff" compared to seeking approval outside oneself.

[ 75 ] Despite westerners reporting higher levels of subjective well-being than easterners, they also have more frequent reports of depression.

[ 76 ] The differing beliefs on self-expression help explain what may at first seem paradoxical. Westerners tend to encourage individual expression, which leads to a greater focus on one's own emotions. This increased self-awareness combines with the normative belief that joy should be more common than sadness. People living under these conditions can catastrophize their own negative emotions; feeling increased sadness over the fact that they are either not currently happy or frequently happy.

[ 77 ] Easterners tend to be more concerned about their collective's feelings over their own individual feelings. They do not typically catastrophize their sadness but instead learn to brush it off.

Blue-collar immigrant workers fill a significant gap in the world economy, yet their experiences are often either overlooked or overly generalized, such as research that measures all immigrant's experiences as a single group. Research has shown that the country which a person immigrates to has a significant influence on their experience with SWB. The nature of immigration also leads to immediate resource loss when a person leaves their family and community of origin.

[ 25 ] An individual’s cultural values may ultimately prevent them from seeking a psychological need if it is not supported by those values, highlighting that determining the uniform psychological needs of a population from research requires careful consideration of the population’s cultural variations.

[ 37 ] One conclusion that can be drawn from the research behind the advantages of data-driven methods over word-level methods in assessing SWB of a population is that cultural variations may be overlooked or biases may arise unconsciously from word-level methods, while data-driven methods can accurately account for the socioeconomic implications of language beyond the positive or negative influence of the word.

[ 43 ] Even within cultures, there have been historical variations in concepts of happiness. Using dictionary definitions from 30 different nations, Oishi et al. (2013) found that happiness was most frequently defined as good luck and favorable external conditions. While this was the case as well in the United States, over time, this definition was replaced by definitions focused on favorable internal feeling states.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Positive psychology [ edit ] Positive psychology is particularly concerned with the study of SWB.

[ 10 ] [ 80 ] Positive psychology was founded by Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi (2000) who identified that psychology is not just the study of pathology, weakness, and damage; but it is also the study of strength and virtue.

[ 81 ] Researchers in positive psychology have pointed out that in almost every culture studied the pursuit of happiness is regarded as one of the most valued goals in life.

[ citation needed ] Understanding individual differences in SWB is of key interest in positive psychology, particularly the issue of why some people are happier than others. Some people continue to be happy in the face of adversity whereas others are chronically unhappy at the best of times.

[ 68 ] Positive psychology has investigated how people might improve their level of SWB and maintain these improvements over the longer term, rather than returning to baseline.

[ 80 ] Lyubomirsky (2001) argued that SWB is influenced by a combination of personality/genetics (studies have found that genetic influences usually account for 35–50% of the variance in happiness measures), external circumstances, and activities that affect SWB.

[ 82 ] She argued that changing one's external circumstances tends to have only a temporary effect on SWB, whereas engaging in activities (mental and/or physical) that enhance SWB can lead to more lasting improvements in SWB.

[ 80 ] Research shows that positive psychology can be used to determine the point at which an individual’s SWB is in homeostasis, meaning a reliable baseline can be provided to assess and maintain the SWB of a population.

[ 32 ] By defining a normative range from which to measure SWB, positive psychology is able to identify individuals and groups that may benefit the most from interventions . Research also tells us that when the SWB of a group is initially very low, any intervention will likely be sufficient in providing the resources needed to support the return of their SWB to homeostatic levels.

[ 32 ] Nature [ edit ] The recent interest in subjective well-being components described in literature has led to research into value of urban green spaces . If we continue to include SWB measurements when creating urban spaces, then we will continue to gain a better understanding of how urban planning influences an individual’s experience.

[ 11 ] A better understanding of psychological and medical topics will lead us to seek the benefits that come from improving our relationship with nature as humans. As we deepen our understanding of ourselves and our experience, we must also recognize the value that the environment provides to humans and the value that humans provide to the environment. Research reviews around the SWB benefits associated with cultural economic systems show the need for established universal terminology to allow for the ease of interdisciplinary collaboration.

[ 19 ] Because a person’s relationship with nature can be assessed both objectively and subjectively, it is difficult to measure all of the benefits UGS's provide to the SWB of society.

[ 11 ] Research shows that nature relatedness directly impacts an individual’s SWB. Nature relatedness is defined as our connection as humans to the rest of the universe. Greater nature relatedness in people reflects greater affect and life satisfaction when evaluating the impact of nature relatedness on the components of subjective well-being, and also reflects a strong correlation between nature relatedness and eudaimonic perspectives when environmental attitudes are part of the control group.

[ 83 ] According to Sonja Lyubomirsky , the determinants of happiness are a combination of a person's genetic set-point, intentional activities and life circumstances.

[ 84 ] Use in happiness economics [ edit ] See also: Happiness economics SWB is often used in appraising the wellbeing of populations.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Economic factors [ edit ] Economic systems theory offers a baseline for various disciplines to determine value.

[ 19 ] Macroeconomics infers a positive correlation between gross domestic product and national income with citizen’s individual welfare.

[ 26 ] Current research into objective macroeconomic influences can be used to evaluate society and inform public policy by inferring SWB expectations for the future. Even when focusing on the internal components of an individual’s happiness, it is still clear that macroeconomic factors positively influence SWB while providing a reliable source of measurement to determine an individual’s experience in society.

Shared Socioeconomic Pathways have emerged from the research behind the relationship between SWB and the macroeconomic factors which coincide with an individual’s life-satisfaction. The SSP’s developed by this research have pushed the interdisciplinary boundaries by using data from both past experiences and future expectations to address climate change issues. The discipline may also continue to grow through the development of scenarios which measure both social support and freedom of choice , and by using Sustainable Development Goals to implement another long-term scenario supported by the concept that SWB is a static factor. The goal of welfare research is to quantify the social welfare function , a process that has been propelled forward by the increased accessibility of SWB data. Early welfare literature highlights social choice theory as the methodology behind collectively conveying the experience of the individual to express the social welfare function. Despite the many variables accounted for in this research, the conclusion that socio-economic development will strongly influence the SWB of the population remains constant and clear.

[ 87 ] Microeconomics infers that an individual maximizes the utility of their resources through consumption. Microeconomic theory overlooks the value saving can have on an individual's experience, and also directly influenced the thinking behind researching the relationship between SWB and consumption.

[ 26 ] Workplace [ edit ] SWB in the workplace increases productivity and the meaning people make through their work. Many factors can affect SWB in the workplace. One of the bigger factors is negative gossip. A study from Xiamen University found that negative gossip is highly correlated with low levels of SWB. To combat this issue, Cheng et al. suggest offering support to employees who feel psychological distress and help the staff increase their emotional intelligence .

When a person has high levels of SWB in the workplace, that person is often more productive.

[ 88 ] SWB helps employees to feel less burned out, leading to higher productivity and more desire or willingness to work extra hours. Many people consider SWB, in the workplace specifically, as a necessary condition for happiness.

[ 89 ] In other words, these people are saying that, if they do not feel SWB in the workplace, they will not feel happiness in life.

Employee's SWB has not only lead to higher profits, but also higher customer loyalty and lower turnover.

[ 90 ] Prioritizing the SWB of the employees benefits all aspects of an organization.

See also [ edit ] Canadian Index of Wellbeing Personality psychology Flow Lived experience Religion and happiness Reasonable person model (RPM) Well-being contributing factors References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Diener, Ed (1984). "Subjective well-being".

Psychological Bulletin .

95 (3): 542– 575.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.95.3.542 .

PMID 6399758 .

^ Tov & Diener (2013), Subjective Well-Being . Research Collection School of Social Sciences. Paper 1395.

https://ink.library.smu.edu.sg/soss_research/1395/ Archived 2020-12-02 at the Wayback Machine ^ Busseri, Michael A.; Sadava, Stan W. (2011).

"A Review of the Tripartite Structure of Subjective Well-Being: Implications for Conceptualization, Operationalization, Analysis, and Synthesis" .

Personality and Social Psychology Review .

15 (3): 290– 314.

doi : 10.1177/1088868310391271 .

PMID 21131431 .

S2CID 36921423 .

^ Lopez, Shane J.; Snyder, C. R. (2011-10-13).

The Oxford Handbook of Positive Psychology . OUP USA.

ISBN 978-0-19-986216-0 .

Archived from the original on 2022-09-09 . Retrieved 2022-03-11 .

^ a b c d e f g Diener, Ed; Suh, E.M.; Lucas, R.E.; Smith, H.L (1999).

"Subjective well-being: Three Decades of Progress" (PDF) .

Psychological Bulletin .

125 (2): 276– 302.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.125.2.276 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-03-29 . Retrieved 2015-04-05 .

^ a b c d e f g h Steel, Piers; Schmidt, Joseph; Shultz, Jonas (2008).

"Refining the relationship between personality and Subjective well-being" (PDF) .

Psychological Bulletin .

134 (1): 138– 161.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.134.1.138 .

hdl : 1880/47915 .

PMID 18193998 . Archived from the original on 2019-01-31 . Retrieved 2011-12-18 .

^ Yang, Haiyang; Ma, Jingjing (2020-07-01).

"How an Epidemic Outbreak Impacts Happiness: Factors that Worsen (vs. Protect) Emotional Well-being during the Coronavirus Pandemic" .

Psychiatry Research .

289 113045.

doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113045 .

ISSN 0165-1781 .

PMC 7190485 .

PMID 32388418 .

^ a b Okun, M. A.; Stock, W. A.; Haring, M. J.; Witter, R. A. (1984). "Health and subjective well-being: a meta-analysis".

The International Journal of Aging & Human Development .

19 (2): 111– 132.

doi : 10.2190/QGJN-0N81-5957-HAQD .

PMID 6519817 .

S2CID 46145827 .

^ a b c Diener, E.; Chan, M.Y. (2011). "Happy People Live Longer: Subjective Well-Being Contributes to Health and Longevity".

Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being .

3 (1): 1– 43.

doi : 10.1111/j.1758-0854.2010.01045.x .

S2CID 13490264 .

^ a b c d e f Diener, Ed (2000).

"Subjective well-being: The Science of Happiness and a Proposal for a National Index" (PDF) .

American Psychologist .

55 (1): 34– 43.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.34 .

PMID 11392863 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2015-04-05 .

^ a b c d e Papastergiou, Elli; Latinopoulos, Dionysis; Evdou, Myrto; Kalogeresis, Athanasios (March 2023).

"Exploring Associations between Subjective Well-Being and Non-Market Values When Used in the Evaluation of Urban Green Spaces: A Scoping Review" .

Land .

12 (3): 700.

Bibcode : 2023Land...12..700P .

doi : 10.3390/land12030700 .

ISSN 2073-445X .

^ a b c d e f g h i Diener, Ed (2008).

Happiness: unlocking the mysteries of psychological wealth . Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub.

ISBN 9781405146616 .

^ White, M; Dolan, P (2009). "Accounting for the richness of our daily activities".

Psychological Science .

20 (8): 1000– 1008.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02392.x .

PMID 19549079 .

S2CID 36494752 .

^ a b c Steinmayr, Ricarda; Paschke, Patrick; Wirthwein, Linda (2022-08-01).

"Elementary School Students' Subjective Well-Being Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Longitudinal Study" .

Journal of Happiness Studies .

23 (6): 2985– 3005.

doi : 10.1007/s10902-022-00537-y .

ISSN 1573-7780 .

PMC 9091542 .

PMID 35571581 .

^ Daniel Kahneman has said that "Life satisfaction is connected to a large degree to social yardsticks–achieving goals, meeting expectations." https://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium.MAGAZINE-why-nobel-prize-winner-daniel-kahneman-gave-up-on-happiness-1.6528513 Archived 2018-10-08 at the Wayback Machine https://qz.com/1503207/a-nobel-prize-winning-psychologist-defines-happiness-versus-satisfaction/ Archived 2021-04-17 at the Wayback Machine ^ Graham, Michael C. (2014).

Facts of Life: ten issues of contentment . Outskirts Press.

ISBN 978-1-4787-2259-5 .

^ a b c DeNeve, Kristina M.; Cooper, Harris (1998).

"The Happy Personality: A Meta-Analysis of 137 Personality Traits and Subjective Well-Being" (PDF) .

Psychological Bulletin .

124 (2): 197– 229.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.124.2.197 .

PMID 9747186 . Archived from the original on 2018-12-23 . Retrieved 2014-04-26 .

^ Institute, Happier Lives.

"Key Ideas" .

Happier Lives Institute .

Archived from the original on 2022-07-13 . Retrieved 2022-07-14 .

^ a b c Nowak-Olejnik, Agnieszka; Schirpke, Uta; Tappeiner, Ulrike (2022-10-01).

"A systematic review on subjective well-being benefits associated with cultural ecosystem services" .

Ecosystem Services .

57 101467.

Bibcode : 2022EcoSv..5701467N .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecoser.2022.101467 .

ISSN 2212-0416 .

S2CID 251460081 .

^ a b c d e f Albuquerque, Brian (2010-01-16).

"Subjective Well-Being" . Positive Psychology UK.

Archived from the original on 2016-11-07 . Retrieved 30 November 2012 .

^ See e.g. " The most basic way of measuring it involves asking individuals how they feel about their lives - known as subjective well being. A typical question is, "Taking all things together, how happy are you?" - with possible answers from 0 (extremely unhappy) to 10 (extremely happy).

" Can Happiness be Measured?, http://www.actionforhappiness.org/why-happiness Archived 2018-10-18 at the Wayback Machine ^ "FAQ" .

Archived from the original on 2018-12-31 . Retrieved 2019-01-27 .

^ van der Krieke et al., L. (2015).

"HowNutsAreTheDutch (HoeGekIsNL): A crowdsourcing study of mental symptoms and strengths" (PDF) .

International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research .

25 (2): 123– 44.

doi : 10.1002/mpr.1495 .

hdl : 11370/060326b0-0c6a-4df3-94cf-3468f2b2dbd6 .

PMC 6877205 .

PMID 26395198 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-08-02 . Retrieved 2019-08-08 .

^ a b Diener, Ed; Pressman, Sarah D.; Hunter, John; Delgadillo-Chase, Desiree (July 2017).

"If, Why, and When Subjective Well-Being Influences Health, and Future Needed Research" .

Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being .

9 (2): 133– 167.

doi : 10.1111/aphw.12090 .

ISSN 1758-0846 .

PMID 28707767 .

S2CID 4801892 .

^ a b c Shirmohammadi, Melika; Beigi, Mina; Richardson, Julia (2023-03-01).

"Subjective well-being among blue-collar immigrant employees: A systematic literature review" .

Human Resource Management Review .

33 (1): 100914.

doi : 10.1016/j.hrmr.2022.100914 .

ISSN 1053-4822 .

S2CID 248488657 .

^ a b c d e f Tsurumi, Tetsuya; Yamaguchi, Rintaro; Kagohashi, Kazuki; Managi, Shunsuke (2021-08-01).

"Are Cognitive, Affective, and Eudaimonic Dimensions of Subjective Well-Being Differently Related to Consumption? Evidence from Japan" .

Journal of Happiness Studies .

22 (6): 2499– 2522.

doi : 10.1007/s10902-020-00327-4 .

ISSN 1573-7780 .

S2CID 228969305 .

^ a b c Buecker, Susanne; Luhmann, Maike; Haehner, Peter; Bühler, Janina Larissa; Dapp, Laura C.; Luciano, Eva C.; Orth, Ulrich (2023).

"The development of subjective well-being across the life span: A meta-analytic review of longitudinal studies" .

Psychological Bulletin .

149 ( 7– 8): 418– 446.

doi : 10.1037/bul0000401 .

S2CID 261649973 . Retrieved 2023-10-05 .

^ a b DeNeve, Kristina M. (1999). "Happy as an Extraverted Clam? The Role of Personality for Subjective Well-Being".

Current Directions in Psychological Science .

8 (5): 141– 144.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8721.00033 .

S2CID 142992658 .

^ a b Lykken, David; Tellegen (1996).

"Happiness Is a Stochastic Phenomenon" (PDF) .

Psychological Science .

7 (3): 186– 189.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.613.4004 .

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9280.1996.tb00355.x .

S2CID 16870174 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-07 . Retrieved 2015-04-05 .

^ McGue, Matt; Bacon, Steve; Lykken, David (1993).

"Personality stability and change in early adulthood: A behavioral genetic analysis" (PDF) .

Developmental Psychology .

29 (1): 96– 109.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.29.1.96 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-05-24 . Retrieved 2012-05-07 .

^ Schimmack, Ulrich (2020-11-15).

"Comparing Top-Down and Bottom-Up Models of Subjective Well-Being" .

Replicability-Index .

Archived from the original on 2021-10-02 . Retrieved 2021-10-02 .

^ a b c d Cummins, Robert A. (2013), Efklides, Anastasia; Moraitou, Despina (eds.), "Positive Psychology and Subjective Well-Being Homeostasis: A Critical Examination of Congruence" , A Positive Psychology Perspective on Quality of Life , Social Indicators Research Series, vol. 51, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

67– 86, doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-4963-4_5 , ISBN 978-94-007-4963-4 , retrieved 2023-10-05 ^ Anglim, Jeromy; Horwood, Sharon; Smillie, Luke D.; Marrero, Rosario J.; Wood, Joshua K. (April 2020).

"Predicting psychological and subjective well-being from personality: A meta-analysis" .

Psychological Bulletin .

146 (4): 279– 323.

doi : 10.1037/bul0000226 .

ISSN 1939-1455 .

PMID 31944795 .

S2CID 210698453 .

^ Bouchard, Thomas J. Jr.; Loehlin, J.C. (2001). "Genes, evolution, and personality".

Behavior Genetics .

31 (3): 243– 273.

doi : 10.1023/A:1012294324713 .

PMID 11699599 .

S2CID 26017318 .

^ Weiss, A.; Bates, T. C.; Luciano, M. (2008).

"Happiness is a personal(ity) thing: The genetics of personality and well-being in a representative sample" (PDF) .

Psychological Science .

19 (3): 205– 210.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02068.x .

hdl : 20.500.11820/a343050c-5c67-4314-b859-09c56aa10d3b .

PMID 18315789 .

S2CID 13081589 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-05-24 . Retrieved 2019-03-15 .

^ Archontaki, Despina; Lewis, Gary J.; Bates, Timothy C. (5 February 2013). "Genetic Influences on Psychological Well-Being: A Nationally Representative Twin Study".

Journal of Personality .

81 (2). Wiley: 221– 230.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-6494.2012.00787.x .

ISSN 0022-3506 .

PMID 22432931 .

^ a b Deci, Edward L.; Ryan, Richard M. (2008-01-01).

"Hedonia, eudaimonia, and well-being: an introduction" .

Journal of Happiness Studies .

9 (1): 1– 11.

doi : 10.1007/s10902-006-9018-1 .

ISSN 1573-7780 .

S2CID 145367475 .

^ Fowler, J. H; Christakis, N. A (4 December 2008).

"Dynamic spread of happiness in a large social network: longitudinal analysis over 20 years in the Framingham Heart Study" .

BMJ .

337 (dec04 2): a2338.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.a2338 .

PMC 2600606 .

PMID 19056788 .

^ Pinquart, Martin; Sörensen, Silvia (2000).

"Influences of socioeconomic status, social network, and competence on subjective well-being in later life: A meta-analysis" .

Psychology and Aging .

15 (2): 187– 224.

doi : 10.1037/0882-7974.15.2.187 .

PMID 10879576 .

^ Siedlecki, Karen L.; Salthouse, Timothy A.; Oishi, Shigehiro; Jeswani, Sheena (2014-06-01).

"The Relationship Between Social Support and Subjective Well-Being Across Age" .

Social Indicators Research .

117 (2): 561– 576.

doi : 10.1007/s11205-013-0361-4 .

ISSN 0303-8300 .

PMC 4102493 .

PMID 25045200 .

^ Gülaçtı, Fikret (2010-01-01).

"The effect of perceived social support on subjective well-being" .

Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences . Innovation and Creativity in Education.

2 (2): 3844– 3849.

doi : 10.1016/j.sbspro.2010.03.602 .

ISSN 1877-0428 .

^ Fan, Xiaojun; Deng, Nianqi; Dong, Xuebing; Lin, Yangxi; Wang, Junbin (2019-08-01).

"Do others' self-presentation on social media influence individual's subjective well-being? A moderated mediation model" .

Telematics and Informatics .

41 : 86– 102.

doi : 10.1016/j.tele.2019.04.001 .

ISSN 0736-5853 .

S2CID 133134097 .

^ a b Jaidka, Kokil; Giorgi, Salvatore; Schwartz, H. Andrew; Kern, Margaret L.; Ungar, Lyle H.; Eichstaedt, Johannes C. (2020-05-12).

"Estimating geographic subjective well-being from Twitter: A comparison of dictionary and data-driven language methods" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

117 (19): 10165– 10171.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..11710165J .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1906364117 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 7229753 .

PMID 32341156 .

^ Pollmann-Schult, Matthias (2014). "Parenthood and Life Satisfaction: Why Don't Children Make People Happy?".

Journal of Marriage and Family .

76 (2): 319– 336.

doi : 10.1111/jomf.12095 .

ISSN 0022-2445 .

^ Tatiana D. Gray, Matt Hawrilenko, and James V. Cordova (2019).

"Randomized Controlled Trial of the Marriage Checkup: Depression Outcomes" (PDF) .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Fink, Brandi C.; Shapiro, Alyson F. (March 2013).

"Coping Mediates the Association Between Marital Instability and Depression, but Not Marital Satisfaction and Depression" .

Couple & Family Psychology .

2 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1037/a0031763 .

ISSN 2160-4096 .

PMC 4096140 .

PMID 25032063 .

^ Maria R. Goldfarb & Gilles Trudel (2019).

"Marital quality and depression: a review" .

Marriage & Family Review .

55 (8): 737– 763.

doi : 10.1080/01494929.2019.1610136 .

S2CID 165116052 .

^ Rask, Katja; Åstedt-Kurki, Päivi; Paavilainen, Eija; Laippala, Pekka (June 2003).

"Adolescent subjective well-being and family dynamics: Adolescent subjective well-being and family dynamics" .

Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences .

17 (2): 129– 138.

doi : 10.1046/j.0283-9318.2002.00118.x .

^ Bradshaw, Jonathan; Keung, Antonia; Rees, Gwyther; Goswami, Haridhan (2011-04-01).

"Children's subjective well-being: International comparative perspectives" .

Children and Youth Services Review . Child Inclusive Research, Policy and Practice.

33 (4): 548– 556.

doi : 10.1016/j.childyouth.2010.05.010 .

ISSN 0190-7409 .

^ Furnham & Argyle (1998).

The psychology of money . Psychology Press.

^ Langner & Michael (1963).

Life stress and mental health: The Midtown Manhattan study . Free Press of Glencoe (New York).

^ Wilkinson (1996).

Unhealthy societies: the afflictions of inequality .

^ Smith, T; Eikeseth; Klevstrand; Lovaas (1997). "Intensive behavioral treatment for preschoolers with severe mental retardation and pervasive developmental disorder".

American Journal on Mental Retardation .

102 (3): 238– 249.

doi : 10.1352/0895-8017(1997)102<0238:IBTFPW>2.0.CO;2 .

PMID 9394133 .

^ Wilson, RM; Runciman, WB; Gibberd, RW; Harrison, BT; Newby, L; Hamilton, JD. (1995).

"The quality in Australian health care study" .

Med J Aust .

163 (9): 458– 471.

doi : 10.5694/j.1326-5377.1995.tb124691.x .

PMID 7476634 .

^ Mayer, J. D. & Salovey, P. (1997). What is emotional intelligence? In P. Salovey & D. Sluyter (Eds). Emotional Development and Emotional Intelligence: Implications for Educators (pp. 3–31). New York: Basic Books.

^ Aknin, Lara B.

; Norton, Dunn (2009). "From wealth to well-being? Money matters, but less than people think".

The Journal of Positive Psychology .

4 (6): 523– 527.

doi : 10.1080/17439760903271421 .

S2CID 9911004 .

^ Beck, Julie (2016-04-07).

"The Countries With the Most Happiness Inequality" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 2025-04-22 .

^ Oishi, Shigehiro; Cha, Youngjae; Komiya, Asuka; Ono, Hiroshi (2022-11-01).

"Money and happiness: the income–happiness correlation is higher when income inequality is higher" .

PNAS Nexus .

1 (5): pgac224.

doi : 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac224 .

ISSN 2752-6542 .

PMC 9802463 .

PMID 36712361 .

^ Vedantam, Shankar (September 15, 2015).

"The Economics Of Happiness And A Country's Income Inequality" .

NPR .

^ "A Wealth Tax Could Deliver a Happiness Dividend" .

Bloomberg.com . 2019-10-27 . Retrieved 2024-12-28 .

^ "Understanding Positive Emotions" . Human Science Lab.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2017 . Retrieved 23 February 2017 .

^ Norton, M.I., Dunn, E.W., & *Aknin, L.B. (2009). From wealth to well-being: Spending money on others promotes happiness. Invited talk at the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Tampa, FL ^ Anderson, C.; Kraus, M. W.; Galinsky, A. D.; Keltner, D. (31 May 2012). "The Local-Ladder Effect: Social Status and Subjective Well-Being".

Psychological Science .

23 (7): 764– 771.

doi : 10.1177/0956797611434537 .

PMID 22653798 .

S2CID 8406753 .

^ Easterlin, Richard A., 1973, Does Money Buy Happiness? The Public Interest, 30 (Winter), 3-10 ^ Veenhoven, Ruut (1991).

"Is Happiness Relative?" .

Social Indicators Research .

24 (1): 1– 34.

doi : 10.1007/bf00292648 .

hdl : 1765/16148 .

S2CID 18774960 .

Archived from the original on 2019-04-10 . Retrieved 2018-09-18 .

^ Easterlin, Richard A. (1995). "Will Raising the Incomes of All Increase the Happiness of All?".

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization .

27 (1): 35– 48.

doi : 10.1016/0167-2681(95)00003-b .

S2CID 10132706 .

^ Jones, Howard (1953).

The Pursuit of Happiness . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p.

140 .

^ a b Bos, E.H.; Snippe, E.; de Jonge, P.; Jeronimus, B.F. (2016).

"Preserving Subjective Wellbeing in the Face of Psychopathology: Buffering Effects of Personal Strengths and Resources" .

PLOS ONE .

11 (3): e0150867.

Bibcode : 2016PLoSO..1150867B .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0150867 .

PMC 4786317 .

PMID 26963923 .

^ Xu, Jingping; Roberts, Robert E. (2010).

"The power of positive emotions: It's a matter of life or death—Subjective well-being and longevity over 28 years in a general population" .

Health Psychology .

29 (1): 9– 19.

doi : 10.1037/a0016767 .

ISSN 1930-7810 .

PMID 20063931 .

^ Sato, Wataru; Kochiyama, Takanori; Uono, Shota; Kubota, Yasutaka; Sawada, Reiko; Yoshimura, Sayaka; Toichi, Motomi (2015).

"The structural neural substrate of subjective happiness" .

Scientific Reports .

5 (1): 16891.

Bibcode : 2015NatSR...516891S .

doi : 10.1038/srep16891 .

PMC 4653620 .

PMID 26586449 .

^ Kurth, F; Luders, E; Wu, B; Black, DS (2014).

"Brain Gray Matter Changes Associated with Mindfulness Meditation in Older Adults: An Exploratory Pilot Study using Voxel-based Morphometry" .

Neuro .

1 (1): 23– 26.

doi : 10.17140/NOJ-1-106 .

PMC 4306280 .

PMID 25632405 .

^ Cheng, Sheung-Tak (2004).

"Age and Subjective Well-Being Revisited: A Discrepancy Perspective" .

Psychology and Aging .

19 (3): 409– 415.

doi : 10.1037/0882-7974.19.3.409 .

ISSN 1939-1498 .

PMID 15382992 .

^ a b Brajša-Žganec, Andreja; Merkaš, Marina; Šverko, Iva (May 2011).

"Quality of Life and Leisure Activities: How do Leisure Activities Contribute to Subjective Well-Being?" .

Social Indicators Research .

102 (1): 81– 91.

doi : 10.1007/s11205-010-9724-2 .

ISSN 0303-8300 .

S2CID 143891798 .

^ Hribernik, J.; Mussap, A. J. (2010). "Research note: Leisure satisfaction and subjective well-being".

Annals of Leisure Research .

13 (4): 701– 708.

doi : 10.1080/11745398.2010.9686871 .

S2CID 144505334 .

^ a b c d e Suh, E.M.; Koo, J. (2008). "Comparing subjective well-being across cultures and nations: the "what" and "why" questions". In Michael Eid & Randy J. Larsen (ed.).

The Science of Subjective Well-Being . New York: Guildford Press. pp.

414 –430.

ISBN 978-1-59385-581-9 .

^ "East-West Cultural Differences in Depression | Psychology Today" .

Psychology Today .

Archived from the original on 2022-09-09 . Retrieved 2021-11-20 .

^ Bastian, Brock (August 2017).

"So many in the West are depressed because they're expected not to be" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 2021-11-21 . Retrieved 2021-11-21 .

^ Boyd, Krys (2025-02-04).

"The best life may not be the most comfortable" .

NPR KERA . Retrieved 2025-04-22 .

^ Oishi, Shigehiro; Graham, Jesse; Kesebir, Selin; Galinha, Iolanda Costa (2013-05-01).

"Concepts of Happiness Across Time and Cultures" .

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin .

39 (5): 559– 577.

doi : 10.1177/0146167213480042 .

hdl : 11144/1836 .

ISSN 0146-1672 .

PMID 23599280 .

^ a b c Lyubomirsky, Sonja (2001).

"Why are some people happier than others? The role of cognitive and motivational processes in well-being" (PDF) .

American Psychologist .

56 (3): 239– 324.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.56.3.239 .

PMID 11315250 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-05-14 . Retrieved 2013-07-25 .

^ Seligman, Martin E. P.; Csikszentmihalyi (2000). "Positive psychology: An introduction".

American Psychologist .

55 (1): 5– 14.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.183.6660 .

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.5 .

PMID 11392865 .

S2CID 14783574 .

^ Røysamb, E.; Harris, J.; Magnus, P.; Vittersø, J.; Tambs, K. (2002). "Subjective well-being. Sex-specific effects of genetic and environmental factors".

Personality and Individual Differences .

32 (2): 211– 223.

doi : 10.1016/s0191-8869(01)00019-8 .

^ Nisbet, Elizabeth K.; Zelenski, John M. (2020), "Nature Relatedness and Subjective Well-Being" , in Maggino, Filomena (ed.), Encyclopedia of Quality of Life and Well-Being Research , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

1– 9, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-69909-7_3909-2 , ISBN 978-3-319-69909-7 , retrieved 2023-10-05 ^ Lyubomirsky, Sonja (2007).

The How of Happiness: A practical approach to getting the life you want . Great Britain: Sphere. p. 20.

ISBN 978-1-84744-193-5 .

^ Waldron, Sam (September 2010).

"Measuring Subjective Wellbeing in the UK" (PDF) (Working paper). Office for National Statistics (UK). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-01-07.

^ Layard, Richard.

"Making personal happiness and wellbeing a goal of public policy" . Archived from the original on 2018-04-04 . Retrieved 2018-04-04 .

^ Emmerling, Johannes; Navarro, Paula; Sisco, Matthew R. (October 2021).

"Subjective Well-Being at the Macro Level—Empirics and Future Scenarios" .

Social Indicators Research .

157 (3): 899– 928.

doi : 10.1007/s11205-021-02670-2 .

ISSN 0303-8300 .

S2CID 234868763 .

^ "Passion vs Money: Should You Choose a Job You Love or One That Pays? | University of the Potomac" . 2022-01-21.

Archived from the original on 2023-06-23 . Retrieved 2023-06-23 .

^ Zakharova, Lyudmila; Saralieva, Zaretkhan; Leonova, Irina (2022-08-27), "Subjective Well-Being at the Workplace as a Social Action: Opportunities for Management and Self-Management" , Happiness and Wellness - Biopsychosocial and Anthropological Perspectives , IntechOpen, ISBN 978-1-80355-592-8 , archived from the original on 2023-06-23 , retrieved 2023-06-23 ^ says, Olivier Girard (2019-07-15).

"Happy employees and their impact on firm performance" .

LSE Business Review .

Archived from the original on 2023-06-23 . Retrieved 2023-06-23 .

External links [ edit ] World Values Survey web site The happiness show Martin Seligman 's Authentic Happiness site v t e Deprivation and poverty indicators Social Topics: Acting out Child abuse Disadvantaged Diseases of poverty Environmental degradation Environmental racism Fushūgaku Governance failure Hikikomori Mental illness Relative deprivation Self-image Social deprivation Social exclusion Social stigma Social vulnerability Social determinants of health in poverty Violence against women Vulnerability Measures: Social Progress Index Psychological Topics: Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment Learned helplessness Psychological abuse psychological poverty Poverty and mental health Social determinants of mental health Economic Topics: Asset poverty Culture of poverty Debt bondage Energy poverty Extreme poverty Housing stress Human trafficking Income deficit Poverty threshold Precariat Precarious work Secondary poverty Social determinants of health in poverty Survival sex Water scarcity Measures: Below Poverty Line (India) Homeless Vulnerability Index Misery index (economics) Gini coefficient Genuine progress indicator (GPI) Legatum Prosperity Index Poverty gap index Physical Topics: Disability and poverty Food insecurity Physical abuse Sex trafficking Social determinants of health Poverty and violence Measures: India State Hunger Index Global Hunger Index Disability-adjusted life year (DALYs) Global Peace Index (GPI) Complex measures Human Poverty Index (HPI) Human Development Index (HDI) Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) Physical Quality of Life Index (PQLI) Living Planet Index (LPI) Progress out of Poverty Index Deprivation index Gender Topics: Feminization of poverty Measures: Gender-related Development Index (GDI) Gender Parity Index Other Categories: Income inequality metrics · Measurements and definitions of poverty · Social responsibility organizations Commons categories: Information graphics about poverty · Poverty-related maps Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐gpzw6
Cached time: 20250812023626
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.127 seconds
Real time usage: 1.214 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6835/1000000
Revision size: 91067/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 288947/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3064/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 383104/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.749/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8063838/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1038.603      1 -total
 61.72%  641.021      1 Template:Reflist
 40.27%  418.242     56 Template:Cite_journal
 15.13%  157.169      1 Template:Psychology_sidebar
 14.92%  154.963      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.79%   80.914      3 Template:Excerpt
  6.53%   67.775     14 Template:Cite_web
  5.54%   57.577      1 Template:Short_description
  4.62%   48.018      9 Template:Cite_book
  3.62%   37.549      6 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:34104355:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812023626 and revision id 1300472061. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subjective_well-being&oldid=1300472061 " Categories : Positive psychology Emotions Personal life Happiness Suffering Quality of life Mental health Subjective experience Well-being Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles to be expanded from December 2012 All articles to be expanded Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2014 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 14:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Subjective well-being 10 languages Add topic

