Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Time abroad 3 Success and criticism 4 Late life 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources Toggle the table of contents Christian Albrecht Jensen 18 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kotava مصرى Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Português Русский Seeltersk Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Danish painter (1792–1870) Christian Albrecht Jensen Self-portrait, 1836 Born ( 1792-06-26 ) 26 June 1792 Bredstedt , Duchy of Schleswig Died 13 July 1870 (1870-07-13) (aged 78) Copenhagen , Denmark Education Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts Known for Painting Movement Danish Golden Age Christian Albrecht Jensen (26 June 1792 – 13 July 1870) was a Danish portrait painter who was active during the Golden Age of Danish Painting in the first half of the 19th century. Painting more than 400 portraits over the course of his career, he depicted most of the leading figures of the Danish Golden Age, including the writer Hans Christian Andersen , the painter Christoffer Wilhelm Eckersberg , the sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen , the physicist Hans Christian Ørsted and the theologian N. F. S. Grundtvig .

Although Jensen experienced considerable commercial success, he received little official appreciation from the artistic establishment of his day. In particular, the art historian and critic Niels Lauritz Høyen criticized his style, finding his paintings 'unfinished'.

Early life and education [ edit ] Jensen was born at Bredstedt in Nordfriesland . From 1810 to 1816, he attended the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts in Copenhagen where he studied under Christian August Lorentzen . From 1817 to 1818, he studied at the Academy of Fine Arts in Dresden.

Time abroad [ edit ] The sculptor H. E. Freund portrayed during Jensen's stay in Rome, 1818–20 In 1818, he traveled to Rome by way of Vienna , Venice , Bologna and Florence . When he arrived, he joined the large colony of Danish-German artists' who lived in the city at the time and also met the sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen .

During his years in Rome, Jensen painted small, informal portraits of many of his fellow artists, including the writer Bernhard Severin Ingemann who visited Rome from 1818 to 1819, and the sculptor Hermann Ernst Freund , Thorvaldsen's closest associate from 1818 to 1828.

[ 1 ] After leaving Rome, he made an unsuccessful attempt to establish himself as a portrait painter in Hamburg .

Success and criticism [ edit ] Back in Copenhagen in the winter of 1822/23, the portrait scene was dominated by Christoffer Wilhelm Eckersberg 's sober, Neoclassical style, yet Jensen's more psychological portraits won immediate popularity.

[ 1 ] Up through the 1820s, he portrayed a large number of prominent members of Danish society but in spite of his commercial success he received little appreciation from art critics or from the establishment at the Academy and when a professorial chair became vacant after Christian August Lorentzen died in 1828 he was passed by.

Carl Friedrich Gauss , 1840 After 1830, commissions dwindled and he experienced financial difficulties. In response, he started collaborating with the historical collections at Frederiksborg Castle , painting both copies of older pictures and originals. This led to a controversy with Niels Lauritz Høyen , an influential art historian and critic who, from the beginning, had been critical of his style, finding his pictures 'unfinished'.

[ 1 ] From 1837, he increasingly looked to other countries for customers. By the Pulkovo Observatory , which opened near Saint Petersburg , he was commissioned to paint 11 portraits of leading international scientists. His painting of Carl Friedrich Gauss from that series remains the most famous portrait of the mathematician.

[ 2 ] Other portrayed scientists included the astronomer Wilhelm von Struve .

Late life [ edit ] The 1840s brought a further decline in orders, prompted by his political views which were not in line with the nationalist tendencies at the time as well as by continued criticism from Høyen. Eventually, after completing more than 400 portraits, he stopped painting. His last two works, portraits of Andreas Christian Krog (1854) and the theologian Andreas Gottlob Rudelbach , are considered to be among his best.

[ 1 ] For the remainder of his life, he worked as an assistant at the Royal Print Collection and as a conservator, supplementing his income by selling paintings from his large art collection.

[ 1 ] Gallery [ edit ] Cathrine Jensen (the artist's wife), 1825 Birgitte Sobotker Hohlenberg , 1826 Adam Gottlob Oehlenschläger , 1832 Christoffer Wilhelm Eckersberg , 1832 Hans Christian Andersen , 1836 N. F. S. Grundtvig , 1843 Andreas Gottlob Rudelbach , 1858 William Martin Leake , National Portrait Gallery, London , 1838 See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Christian Albrecht Jensen .

Art of Denmark List of Danish painters References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "C. A. Jensen" . Gyldendal . Retrieved 2010-08-23 .

^ "About the Gauss Portrait" . International Mathematical Union. Archived from the original on 2010-08-26 . Retrieved 2010-08-24 .

Sources [ edit ] Cederstrøm, Elisabeth (2003). "Jensen, Christian Albrecht".

Grove Art Online .

v t e Danish Golden Age (1800–1850) Centres Golden Age Copenhagen People Architecture Michael Gottlieb Bindesbøll Jørgen Hansen Koch Andreas Hallander Christian Frederik Hansen Gustav Friedrich Hetsch Johan Martin Quist Painting Wilhelm Bendz Ditlev Blunck Emil Bærentzen Carl Dahl Dankvart Dreyer C. W. Eckersberg Frederik Theodor Kloss Johan Vilhelm Gertner Louis Gurlitt Hans Jørgen Hammer Constantin Hansen Georg Hilker H. G. F. Holm C. A. Jensen Albert Küchler Vilhelm Kyhn Christen Købke Emanuel Larsen Johan Lundbye Wilhelm Marstrand Adam August Müller Fritz Petzholdt Jørgen Roed Martinus Rørbye P. C. Skovgaard Jørgen Valentin Sonne Carl Frederik Sørensen Sculpture Herman Wilhelm Bissen Christen Christensen Hermann Ernst Freund Jens Adolf Jerichau Bertel Thorvaldsen Music Niels Gade Johan Peter Emilius Hartmann Friedrich Kuhlau Christoph Ernst Friedrich Weyse Performing arts August Bournonville Johanne Luise Heiberg Literature Hans Christian Andersen Jens Baggesen Ludvig Bødtcher Henrik Hertz Bernhard Severin Ingemann Adam Oehlenschläger Adolph Wilhelm Schack von Staffeldt Christian Winther Emil Aarestrup Philosophy and theology N. F. S. Grundtvig Søren Kierkegaard Poul Martin Møller Henrik Steffens Law and science Adam Wilhelm Hauch Peter Wilhelm Lund Rasmus Rask Joakim Frederik Schouw Anders Sandøe Ørsted Hans Christian Ørsted Administrators and patrons Frederik VI Christian VIII Christian Ditlev Frederik Reventlow Jonas Collin Niels Laurits Høyen Knud Lyne Rahbek Ernst von Schimmelmann Just Mathias Thiele Christian Jürgensen Thomsen Venues Institutions Royal Academy of Fine Arts Royal Danish Theatre Kunstforeningen Sorø Academy Private venues Bakkehuset ( Kamma Rahbek ) C. A. Reitzel's Bookshop Nysø Manor Sophienholm ( Friederike Brun ) Sølyst ( Charlotte Schimmelmann ) « Age of Enlightenment Modern Breakthrough » ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_Albrecht_Jensen&oldid=1305121574 " Categories : 1792 births 1870 deaths Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts alumni People from Nordfriesland 19th-century Danish painters Danish male painters 19th-century Danish male artists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 05:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian Albrecht Jensen 18 languages Add topic

