Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Etymology 3 Notable examples 4 References Toggle the table of contents Bight (geography) 10 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Shallowly concave bend or curve in a coastline, river, or other geographical feature A stretch of coastline of the Great Australian Bight , a large oceanic bight composed of individual bights In geography , a bight ( / b aɪ t / ) is a concave bend or curvature in a coastline , river or other geographical feature, [ 1 ] or it may refer to a very open bay formed by such a feature.

[ 2 ] Such bays are typically broad, open, shallow and only slightly recessed.

[ 3 ] Description [ edit ] The size of bights differs greatly, which may be as small as a bend in a river or large like a sound .  
Large bights are shallower than sounds.

[ citation needed ] Traditionally, explorers defined a bight as a bay that could be sailed out of on a single tack in a square-rigged sailing vessel, regardless of the direction of the wind [ citation needed ] (typically meaning the apex of the bight is less than 25 degrees from the edges [ citation needed ] ).

According to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , an indentation with an area as large as (or larger than) that of the semi-circle whose diameter is a line drawn across the mouth of that indentation, can be regarded as a bay not merely a bight.

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term is derived from Old English byht ("bend, angle, corner; bay, bight") with German Bucht and Danish bugt as cognates , both meaning " bay ". Bight is not etymologically related to " bite " (Old English bītan ).

Notable examples [ edit ] Bight of Bangkok Bay of Campeche Bay of Plenty Bight of Benin Bight of Biafra Canterbury Bight German Bight or Heligoland Bight Great Australian Bight McKenzie Bight Mecklenburg Bight Mid-Atlantic Bight New York Bight North Taranaki Bight Robson Bight Santa Monica Bay South Taranaki Bight Southern Bight Southern California Bight Trinity Bight, Newfoundland and Labrador References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of bight in English" .

Oxford Dictionary . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on August 24, 2012 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 .

^ "bight" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ "What is a bight?" .

National Ocean Service . National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . Retrieved 9 August 2016 .

^ United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea "For the purposes of this Convention, a bay is a well-marked indentation whose penetration is in such proportion to the width of its mouth as to contain land-locked waters and constitute more than a mere curvature of the coast. An indentation shall not, however, be regarded as a bay unless its area is as large as, or larger than, that of the semi-circle whose diameter is a line drawn across the mouth of that indentation.
For the purpose of measurement, the area of an indentation is that lying between the low-water mark around the shore of the indentation and a line joining the low-water mark of its natural entrance points. Where, because of the presence of islands, an indentation has more than one mouth, the semi-circle shall be drawn on a line as long as the sum total of the lengths of the lines across the different mouths. Islands within an indentation shall be included as if they were part of the water area of the indentation." v t e Coastal geography Landforms Anchialine pool Archipelago Atoll Avulsion Ayre Barrier island Bay Bight Bodden Brackish marsh Cape Channel Cliff Coast Coastal plain Coastal waterfall Continental margin Continental shelf Coral reef Cove Dune cliff-top Estuary Firth Fjard Fjord Freshwater marsh Fundus Gat Geo Gulf Gut Hapua Headland Inlet Intertidal wetland Island Islet Isthmus Liman Lagoon Machair Mudflat Natural arch Peninsula Reef Ria Salt marsh Shoal Skerry Sound Spit Stack Strait Strand plain Submarine canyon Tidal island Tidal marsh Tide pool Tied island Tombolo Waituna Windwatt Beaches Beach cusps Beach evolution Beach ridge Beach wrack Beaches in estuaries and bays Beachrock Coastal morphodynamics Pocket beach Raised beach Recession Shell beach Shingle beach Storm beach Wash margin River mouths Debouch Mouth bar River delta mega regressive Processes Blowhole Cliffed coast Coastal biogeomorphology Coastal erosion Concordant coastline Current Cuspate foreland Discordant coastline Emergent coastline Feeder bluff Flat coast Graded shoreline Ingression coast Large-scale coastal behaviour Longshore drift Marine regression Marine transgression Raised shoreline Rip current Rocky shore Sea cave Sea foam Shoal peresyp Steep coast Submergent coastline Surf break Surf zone Surge channel Swash Undertow Volcanic arc Wave-cut platform Wave shoaling Wind fetch Wind wave Management Accretion Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Submersion Related Bulkhead line Coastal engineering Grain size boulder clay cobble granule gravel pebble sand shingle silt Intertidal zone Littoral zone Physical oceanography Region of freshwater influence River plume Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bight_(geography)&oldid=1293409110 " Categories : Bights (geography) Bodies of water Coastal and oceanic landforms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 15:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bight (geography) 10 languages Add topic

