Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Doctrine 2 Examples 3 Rechtsstaat 4 By country 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Rule according to higher law 6 languages العربية فارسی עברית Română Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief that universal principles of morality override unjust laws Not to be confused with rule of law .

A statue of Iustitia , the personification of justice, at a courthouse in Rome Judicial interpretation Forms Constitutional review Judicial opinion In Catholic canon law In Islamic jurisprudence Kritarchy Statutory interpretation Judicial misconduct Activism Chilling effect Discretion Immunity Restraint Ultra vires General rules of interpretation Accountability Adversarial system Appeal Conflict of laws Forum shopping Jurisdictional arbitrage Lex loci Golden rule Inquisitorial system Interpretation Act Jury nullification Justiciability Letter and spirit of the law Mischief rule Nondelegation doctrine Plain meaning rule Polycentric law Precedent Reasonableness Rule according to higher law Separation of powers Judicial independence Parliamentary sovereignty General theories of interpretation Common good constitutionalism Court administration Judicial reform Jurisprudence Indeterminacy debate Legal realism Legal process Legal formalism Legitimacy Living Constitution / Living tree / Living instrument Opinio juris sive necessitatis Originalism ( original meaning ) Original intent ( legislative intent , legislative history ) Purposive approach Strict constructionism Textualism International Anarchy Hard law International litigation International legal theories Monism and dualism Peremptory norm Soft law Universal jurisdiction v t e The rule according to a higher law is a philosophical concept that no law may be enforced by the government unless it conforms with certain universal principles (written or unwritten) of fairness, morality, and justice.

[ 1 ] Thus, the rule according to a higher law may serve as a practical legal criterion to qualify the instances of political or economical decision-making, when a government , even though acting in conformity with clearly defined and properly enacted law , still produces results which many observers find unfair or unjust.

[ 2 ] Doctrine [ edit ] The idea of a law of ultimate justice over and above the momentary law of the state—a higher law—was first introduced into post-Roman Europe by the Catholic canon law jurists.

[ 3 ] "Higher law" can be interpreted in this context as the divine or natural law or basic legal values, established in the international law —the choice depending on the viewpoint; no matter the source, it is a law above the law.

[ 4 ] It is in this capacity that it possesses the equal legal value for both the common and civil law jurisdictions, as opposed to natural law which is largely associated with common law.

[ 5 ] "To recognize the necessary connection between the rule of law as an ideal and well-constructed constitutional government does not and should not be taken to imply that all states can or should maintain the same constitutional structures in practice".

[ 6 ] The rule according to higher law is a practical approach to the implementation of the higher law theory that creates a bridge of mutual understanding (with regard to universal legal values) between the English-language doctrine of the rule of law , traditional for the countries of common law, and the originally German doctrine of Rechtsstaat , translated into other languages of continental Europe as état de droit (French), estado de derecho (Spanish), stato di diritto (Italian), and Правовое государство , pravovoe gosudarstvo (Russian).

[ 7 ] The latter doctrine is the product of continental European legal thought, which had adopted it from German legal philosophy.

Amartya Sen mentioned that the legal theorists in ancient India used the classical Sanskrit term nyāya in the sense of not just a matter of judging institutions and rules, but of judging the societies themselves.

[ 8 ] Examples [ edit ] Before the American Civil War , African Americans were legally denied equal rights and freedoms pursuant to formally valid codes prescribing the relations between master and slave. Although these codes were de jure fully suitable for application in legal practice, antislavery advocates argued that their enforcement by the US government de facto violated the basic human rights of a significant part of the population. In 1850, for example, during a Senate debate on the extension of slavery to new states and territories, William H. Seward famously proclaimed that slavery is forbidden under "a higher law than the Constitution ".

[ 9 ] In some countries, political leaders assert that the rule of law is purely a procedural concept. Therefore, they argue that any government may strip its subjects of their fundamental freedoms or infringe their vital interests so long as that is done by way of a duly-implemented legal mechanism. For example, at the Nuremberg trials , in an attempt to justify their crimes against Jewish and Romani population of Europe during World War II , some of the former leaders of Nazi Germany argued that they had broken none of the laws that were effective when Hitler had been in power. It was only by invoking the rule according to a higher law that the Allied prosecutors overcame such defenses.

[ 10 ] In other countries, conversely, political leaders assert that all written laws must be kept in line with the universal principles of morality, fairness, and justice. These leaders argue that, as a necessary corollary to the axiom that "no one is above the law", the rule of law requires the government to treat all persons equally under the law. However, the proclaimed right to equal treatment is susceptible to instantly becoming void each time the government denies a sufficient level of respect, dignity, and autonomy to a certain class of individuals or to human rights in general.

[ 11 ] Rechtsstaat [ edit ] The Rechtsstaat doctrine (legal state, state of right, constitutional state, constitutional government) was first introduced by the German philosopher Immanuel Kant in his latest works completed after the U.S. and French constitutions had been adopted in the late 18th century.

[ 12 ] Kant's approach is based on the supremacy of country's written constitution created using principles of the Higher Law. This supremacy meant creating guarantees for the implementation of his central idea: a permanently peaceful life as a basic condition for the happiness and prosperity of the citizens. Kant was basing his doctrine exclusively on the idea of constitutionalism and constitutional government.

The Russian legal system, born in the 19th century as a result of the transformations initiated by the reforms of the Emperor Alexander II , was (and still is) based primarily upon the German legal tradition. It was from the latter that Russia had adopted the doctrine of Rechtsstaat , which literally translates as "legal state". Its closest English analogue is "the rule of law".

[ 13 ] The Russian legal state concept adopts the written constitution as the country's supreme law (the rule of constitution). It is a fundamental but undefined principle that appears in the very first dispositive provision of Russia's post-communist constitution: "The Russian Federation – Russia – constitutes a democratic federative legal state with a republican form of governance." Similarly, the very first dispositive provision of Ukraine's constitution declares that "Ukraine is a sovereign and independent, democratic, social, legal state." Hence, the effort to invest meaning to the "legal state" definition is anything but theoretical.

Valery Zorkin , President of the Constitutional Court of Russia, wrote in 2003, "Becoming a legal state has long been our ultimate goal, and we have certainly made serious progress in this direction over the past several years. However, no one can say now that we have reached this destination. Such a legal state simply cannot exist without a lawful and just society. Here, as in no other sphere of our life, the state reflects the level of maturity reached by the society." [ 14 ] By country [ edit ] Section 109 of the Constitution of Australia Primacy of European Union law Supremacy Clause (USA) See also [ edit ] Constitutional economics Constitutional patriotism – Concept of citizenship Constitutional theory – Area of constitutional law Equality before the law – Judicial principle International human rights law – Body of international law designed to promote human rights International humanitarian law – law of war to protect non-combatants Judicial independence – Concept that the judiciary should be independent Jurisprudence – Theoretical study of law Kritarchy – Ancient Israeli system of rule by Biblical judges Legal doctrine – Set of rules or procedures through which judgements can be determined in a legal case Liberal legalism – Belief that politics should be constrained by legal constitutional boundaries Monism and dualism in international law Nuremberg principles – Guidelines for determining what constitutes a war crime Parliamentary sovereignty – Constitutional legal doctrine Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant – Overview of Immanuel Kant's political philosophy Religious democracy – Form of government Religious law – Ethical and moral codes taught by religious traditions Theocracy – Form of government with religious leaders Philosophy of law – branch of philosophy examining the nature of law Law Natural law Roerich Pact – International treaty for the protection of important cultural heritage References [ edit ] ^ Lehman, Jeffrey and Phelps, Shirelle, ed. (2004).

West's Encyclopedia of American Law , 2nd ed. Thomson Gale.

ISBN 0-7876-6367-0 .

^ Sellers, M. N. S.

(2004).

Republican Legal Theory: The History, Constitution and Purposes of Law in a Free State . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

^ Wormser, The Story of the LAW , pg. 189 ^ Edward S. Corwin, The "Higher Law" Background of American Constitutional Law (1955).

^ Leslie F. Goldstein, "Popular Sovereignty, the Origins of Judicial Review, and the Revival of Unwritten Law", Journal of Politics 48 (1986): 51–71 ^ Mortimer Sellers , An Introduction. The Rule of Law in Comparative Perspectives , edited by Mortimer Sellers and Tadeusz Tomaszewski, Heidelberg – London – New York: Springer, 2010, pp. 4–5.

ISBN 978-90-481-3749-7 .

^ Peter Barenboim, Naeem Sidiqi.

Bruges, the Bridge between Civilizations: The 75 Anniversary of the Roerich Pact, Grid Belgium, 2010 .

ISBN 978-5-98856-114-9 ^ Amartya Sen, "Global justice", in James J. Heckman , Robert L. Nelson, Lee Cabating and Paul Lepore, ed., Global Perspectives on the Rule of Law , London and New York: Routledge, 2010.

^ [Robert C. Byrd, The Senate, 1789-1989: Classic Speeches, 1830-1993. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1994., https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/generic/Speeches_Seward_NewTerritories.htm ] ^ Introductory note by Antonio Cassese for General Assembly resolution 95(I) of 11 December 1946 (Affirmation of the Principles of International Law recognized by the Charter of the Nürnberg Tribunal) on the website of the UN Audiovisual Library of International Law ^ Augusto Zimmermann, Constitutions Without Constitutionalism: The Failure of Constitutionalism in Brazil, The Rule of Law in Comparative Perspectives , edited by Mortimer Sellers and Tadeusz Tomaszewski, Springer, Heidelberg – London – New York, 2010, p. 101.

ISBN 978-90-481-3749-7 .

^ Hayek, Friedrich (1960).

The Constitution of Liberty . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp.

196– 7.

^ Peter Barenboim, "Defining the rules", The European Lawyer , Issue 90, October 2009.

^ The World Rule of Law Movement and Russian Legal Reform , edited by Francis Neate and Holly Nielsen, Justitsinform, Moscow, 2007.

Sources [ edit ] West's Encyclopedia of American Law (in 13 volumes), 2nd Ed., edited by Jeffrey Lehman and Shirelle Phelps. Publisher: Thomson Gale, 2004.

ISBN 0-7876-6367-0 .

Kant’s Principles of Politics, including his essay on Perpetual Peace. A Contribution to Political Science , translation by W. Hastie, Edinburgh: Clark, 1891. In Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch Dicey, Albert .

Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (8th Edition, Macmillan, 1915).

Bingham, Thomas .

"The Rule of Law" , Centre for Public Law, Faculty of Law, University of Cambridge (2006-11-16).

Edward S. Corwin, The "Higher Law" Background of American Constitutional Law (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1955) Buchanan, James M. (1987). "The Constitution of Economic Policy".

The American Economic Review .

77 (3): 243– 250.

Bibcode : 1987Sci...236.1433B .

doi : 10.1126/science.236.4807.1433 .

JSTOR 1804093 .

PMID 17793230 .

Wormser, René A., The Story of the LAW and the Men Who Made It—From the Earliest Times to the Present: Revised and Updated Edition of "The Law" (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1962).

Buchanan, James M. (1 December 1990). "The domain of constitutional economics".

Constitutional Political Economy .

1 (1): 1– 18.

doi : 10.1007/BF02393031 .

S2CID 144307393 .

"Economics and the Rule of Law" The Economist (2008-03-13).

Philip P. Wiener, ed., "Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Studies of Selected Pivotal Ideas", (David Fellman, "Constitutionalism") , vol 1, p. 485 (1973–74).

Herman Belz, "A Living Constitution or Fundamental Law? American Constitutionalism in Historical Perspective" (Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. 1998), ISBN 978-0-8476-8643-8 Louis Michael Seidman, "Critical Constitutionalism Now" , 75 Fordham Law Review 575, 586 (Nov. 2006).

External links [ edit ] "Democracy Conference" . Innertemple.org.uk. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28 . Retrieved 2010-08-22 .

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rule_according_to_higher_law&oldid=1295948560 " Categories : Legal doctrines and principles Philosophy of law Theories of law Sovereignty Constitutional law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 21:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rule according to higher law 6 languages Add topic

