Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Mechanics 1.2 Mathematics 1.3 Computer Science 2 Process 3 Applications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Computational mechanics 9 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Polski Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Application of mechanics using computational methods For the scientific journal, see Computational Mechanics .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Computational mechanics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: The 'Overview' section needs to be properly formatted.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( October 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Computational mechanics is the discipline concerned with the use of computational methods to study phenomena governed by the principles of mechanics .

[ 1 ] Before the emergence of computational science (also called scientific computing) as a "third way" besides theoretical and experimental sciences, computational mechanics was widely considered to be a sub-discipline of applied mechanics . It is now considered to be a sub-discipline within computational science.

Overview [ edit ] Computational mechanics (CM) is interdisciplinary. Its three pillars are mechanics , mathematics , and computer science .

Mechanics [ edit ] Computational fluid dynamics , computational thermodynamics , computational electromagnetics , computational solid mechanics are some of the many specializations within CM.

Mathematics [ edit ] The areas of mathematics most related to computational mechanics are partial differential equations , linear algebra and numerical analysis . The most popular numerical methods used are the finite element , finite difference , and boundary element methods in order of dominance. In solid mechanics finite element methods are far more prevalent than finite difference methods, whereas in fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, and electromagnetism, finite difference methods are almost equally applicable. The boundary element technique is in general less popular, but has a niche in certain areas including acoustics engineering, for example.

Computer Science [ edit ] With regard to computing, computer programming, algorithms, and parallel computing play a major role in CM. The most widely used programming language in the scientific community, including computational mechanics, is Fortran . Recently, C++ has increased in popularity. The scientific computing community has been slow in adopting C++ as the lingua franca. Because of its very natural way of expressing mathematical computations, and its built-in visualization capacities, the proprietary language/environment MATLAB is also widely used, especially for rapid application development and model verification.

Process [ edit ] Scientists within the field of computational mechanics follow a list of tasks to analyze their target mechanical process: A mathematical model of the physical phenomenon is made. This usually involves expressing the natural or engineering system in terms of partial differential equations . This step uses physics to formalize a complex system.

The mathematical equations are converted into forms which are suitable for digital computation. This step is called discretization because it involves creating an approximate discrete model from the original continuous model.  In particular, it typically translates a partial differential equation (or a system thereof) into a system of algebraic equations . The processes involved in this step are studied in the field of numerical analysis .

Computer programs are made to solve the discretized equations using direct methods (which are single step methods resulting in the solution) or iterative methods (which start with a trial solution and arrive at the actual solution by successive refinement). Depending on the nature of the problem, supercomputers or parallel computers may be used at this stage.

The mathematical model, numerical procedures, and the computer codes are verified using either experimental results or simplified models for which exact analytical solutions are available. Quite frequently, new numerical or computational techniques are verified by comparing their result with those of existing well-established numerical methods. In many cases, benchmark problems are also available. The numerical results also have to be visualized and often physical interpretations will be given to the results.

Applications [ edit ] Some examples where computational mechanics have been put to practical use are vehicle crash simulation , petroleum reservoir modeling , biomechanics, glass manufacturing, and semiconductor modeling.

Complex systems [ which?

] that would be very difficult or impossible to treat using analytical methods have been successfully simulated using the tools provided by computational mechanics.

See also [ edit ] Scientific computing Dynamical systems theory List of computer simulation software List of finite element software packages Movable cellular automaton References [ edit ] ^ Jamshid Ghaboussi; Xiping Steven Wu (25 November 2016).

Numerical Methods in Computational Mechanics . CRC Press.

ISBN 978-1-315-35164-3 .

External links [ edit ] United States Association for Computational Mechanics Santa Fe Institute Comp Mech Publications Authority control databases : National Czech Republic v t e Computational science Biology Anatomy Biological systems Cognition Genomics Neuroscience Phylogenetics Chemistry Electronic structure Molecular mechanics Quantum mechanics Physics Astrophysics Electromagnetics Fluid dynamics Geophysics Mechanics Particle physics Thermodynamics Linguistics Semantics Lexicology Social science Politics Sociology Economics Other Finance Materials science Mathematics Statistics Engineering Semiotics Transportation science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computational_mechanics&oldid=1297052705 " Categories : Computational science Mechanics Computational fields of study Computational physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from October 2016 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from October 2016 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from October 2016 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2020 This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 22:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Computational mechanics 9 languages Add topic

