Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publishing program 2 Book series 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Progress Publishers 18 languages বাংলা Català Español Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी Italiano മലയാളം 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Русский Suomi తెలుగు Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Soviet publisher Progress Publishers Company type Publisher Founded 1931 Headquarters Moscow , USSR Products Books Website moscow .progresspublishers .org Progress Publishers was a Moscow -based Soviet , and later Russian, publisher founded in 1931.

[ 1 ] It is still in existence today.

Publishing program [ edit ] Progress Publishers published books in a variety of languages: Russian, English, and many other European and Asian languages. They issued many scientific books, books on arts, political books (especially on Marxism–Leninism ), classic books , children's literature , novels and short fiction, books in source languages for people studying foreign languages, guidebooks and photographic albums .

Progress Publishers joined with International Publishers in New York and the Communist Party of Great Britain 's publishing house, Lawrence and Wishart , in London to publish the 50-volume Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels , a project launched in 1975 and completed only in 2004.

[ 2 ] Other books published in English by Progress included Marx and Engels on the United States (1979), a compilation drawn from letters, articles, and various other works, and A Short History of the USSR (1984).

One of the common features of all Progress books was their "request to reader" to send an opinion and suggestions on the book. It reads: REQUEST TO READERS. Progress Publishers would be glad to have your opinion of this book, its translation and design and any suggestions you may have for future publications. Please send all your comments to 17, Zubovsky Boulevard, Moscow, U.S.S.R.

[ 3 ] Book series [ edit ] ABC of Social and Political Knowledge [ 4 ] Books About the USSR [ 5 ] Classics of Russian Literature [ 6 ] Current International Problems Imperialism: Acts, Facts, and Records Impressions of the USSR [ 7 ] International Communist and Working-Class Movement V. I. Lenin: Collected Works [ 8 ] Library of Political Knowledge Library of Soviet Literature Man Through the Ages Modern Working-Class Novels Series On the Track of Discovery Progress Books about the USSR Progress Guides to the Social Sciences [ 9 ] Progress Marxist–Leninist Theory Progress Military Series Progress Problems of the Third World (also known as: Problems of the Third World) Progress Russian Classics Series (also known as: Russian Classics Series) [ 10 ] Progress Soviet Authors Library [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Russian Readers for Beginners Scientific Socialism Series [ 13 ] Socialism Today Soviet Foreign Policy and International Relations Soviet Literature for Young People Soviet Military Thought Series Soviet Novels Series Soviet Short Stories Series Stormy Petrel Series Student's Library Theories and Critical Studies War Memoirs See also [ edit ] Books portal Soviet Union portal International Publishers Lawrence and Wishart References [ edit ] ^ Progress Publishers , biblio.com. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected Works.

In 50 volumes. New York: International Publishers, 1975-2004. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ Polevoi, Boris (1967).

A Story About a Real Man . Moscow: Progress Publishers.

^ Galina Kirilenko and Lydia Korshunova, What Is Personality?

, Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1989 (ABC of Social and Political Knowledge), back panel of dust wrapper. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ Mikhail Zakharov and Robert Tzivilyov, Social Security in the USSR , Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1978 (Books About the USSR). Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ Fyodor Dostoyevsky , The Insulted and Humiliated , Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1957 (Classics of Russian Literature). Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ se:Impressions of the USSR , worldcat.org. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ V. I. Lenin , Collected Works , Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1960-1970. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ se:Progress Guides to the Social Sciences , worldcat.org. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ Russian Classics Series (Progress Publishers) - Book Series List , publishinghistory.com. Retrieved 29 May 2020.

^ Progress Soviet Author's Library , seriesofseries.com. Retrieved 29 May 2020.

^ Maxim Gorky , My Apprenticeship - My Universities , Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1973 (Progress Soviet Authors Library), back panel of dust wrapper. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ se:Scientific Socialism Series , worldcat.org. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

Further reading [ edit ] Vijay Prashad, ed., When the East Was Read: Socialist Culture in the Third World , New Delhi: LeftWord Books, 2019.

External links [ edit ] Progress Publishers, Moscow - official website Rossen Djagalov, Progress Publishers: A Short History , at leftword.org Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Japan Latvia Poland Academics CiNii Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Progress_Publishers&oldid=1297810309 " Categories : Political book publishing companies Publishing companies of the Soviet Union Book publishing companies of Russia Publishing companies established in 1931 1931 establishments in the Soviet Union Defunct book publishing companies Companies based in Moscow English language in Russia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 17:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Progress Publishers 18 languages Add topic

