Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Diplomatic visits Toggle Diplomatic visits subsection 1.1 Visits by United Arab Emirates 2 Transport links 3 Military relations 4 Trade 5 Education 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Australia–United Arab Emirates relations 5 languages العربية Français עברית Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Emirati Australians ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Australia–United Arab Emirates relations" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Bilateral relations Australia– United Arab Emirates relations Australia United Arab Emirates Bilateral ties exist between Australia and the United Arab Emirates .  The UAE maintains an embassy in Canberra whilst Australia has an embassy in Abu Dhabi and a consulate-general in Dubai .

Diplomatic visits [ edit ] Visits by United Arab Emirates [ edit ] In February 2010, UAE foreign minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al-Nahyan made a historic first official visit to Australia. During the tour, a memorandum of understanding  on the establishment of a Joint Committee on Consular Affairs was signed by Nahyan and Australian foreign minister Stephen Smith .

[ 1 ] Transport links [ edit ] Emirates Airlines offers direct services from Dubai to Perth, Adelaide, Sydney, Brisbane and Melbourne.

Etihad Airways offers direct services from Abu Dhabi to Sydney, Brisbane, Perth and Melbourne.

[ citation needed ] Military relations [ edit ] Australia openly supports the United Arab Emirates during the Yemeni Civil War , shipping weapons and ammunitions to provide for Yemeni government's forces and the Saudi-led coalition, which led to criticism among public about Australia's involvement, given high civilian casualties.

[ 2 ] An Australian retired general, Mike Hindmarsh , is also hired to command the Emirati troops during the war.

[ 3 ] Trade [ edit ] Monthly value of Australian merchandise exports to the United Arab Emirates (A$ millions) since 1988 Monthly value of UAE merchandise exports to Australia ( A$ millions) since 1988 The UAE is identified by Australia as its largest market in the Persian Gulf region.

[ citation needed ] As of 2008–09, trade between the UAE and Australia was valued to A$5.5 billion. Of this, Australian exports to the UAE were A$3.6 billion, while UAE exports to Australia were A$1.9 billion (including crude petroleum imports worth A$1.7 billion).

On 17 September 2024, Australia announced that it had reached a deal with the UAE to remove tariffs for approximately 99% of Australian exports in a bid to improve trade ties.

[ 4 ] Education [ edit ] The majority of Emiratis residing in Australia are students pursuing education in various Australian universities. Australia is a popular destination to which Emirati students have turned for higher education, [ 5 ] with enrolments increasing over the years.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] As of 2013, there were up to 1,700 Emirati students in Australia.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] In that same year, there were over 900 Emirati student enrolments for Australia.

[ 11 ] Many of them are on UAE government scholarships and pursuing postgraduate or PhD degrees. They are concentrated in large cities such as Sydney , Melbourne , Brisbane and Perth .

[ 9 ] In addition, around 14,000 Emiratis also visit Australia each year for tourism. Migration is made easier by relaxed visa requirements and the extensive aviation links between both countries.

[ 12 ] [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Australians in the United Arab Emirates References [ edit ] ^ "UAE Foreign Minister visit to Australia - Australian Government (DFAT)" .

^ Doherty, Ben; Knaus, Christopher; Davidson, Helen (4 September 2019).

"Australia may be complicit in war crimes if it supports Saudi-led coalition in Yemen – UN | Arms trade | The Guardian" .

The Guardian .

^ "Retired Australian Major General Mike Hindmarsh faces questions about knowledge of civilian attacks in Yemen - ABC News" .

ABC News . 8 February 2016.

^ "UAE, Australia reach trade deal set to boost agriculture exports, investments" .

Al Arabiya English .

^ Mustafa, Awad (20 May 2013).

"Australian visa rules eased for Emirati students" .

The National . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

The Australian ambassador, Pablo Kang , said 1,040 Emiratis were studying in Australia last year. "The year before that, 20 per cent of all Emirati overseas students studied in Australia," he said.

^ Malek, Caline (17 April 2014).

"Australia hopes to lure Emirati students to its institutions while selling uranium to the UAE" .

The National . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "UAE students in Australia exchange programme" .

Trade Arabia . 2 August 2011 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ a b "Australia is keen to promote Islamic finance" .

Khaleej Times . 18 June 2010. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ a b "Austrade Education Seminar Address Downtown, Dubai" (PDF) .

UAE Embassy, Canberra . 14 April 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 February 2015 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "Bilateral relationship" .

Embassy of the United Arab Emirates in Canberra . Archived from the original on 29 March 2015 . Retrieved 9 March 2015 .

We have sent almost 2000 Emirati students to study in Australia and many thousands of Emirati and Australian tourists visit each other's countries every year.

^ "United Arab Emirates country brief" .

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Australia) . Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "UAE in talks to ease visa requirements to Australia" .

Arabian Business . 20 May 2013 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

External links [ edit ] The Council for Australian-Arab Relations (CAAR) - DFAT v t e Foreign relations of Australia Africa Egypt Kenya Libya Morocco Senegal South Africa South Sudan Zimbabwe Americas Argentina Barbados Brazil Canada Chile Colombia El Salvador Mexico Paraguay Peru Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Asia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Brunei Cambodia China Hong Kong East Timor India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan Kurdistan Region of Iraq Malaysia Mongolia Nepal North Korea Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Arab Emirates Vietnam Europe Albania Belgium Croatia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Romania Russia Spain Sweden Serbia Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Oceania Micronesia Fiji Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Former Yugoslavia Related Minister for Foreign Affairs Diplomatic missions of / in Australia High Commissioners and Ambassadors United Nations Foreign policy history Free trade agreements of Australia v t e Foreign relations of the United Arab Emirates Bilateral relations Africa Algeria Egypt Kenya Libya Somalia ( Somaliland ) South Africa Sudan Tanzania Americas Canada Chile Colombia Mexico Peru United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Bahrain Bangladesh China India Indonesia Iran Iraq Kurdistan Region Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia South Korea Syria Taiwan Turkey Vietnam Yemen Europe Cyprus Denmark France Germany Greece Holy See Kosovo North Macedonia Poland Portugal Russia Serbia Spain United Kingdom Oceania Australia Diplomatic missions Diplomatic missions of the United Arab Emirates / in the United Arab Emirates Multilateral relations United Nations ( ICAO , ILO , UPU , WHO , WIPO ) Arab League ( ALECSO , CAEU , AMF ) Gulf Cooperation Council Organisation of Islamic Cooperation OPEC BRICS Non-Aligned Movement World Trade Organization Shanghai Cooperation Organisation International Monetary Fund World Bank International Monetary Fund International Maritime Security Construct Indo-Abrahamic Alliance Portals : Politics Australia United Arab Emirates Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australia–United_Arab_Emirates_relations&oldid=1255631614 " Categories : Australia–United Arab Emirates relations Bilateral relations of Australia Bilateral relations of the United Arab Emirates Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from December 2021 Articles needing additional references from January 2011 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 This page was last edited on 5 November 2024, at 22:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Australia–United Arab Emirates relations 5 languages Add topic

