Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Operation 2 History 3 Principle 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Centrifugal clutch 15 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Automatic clutch that uses centrifugal force to operate Talbot car's 'traffic clutch' of the 1930s A centrifugal clutch is an automatic clutch that uses centrifugal force to operate. The output shaft is disengaged at lower rotational speed and engages as the output increases to a certain speed. It is often used in mopeds , underbones , lawn mowers , go-karts , chainsaws , mini bikes , and some paramotors and boats to keep the engine from stalling when the output shaft is slowed or stopped abruptly, and to remove load when starting and idling. It has been superseded for automobile applications by the fluid coupling , torque converter and automated manual transmissions .

Operation [ edit ] A chainsaw 's clutch. The chain wraps around a sprocket behind the clutch that turns with the outer drum.

The input of the clutch is connected to the engine crankshaft while the output may drive a shaft, chain, or belt. As engine revolutions per minute increase, weighted arms in the clutch swing outward and force the clutch to engage. The most common types have friction pads or shoes radially mounted that engage the inside of the rim of a housing. On the center shaft, there is an assorted number of extension springs, which connect to a clutch shoe. When the central shaft spins fast enough, the springs extend, causing the clutch shoes to engage the friction face. It can be compared to a drum brake in reverse. This type can be found on most home-built karts , lawn and garden equipment, fuel-powered model cars, and low power chainsaws .

Another type used in racing karts has friction and clutch disks stacked together like a motorcycle clutch. The weighted arms force these disks together and engage the clutch.
When the engine reaches a certain speed, the clutch activates, working somewhat like a continuously variable transmission . As the load increases, the speed drops, disengaging the clutch, letting the speed rise again, and reengaging the clutch. If tuned properly, the clutch will tend to keep the speed at or near the torque peak of the engine. This results in a fair bit of waste heat , but over a broad range of speeds, it is much more useful than a direct drive in many applications.

History [ edit ] A centrifugal clutch shown in a patent application, 1898 Centrifugal clutches were used in railway locomotives before 1858, [ 1 ] and referred to (in relation to electric motors) in a patent of 1899.

[ 2 ] A patent was issued in the United States for an automotive centrifugal clutch (on an electric vehicle) in 1898.

[ 3 ] There is a design for a toy 'automatic clutch' in Meccano Magazine of June 1934.

[ 4 ] Armstrong Siddeley cars featured automatic (centrifugal) clutches beginning in 1936.

[ 5 ] Thomas Fogarty , who is also credited with inventing the balloon catheter , is credited with inventing a centrifugal clutch for small motor applications in the 1940s.

[ 6 ] Principle [ edit ] This works on the principle of centrifugal force, which means when engine speed reaches a specific rpm (Revolutions per minute) it generates enough centrifugal force inside the clutch which results in clutch engagement, and it transmits the engine power. At lower speeds, it disconnects itself to stop power transmission.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Saxomat References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Centrifugal clutches .

^ Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Volume 17 (1858) ^ Patents for Inventions (Patent Office, 1899) ^ US patent US598314 , W A Crowdus, "AUTOMOBILE VEHICLE", issued 1898-02-01 ^ "Automatic Clutch" .

nzmeccano.com .

Meccano Ltd . June 1934. Archived from the original on September 8, 2019 . Retrieved September 8, 2019 .

^ "Armstrong Siddeley 17 HP" .

siddeley.com . Archived from the original on 2013-06-19.

^ "Thomas Fogarty Lemelson-MIT Program" .

lemelson.mit.edu . Archived from the original on 2019-03-02 . Retrieved 2019-01-30 .

^ Sandhu, Navdeep.

"AETPaperIYR2 auto mobile" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) External links [ edit ] Centrifugal Clutch Design | in 2021 by Automobile Informer Compliant Centrifugal Clutches: Design, Analysis, and Testing , Master's thesis at the Harold B. Lee Library , Brigham Young University Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Centrifugal_clutch&oldid=1295293445 " Category : Clutches Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 21:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Centrifugal clutch 15 languages Add topic

