Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Vehicle suspension 1.2 Construction 2 Early history 3 Types of vehicle shock absorbers Toggle Types of vehicle shock absorbers subsection 3.1 Twin-tube 3.1.1 Basic twin-tube 3.1.2 Twin-tube gas charged 3.1.3 Position sensitive damping 3.1.4 Coilover 3.2 Mono-tube 3.3 Spool valve 3.4 Remote reservoir/piggy-back 3.5 Bypass shock 4 Theoretical approaches 5 Special features 6 Shock absorber and strut comparison 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources 10 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Shock absorber 51 languages Afrikaans العربية Български བོད་ཡིག Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mechanical component This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Shock absorber" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Miniature oil-filled coilover shock components for scale cars A shock absorber or damper is a mechanical or hydraulic device designed to absorb and damp shock impulses. It does this by converting the kinetic energy of the shock into another form of energy (typically heat ) which is then dissipated. Most shock absorbers are a form of dashpot (a damper which resists motion via viscous friction).

Description [ edit ] Pneumatic and hydraulic shock absorbers are used in conjunction with cushions and springs. An automobile shock absorber contains spring-loaded check valves and orifices to control the flow of oil through an internal piston (see below).

[ 1 ] One design consideration, when designing or choosing a shock absorber, is where that energy will go. In most shock absorbers, energy is converted to heat inside the viscous fluid. In hydraulic cylinders , the hydraulic fluid heats up, while in air cylinders , the hot air is usually exhausted to the atmosphere. In other types of shock absorbers, such as electromagnetic types, the dissipated energy can be stored and used later. In general terms, shock absorbers help cushion vehicles on uneven roads and keep wheels in contact with the ground.

Vehicle suspension [ edit ] Main article: Suspension (vehicle) In a vehicle, shock absorbers reduce the effect of traveling over rough ground, leading to improved ride quality and vehicle handling . While shock absorbers serve the purpose of limiting excessive suspension movement, their intended main purpose is to damp spring oscillations. Shock absorbers use valving of oil and gasses to absorb excess energy from the springs. Spring rates are chosen by the manufacturer based on the weight of the vehicle, loaded and unloaded. Some people use shocks to modify spring rates but this is not the correct use. Along with hysteresis in the tire itself, they damp the energy stored in the motion of the unsprung weight up and down. Effective wheel bounce damping may require tuning shocks to an optimal resistance.

Spring -based shock absorbers commonly use coil springs or leaf springs , though torsion bars are used in torsional shocks as well. Ideal springs alone, however, are not shock absorbers, as springs only store and do not dissipate or absorb energy. Vehicles typically employ both hydraulic shock absorbers and springs or torsion bars. In this combination, "shock absorber" refers specifically to the hydraulic piston that absorbs and dissipates vibration. Now, composite suspension systems are used mainly in 2 wheelers and also leaf springs are made up of composite material in 4 wheelers.

Construction [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2022 ) The most common type is a hydraulic shock absorber, which usually includes a piston, a cylinder, and an oil-filled chamber. The piston is connected to the piston rod, which extends into the cylinder and divides the cylinder into two parts. One chamber is filled with hydraulic oil, while the other chamber contains compressed oil [ according to whom?

] or air. When there is vibration in the vehicle, the piston moves into the cylinder, forcing the hydraulic fluid through small holes, creating resistance and dissipating energy in the form of heat. This dampens oscillations, reducing further bouncing or wobble of the car. Shock construction requires a balance of features such as piston design, fluid viscosity, and overall size of the unit to ensure performance. As technology developed, other types of shock absorbers emerged, including gas and electric shock absorbers, that provided improved control and flexibility. The design and manufacture of shock absorbers is constantly evolving due to the continuous improvement of vehicle dynamics and passenger comfort.

Early history [ edit ] In common with carriages and railway locomotives, most early motor vehicles used leaf springs . One of the features of these springs was that the friction between the leaves offered a degree of damping, and in a 1912 review of vehicle suspension, the lack of this characteristic in helical springs was the reason it was "impossible" to use them as main springs.

[ 2 ] However the amount of damping provided by leaf spring friction was limited and variable according to the conditions of the springs, and whether wet or dry. It also operated in both directions. Motorcycle front suspension adopted coil sprung Druid forks from about 1906, and similar designs later added Friction disk shock absorber rotary friction dampers, which damped both ways - but they were adjustable (e.g. 1924 Webb forks). These friction disk shock absorbers were also fitted to many cars.

One of the problems with motor cars was the large variation in sprung weight between lightly loaded and fully loaded, especially for the rear springs. When heavily loaded the springs could bottom out, and apart from fitting rubber "bump stops", there were attempts to use heavy main springs with auxiliary springs to smooth the ride when lightly loaded, which were often called "shock absorbers". Realizing that the spring and vehicle combination bounced with a characteristic frequency, these auxiliary springs were designed with a different period, but were not a solution to the problem that the spring rebound after striking a bump could throw passengers out of their seats. What was called for was damping that operated on the rebound.

Although C.L. Horock came up with a design in 1901 that had hydraulic damping, it worked in one direction only. It does not seem to have gone into production right away, whereas mechanical dampers such as the Gabriel Snubber started being fitted in the late 1900s (also the similar Stromberg Anti-Shox). These used a belt coiled inside a device such that it freely wound in under the action of a coiled spring but met friction when drawn out. Gabriel Snubbers were fitted to an 11.9HP Arrol-Johnston car which broke the 6-hour Class B record at Brooklands in late 1912, and the Automator journal noted that this snubber might have a great future for racing due to its light weight and easy fitment.

[ 3 ] French engineers Gaston Dumond and Ernest Mathis patented two different hydraulic shock absorbers with rectilinear motion in 1906–1907, but those were not commercially successful.

[ 4 ] One of the earliest hydraulic dampers to go into production was the Telesco Shock Absorber, exhibited at the 1912 Olympia Motor Show and marketed by Polyrhoe Carburettors Ltd.

[ 3 ] This contained a spring inside the telescopic unit like the pure spring type "shock absorbers" mentioned above, but also oil and an internal valve so that the oil damped in the rebound direction. The Telesco unit was fitted at the rear end of the leaf spring, in place of the rear spring to chassis mount, so that it formed part of the springing system, albeit a hydraulically damped part.

[ 5 ] This layout was presumably selected as it was easy to apply to existing vehicles, but it meant the hydraulic damping was not applied to the action of the main leaf spring, but only to the action of the auxiliary spring in the unit itself.

The first production hydraulic dampers to act on the main leaf spring movement were probably those based on an original concept by Maurice Houdaille patented in 1908 and 1909. These used a lever arm which moved hydraulically damped vanes inside the unit. The main advantage over the friction disk dampers was that it would resist sudden movement but allow slow movement, whereas the rotary friction dampers tended to stick and then offer the same resistance regardless of speed of movement. There appears to have been little progress on commercialising the lever arm shock absorbers until after World War I , after which they came into widespread use, for example as standard equipment on the 1927 Ford Model A and manufactured by Houde Engineering Corporation of Buffalo, NY.

Types of vehicle shock absorbers [ edit ] Diagram of the main components of a twin-tube and mono-tube shock absorber Most vehicular shock absorbers are either twin-tube or mono-tube types with some variations on these themes.

Twin-tube [ edit ] Basic twin-tube [ edit ] Also known as a "two-tube" shock absorber, this device consists of two nested cylindrical tubes, an inner tube that is called the "working tube" or the "pressure tube", and an outer tube called the "reserve tube". At the bottom of the device on the inside is a compression valve or base valve. When the piston is forced up or down by bumps in the road, hydraulic fluid moves between different chambers via small holes or "orifices" in the piston and via the valve, converting the "shock" energy into heat which must then be dissipated.

Twin-tube gas charged [ edit ] Variously known as a "gas cell two-tube" or similarly named design, this variation represented a significant advancement over the basic twin-tube form. Its overall structure is very similar to the twin-tube, but a low-pressure charge of nitrogen gas is added to the reserve tube. The result of this alteration is a dramatic reduction in "foaming" or "aeration", the undesirable outcome of a twin-tube overheating and failing which presents as foaming hydraulic fluid dripping out of the assembly. Twin-tube gas charged shock absorbers represent the vast majority of original modern vehicle suspension installations.

Position sensitive damping [ edit ] Often abbreviated simply as "PSD", this design is another evolution of the twin-tube shock. In a PSD shock absorber, which still consists of two nested tubes and still contains nitrogen [ 6 ] gas, a set of grooves has been added to the pressure tube. These grooves allow the piston to move relatively freely in the middle range of travel (i.e., the most common street or highway use, called by engineers the "comfort zone") and to move with significantly less freedom in response to shifts to more irregular surfaces when upward and downward movement of the piston starts to occur with greater intensity (i.e., on bumpy sections of roads— the stiffening gives the driver greater control of movement over the vehicle so its range on either side of the comfort zone is called the "control zone"). This advance allowed car designers to make a shock absorber tailored to specific makes and models of vehicles and to take into account a given vehicle's size and weight, its maneuverability, its horsepower, etc. in creating a correspondingly effective shock.

Coilover [ edit ] Main article: Coilover Coilover shock absorbers are usually a kind of twin-tube, gas-charged shock absorber inside the helical road spring. They are common on motorcycles and scooter rear suspensions, and widely used on front and rear suspensions in cars.

Mono-tube [ edit ] Hydraulic shock absorber monotube in different operational situations: 1 ) Drive slow or adjustments open 2 ) Like "1", but extension immediately after the compression 3 ) Drive fast adjustments or closed, you can see the bubbles of depression, which can lead to the phenomenon of cavitation 4 ) Like "3", but the extension immediately after the compression Note: The volume change caused by the stem is considered.

Absorber with remote-reservoir connected rigidly, compared to most shock absorbers. It uses a diaphragm instead of a membrane, and does not contain a control valve for expansion of the pneumatic chamber.

Description: 1) Sheath and gas tank 2) Stem 3) Snap rings 4) Plate bearing spring 5) Spring 6) End cap and preload adjustment 7) Cap gas, present in versions both with or without gas valve (inverted profile) 8) Mobile diaphragm 9) Pad switch (compression) 10) Wiper 11) Oil seal assembly, and shock seal 12) Negative buffer pad or limit switch (extension) 13) Piston with sliding blades and seal The principal design alternative to the twin-tube form has been the mono-tube shock absorber which was considered a revolutionary advancement when it appeared in the 1950s. As its name implies, the mono-tube shock, which is also a gas-pressurized shock and also comes in a coilover format, consists of only one tube, the pressure tube, though it has two pistons. These pistons are called the working piston and the dividing or floating piston, and they move in relative synchrony inside the pressure tube in response to changes in road smoothness. The two pistons also completely separate the shock's fluid and gas components. The mono-tube shock absorber is consistently a much longer overall design than the twin-tubes, making it difficult to mount in passenger cars designed for twin-tube shocks. However, unlike the twin-tubes, the mono-tube shock can be mounted either way—it does not have any directionality.

[ 7 ] It also does not have a compression valve, whose role has been taken up by the dividing piston, and although it contains nitrogen gas, the gas in a mono-tube shock is under high pressure (260-360 p.s.i.

or so) which can actually help it to support some of the vehicle's weight, something which no other shock absorber is designed to do.

[ 8 ] Due to their larger size, monotube dampers dissipate heat better than dual-tube dampers.

[ 9 ] Mercedes became the first auto manufacturer to install mono-tube shocks as standard equipment on some of their cars starting in 1958. They were manufactured by Bilstein , patented the design and first appeared in 1954s.

[ 10 ] Because the design was patented, no other manufacturer could use it until 1971 when the patent expired.

[ 8 ] Spool valve [ edit ] Spool valve dampers are characterized by the use of hollow cylindrical sleeves with machined-in oil passages as opposed to traditional conventional flexible discs or shims.

[ 11 ] Spool valving can be applied with monotube, twin-tube, or position-sensitive packaging, and is compatible with electronic control.

[ 12 ] Primary among benefits cited in Multimatic ’s 2010 patent filing is the elimination of performance ambiguity associated with flexible shims, resulting in mathematically predictable, repeatable, and robust pressure-flow characteristics.

[ 13 ] Remote reservoir/piggy-back [ edit ] An extra tube or container of oil connected to the oil compartment of the (main) shock via a flexible pipe (remote reservoir) or inflexible pipe (piggy-back shock). Increases the amount of oil a shock can carry without increasing its length or thickness.

Bypass shock [ edit ] Allows each section of suspension travel to have an independent suspension tune. Bypass shock, double bypass shock, triple bypass shock etc. Triple bypass would have a separate set of suspension tuning controls for each of its three sections of suspension travel: initial travel, mid-travel, full-travel.

[ 14 ] Theoretical approaches [ edit ] There are several commonly used principles behind shock absorption: Hysteresis of structural material, for example the compression of rubber disks, stretching of rubber bands and cords, bending of steel springs , or twisting of torsion bars .  Hysteresis is the tendency for otherwise elastic materials to rebound with less force than was required to deform them. Simple vehicles with no separate shock absorbers are damped, to some extent, by the hysteresis of their springs and frames.

Dry friction as used in wheel brakes , by using disks (classically made of leather ) at the pivot of a lever, with friction forced by springs. Used in early automobiles such as the Ford Model T , up through some British cars of the 1940s and on the French Citroën 2CV in the 1950s. Although now considered obsolete, an advantage of this system is its mechanical simplicity; the degree of damping can be easily adjusted by tightening or loosening the screw clamping the disks, and it can be easily rebuilt with simple hand tools. A disadvantage is that the damping force tends not to increase with the speed of the vertical motion.

Further information: Friction disk shock absorber Solid state, tapered chain shock absorbers, using one or more tapered, axial alignment(s) of granular spheres, typically made of metals such as nitinol , in a casing.

[1] , [2] Fluid friction, for example the flow of fluid through a narrow orifice ( hydraulics ), constitutes the vast majority of automotive shock absorbers. This design first appeared on Mors racing cars in 1902.

[ 15 ] One advantage of this type is, by using special internal valving, the absorber may be made relatively soft to compression (allowing a soft response to a bump) and relatively stiff to extension, controlling "rebound", which is the vehicle response to energy stored in the springs; similarly, a series of valves controlled by springs can change the degree of stiffness according to the velocity of the impact or rebound. Specialized shock absorbers for racing purposes may allow the front end of a dragster to rise with minimal resistance under acceleration, then strongly resist letting it settle, thereby maintaining a desirable rearward weight distribution for enhanced traction.

Further information: Lever arm shock absorber Compression of a gas, for example pneumatic shock absorbers, which can act like springs as the air pressure is building to resist the force on it. Enclosed gas is compressible, so equipment is less subject to shock damage. This concept was first applied in series production on Citroën cars in 1954. Today, many shock absorbers are pressurized with compressed nitrogen , to reduce the tendency for the oil to cavitate under heavy use. This causes foaming which temporarily reduces the damping ability of the unit. In very heavy duty units used for racing or off-road use, there may even be a secondary cylinder connected to the shock absorber to act as a reservoir for the oil and pressurized gas. In aircraft landing gear, air shock absorbers may be combined with hydraulic damping to reduce bounce. Such struts are called oleo struts (combining oil and air) [3] .

Inertial resistance to acceleration, the Citroën 2CV had shock absorbers that damp wheel bounce with no external moving parts. These consisted of a spring-mounted 3.5 kg (7.75 lb) iron weight inside a vertical cylinder [4] and are similar to, yet much smaller than versions of the tuned mass dampers used on tall buildings.

Composite hydropneumatic suspension combines many suspension elements in a single device: spring action, shock absorption, ride-height control , and self leveling suspension . This combines the advantages of gas compressibility and the ability of hydraulic machinery to apply force multiplication.

Conventional shock absorbers can be combined with air suspension springs - an alternate way to achieve ride-height control , and self leveling suspension .

In an electrorheological fluid damper, an electric field changes the viscosity of the oil. This principle allows semi-active damper applications in automotive and various industries.

Magnetic field variation: a magnetorheological damper changes its fluid characteristics through an electromagnet .

The effect of a shock absorber at high (sound) frequencies is usually limited by using a compressible gas as the working fluid or mounting it with rubber bushings .

Special features [ edit ] Some shock absorbers allow tuning of the ride via control of the valve by a manual adjustment provided at the shock absorber.

Active suspension systems allow the driver to electronically adjust the damper stiffness and automatically change damper stiffness to adapt to road conditions, using mechanisms such as adjustable valves or magnetorheological fluid .

[ 9 ] Additional control can be provided by dynamic valve control via computer in response to sensors, giving both a smooth ride and a firm suspension when needed, allowing ride height adjustment or even ride height control .

Ride height control is especially desirable in highway vehicles intended for occasional rough road use, as a means of improving handling and reducing aerodynamic drag by lowering the vehicle when operating on improved high speed roads.

Heatsinks , fans , or liquid cooling to prevent or delay shock fade and failure (oil leak) due to overheating Shock absorber and strut comparison [ edit ] A strut is a structural component that combines the shock absorber with other suspension parts like the coil spring and steering knuckle into one compact unit [ 16 ] Unlike a shock absorber, a strut has a reinforced body and stem.

Struts are subjected to multidirectional loads, while a shock absorber only damps vibration, only receiving a load along its axis.

Struts and shock absorbers have a different way of attachment. Shock absorbers are mounted through rubber or urethane bushings to the frame and suspension. A strut is hard mounted to the suspension and is mounted to the frame through a rotating plate providing the upper pivot point of the steering.

See also [ edit ] Base isolation Betagel , uses gel and silicone to absorb violent shocks Buffer (disambiguation) Buffer (rail transport) Buffer stop Chapman strut Cushioning Damped wave Damper (disambiguation) Damping ratio Dashpot Hydropneumatic suspension Impact force Lever arm shock absorber List of auto parts MacPherson strut Oleo strut Packaging and labeling Ralph Peo Shock (mechanics) Shock mount Shock response spectrum Strut bar Strut Vibration Vibration isolation References [ edit ] ^ , Horst Bauer (ed)., Automotive Handbook 4th Edition , Robert Bosch GmbH , 1996, ISBN 0-8376-0333-1 , page 584 ^ "Springs - A simple study of car suspension", The Automotor Journal, August 10th, 1912, pp936-937 ^ a b "Some accessories to see at Olympia", The Automator Journal, Nov 2nd , 1912, p1284 ^ Simionescu, P. A.; Norton, Robert L. (2024). Okada, Masafumi (ed.).

"On the History of Early Automobile Suspension Systems" .

Advances in Mechanism and Machine Science . Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland: 1012– 1022.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-45709-8_99 .

ISBN 978-3-031-45709-8 .

^ "What a Chauffeur Expects to see at Olympia", The Automator Journal, Nov 9th 1912, p1313 ^ "Nitrogen - Element information, properties and uses | Periodic Table" .

www.rsc.org . Retrieved 2024-11-18 .

^ "thyssenkrupp Bilstein - Entwicklung / Produkte - Konventionelle Dämpfer - 1-Rohr-Dämpfer (deCarbon-Prinzip)" .

www.thyssenkrupp-bilstein.de . Retrieved 2017-07-13 .

^ a b Carley, Larry (February 2008), "Monotube shocks-- don't absorb shocks, but..." (PDF) , Brake and front end magazine , archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-01-02 , retrieved 1 January 2014 ^ a b Barton, David C.; Fieldhouse, John D. (2024).

Automotive Chassis Engineering . Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

124– 132.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-57526-6 .

ISBN 978-3-031-57525-9 .

^ Shelton, p.24 and p.26 caption.

^ "From F1 to Baja: Multimatic's Clever Spool-Valve Dampers Explained" . Retrieved 2017-07-19 .

^ "Damper and Awe: 6 Types of Automotive Dampers Explained - Feature" . Retrieved 2017-07-19 .

^ US 8800732 B2 , Holt, Laurence J.; O'Flynn, Damian & Tomlin, Andrew, "Hydraulic damper spool valve", published 2014-08-12 ^ "Byass Shocks Part 1 – AccuTune Off-Road" . Retrieved 2024-06-14 .

^ Setright, L. J. K. "Dampers: Smoothing Out the Bumps", in Northey, Tom, ed.

World of Automobiles (London: Orbis, 1974), Volume 5, p.490. and 1903-03-07 - Le Génie civil: "Amortisseur Mors".

^ "Understanding Car Shock Absorbers | PartsHawk" .

partshawk.com . Retrieved 2023-05-21 .

Sources [ edit ] Shelton, Chris. "Then, Now, and Forever" in Hot Rod , March 2017, pp. 16–29.

Bibliography [ edit ] Kinra, Vikram K.; Wolfenden, Alan (1992), M3D: mechanics and mechanisms of material damping , ASTM special technical publication number 1169, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: ASTM International , ISBN 978-0-8031-1495-1 Holland, Max (1989), When the Machine Stopped: A Cautionary Tale from Industrial America , Boston: Harvard Business School Press, ISBN 978-0-87584-208-0 , OCLC 246343673 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shock absorbers .

This Motor-Truck Hasn't Any Springs , Popular Science, February 1919 MIT Undergrads Create Shock Absorber That Generates Energy .

Leveling Out The Rough Spots , 1943 article Damping rate calculations Archived 2021-06-09 at the Wayback Machine , seminar notes by Kaz Technologies [5] Archived 2017-11-20 at the Wayback Machine , shock absorber measurement v t e Powertrain Part of the Automobile series Automotive engine Diesel engine Electric Fuel cell Hybrid ( Plug-in hybrid ) Internal combustion engine Petrol engine Steam engine Transmission Automatic transmission Chain drive Direct-drive Clutch Constant-velocity joint Continuously variable transmission Coupling Differential Direct-shift gearbox Drive shaft Dual-clutch transmission Drive wheel Automated manual transmission Electrorheological clutch Epicyclic gearing Fluid coupling Friction drive Gearshift Giubo Hotchkiss drive Limited-slip differential Locking differential Manual transmission Manumatic Parking pawl Park-by-wire Preselector gearbox Semi-automatic transmission Shift-by-wire Torque converter Transaxle Transfer box Transmission control unit Universal joint Wheels and tires Wheel hub assembly Wheel Rim Alloy wheel Hubcap Tire Off-road Racing slick Radial Rain Run-flat Snow Spare Tubeless Hybrid Electric motor Hybrid vehicle drivetrain Electric generator Alternator Portal Category v t e Automotive handling Main topics Car handling Center of mass Downforce Drifting Electronic Stability Control Fishtailing Inboard brake Oversteer Steering Suspension Tire / Tyre Transaxle Understeer Unsprung mass Vehicle dynamics Weight transfer Spring types Coil Leaf Pneumatic Torsion Suspension types Dependent Beam axle De Dion tube Semi-independent Twist beam Independent Double wishbone ( Jaguar IRS ) Dubonnet MacPherson strut ( Chapman strut ) Multi-link Sliding pillar Swing axle Trailing arm ( Semi-trailing arm ) v t e Chassis control system Part of the Automobile series Suspension Anti-roll bar (sway bar) Axle Axle track Beam axle Camber angle Car handling Coil spring De Dion tube Double wishbone Hydrolastic ( Hydragas ) Hydropneumatic Independent suspension Leaf spring Live axle MacPherson strut Multi-link suspension Panhard rod Shock absorber Swing axle Toe angle Torsion bar Trailing arm Unsprung mass Watt's linkage Wheel alignment Wheelbase Steering Ackermann steering geometry Caster angle Kingpin Oversteer Power steering Rack and pinion Torque steering Understeer Brakes Automatic braking Anti-lock braking system Active rollover protection Brake bleeding Brake fade Brake fluid Brake lining Combined braking system Disc brake Drum brake Electric park brake Electronic brakeforce distribution Electronic stability control Engine braking Hydraulic brake Hydraulic fluid Inboard brake Parking brake Regenerative brake Vacuum servo Roadwheels Tires (Tyres) Alloy wheel Custom wheel Drive wheel Hubcap Outline of tires Rostyle wheel Spinner Whitewall tire Wire wheels Portal Category Authority control databases : National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5464bfd8b4‐6tmd9
Cached time: 20250815190932
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.520 seconds
Real time usage: 0.658 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2613/1000000
Revision size: 28506/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85542/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3207/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80447/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.307/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7124702/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  532.294      1 -total
 30.71%  163.486      1 Template:Reflist
 18.48%   98.372      4 Template:Navbox
 15.70%   83.565      1 Template:Powertrain
 10.80%   57.512      1 Template:Short_description
  9.98%   53.138      1 Template:ISBN
  9.98%   53.115      2 Template:Ambox
  9.89%   52.649      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.61%   45.805      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.24%   43.875      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:170829:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815190932 and revision id 1306067852. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shock_absorber&oldid=1306067852 " Categories : Shock absorbers Mechanical devices using viscosity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from August 2022 All articles to be expanded All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 19:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shock absorber 51 languages Add topic

