Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Governance 3 Contributors 4 List of editors 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents First Things 4 languages Deutsch Français Galego Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American ecumenical and conservative religious and political journal First Things Editor R. R. Reno Categories Religion Frequency Monthly (10 issues/year) First issue March 1990 Company Institute on Religion and Public Life Country United States Based in New York City Language English Website FirstThings.com ISSN 1047-5141 First Things ( FT )  is a journal aimed at "advanc[ing] a religiously informed public philosophy for the ordering of society", [ 1 ] focusing on theology , liturgy , history of religion , church history , culture , education , society , politics , literature , book reviews , and poetry .

First Things is inter-religious , inter- denominational and ecumenical , especially Christian and Jewish . It articulates Christian ecumenism, Christian–Jewish dialogue , erudite social and political conservatism and a critique of contemporary society.

First Things is published by the New York –based Institute on Religion and Public Life (IRPL) as a monthly, except for bi-monthly issues covering June/July and August/September, [ 2 ] and has a circulation of approximately 30,000 copies.

First Things ' founding editor and editor-in-chief, from 1990 to his death in 2009, was Richard John Neuhaus . Since 2011, R. R. Reno has served as editor.

Ross Douthat wrote that, through First Things , Neuhaus demonstrated "that it was possible to be an intellectually fulfilled Christian".

[ 3 ] George Weigel , a long-time contributor and IRPL board member, wrote in Newsweek that, under the influence of Neuhaus, First Things had "quickly became, under his leadership and inspiration, the most important vehicle for exploring the tangled web of religion and society in the English-speaking world." [ 4 ] History [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e First Things was founded in March 1990 by Richard John Neuhaus , a Lutheran pastor turned Catholic priest, intellectual, writer, and activist. He started the journal, along with some long-time friends and collaborators, after he left the Rockford Institute .

[ 5 ] In 1996, in response to the Colorado Supreme Court 's decision in Romer v. Evans , which the magazine's leaders correctly predicted the Supreme Court of the United States would uphold on appeal, First Things published a symposium titled "The End of Democracy?", which denounced the ruling and included an essay by Charles Colson calling for a violent uprising against the United States government.

[ 6 ] The symposium was widely denounced by the mainstream press and more moderate conservatives including the magazine's own Midge Decter , who screamed at Neuhaus in a telephone call, and David Brooks . It led to the resignation of editorial board members Gertrude Himmelfarb and Walter Berns .

[ 6 ] Neuhaus, the journal's editor-in-chief until his death in January 2009, regularly wrote columns called "The Public Square" and "While We're At It". Three editors served under Neuhaus: James Nuechterlein, a Lutheran, from 1990 to 2004; Damon Linker , who converted from Judaism to Catholicism, from 2004 to 2005, when he left over disagreements with Neuhaus (whom he later criticized heavily in his book The Theocons ); [ 7 ] [ 8 ] and Joseph Bottum , a Catholic, from 2005, upon returning from The Weekly Standard .

[ 9 ] After his death, Neuhaus was succeeded by Bottum, who used the title "editor".

[ 10 ] Bottum served through October 2010, when he was forced out after a controversy about the future and the funding of the magazine, and Nuechterlein returned from retirement to become interim editor.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In April 2011, R. R. Reno , a professor of theology and ethics at Creighton University , who had been involved with the magazine for over a decade and was a Catholic convert from the Episcopal Church , was selected as editor.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] After Neuhaus's death, David P. Goldman , David Blum , David Mills , Midge Decter ( ad interim ), Mark Bauerlein , Matthew Schmitz, Julia Yost, and Dan Hitchens have served as executive or senior editors; the latter two are still in office.

In 2018, First Things published a review by the Dominican priest Romanus Cessario of Vittorio Messori 's book Kidnapped by the Vatican? The Unpublished Memoirs of Edgardo Mortara . The book covers the case of Edgardo Mortara , a Jewish boy mistakenly baptized by Italian nuns and kidnapped by the Vatican on the grounds that anyone baptized had to be raised Catholic. Cessario wrote that "Divine Providence kindly arranged for his being introduced into a regular Christian life." [ 16 ] Catholic writer Michael Sean Winters called the article "morally repugnant" and "intellectually deplorable", while First Things regular contributor Robert P. George described it as "an embarrassment".

[ 17 ] In 2022, First Things published " The Three Worlds of Evangelicalism " by Aaron Renn.

[ 18 ] The essay spawned a full-length book, Life in the Negative World , and was the most-read print issue article on the FT website in 2022.

[ 19 ] Christianity Today said Renn's "positive-neutral-negative world framework is among the most thought-provoking ideas pertaining to American evangelicalism this century." [ 20 ] Governance [ edit ] First Things is run by the board of the Institute on Religion and Public Life (IRPL), which is chaired by Colin Moran and whose members include, among others, Russell Hittinger , David Novak , George Weigel , and Robert Louis Wilken (former chairman) as of January 2023.

[ 1 ] Similarly to Richard John Neuhaus , Wilken is a former Lutheran minister converted to the Catholic Church.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] The pair first met at the Lutheran Concordia College of Texas in 1953, became friends, graduated in 1955 and earned the master of Divinity at Concordia Seminary in 1960. Former members of the editorial board include neoconservatives Gertrude Himmelfarb and Peter L. Berger , who resigned in November 1996 amid "The End of Democracy?" controversy, [ 23 ] Methodist theologian Stanley Hauerwas , who resigned in February 2002 in protest with the journal's stance on the war on terror , [ 24 ] [ 25 ] and Mary Ann Glendon , Catholic jurist and former United States Ambassador to the Holy See . Both Berger (a Lutheran) and Hauerwas continued to publish articles in the journal also after their resignation from the editorial board. Until 2010, the journal had a finance committee, whose latest members were William Burleigh, Frederic Clark, Robert P. George, Peter Thiel and George Weigel.

[ 26 ] Other former leading members of the advisory council have included Jean Bethke Elshtain , Ernest Fortin , Elizabeth Fox-Genovese , Suzanne Garment , Bruce C. Hafen , Carl F. H. Henry , Leonid Kishkovsky, Glenn Loury , George Marsden , Gilbert Meilaender (who still contributes to the journal), and Max Stackhouse .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] The journal used to have an advisory council (appointed  by the institute board). In mid 2017, it included among others neoconservative writer Midge Decter ; historian Wilfred M. McClay ; philosophers Hadley Arkes and Robert P. George ; political scientist Timothy Fuller; Christian theologians or biblicists Gary A. Anderson (Methodist), Thomas Sieger Derr (Congregationalist), Timothy George (Baptist), Terryl Givens (Latter-day Saint), Chad Hatfield (Eastern Orthodox), Robert Jenson (Lutheran), Peter Leithart (Presbyterian), Cornelius Plantinga (Dutch Reformed) and Ephraim Radner (Anglican); Jewish scholars David G. Dalin and Eric Cohen, founding editor of The New Atlantis ; physicist Stephen Barr ; and Mark C. Henrie , president of the Arthur N. Rupe Foundation and former Chief Academic Officer and Senior Vice-president of the Intercollegiate Studies Institute .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Until his death in February 2017, the council included also theologian and writer Michael Novak , [ 31 ] who, along with fellow Catholics Neuhaus and Weigel, was part of the "neoconservative trinity" according to critics.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Contributors [ edit ] Contributors usually represent traditional Catholic , Orthodox , Anglican , Protestant (especially Lutheran , Methodist , and Presbyterian ), Jewish and Islamic viewpoints.

[ 34 ] Frequent contributors in the magazine's first year (1990) included Catholic jurist Mary Ann Glendon (later United States Ambassador to the Holy See under George W. Bush ); rabbi David Novak ; Catholic philosopher, diplomat and author Michael Novak ; Lutheran-turned-Catholic historian Robert Louis Wilken; Catholic scholar and papal biographer George Weigel ; and Lutheran ethicist Gilbert Meilaender . Others appearing included Gary Bauer , William Bennett , Peter L. Berger , David Brooks , Robertson Davies , Avery Dulles (later Catholic cardinal ), Jean Bethke Elshtain , Robert P. George , Stanley Hauerwas , David Horowitz , Peter Leithart , Martin E. Marty , Ralph McInerny , Mark Noll , and Michael Wyschogrod .

[ 35 ] Frequent contributors in recent years have included some of the aforementioned authors and several members or former members of the IRPL board and the former advisory council, as well as Hadley Arkes , Sohrab Ahmari , Mark Bauerlein , Hans Boersma , Randy Boyagoda , Christopher Caldwell , archbishop Charles J. Chaput , Elizabeth C. Corey, Ross Douthat , Mary Eberstadt , Joseph Epstein , Anthony Esolen , Timothy George , David Bentley Hart , Peter Hitchens , Sam Kriss, Wilfred M. McClay , Joshua Mitchell, Stanley G. Payne , cardinal George Pell , Nathan Pinkoski, Ephraim Radner, Robert Royal , Matthew Rose, Roger Scruton , Wesley J. Smith , Patricia Snow, Peter Tonguette, Michael Toscano, and Carl Trueman .

[ 36 ] First Things has often hosted statements by Evangelicals and Catholics Together , a group of leading scholars in the United States that are either evangelical Protestants or Catholics. Beginning in May 2017, Shalom Carmy , an Orthodox rabbi teaching Jewish studies and philosophy at Yeshiva University (where he is Chair of Bible and Jewish philosophy at Yeshiva College , also and an affiliated scholar at Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law ), as well as editor of Tradition , wrote a regular column named " Litvak at Large".

[ 37 ] In the August/September 2021 issue, Carmy's column was taken over by Liel Leibovitz , writing under a column named "Leibovitz at Large". Carmy continued to be a frequent contributor of First Things .

R. R. Reno has continued Richard John Neuhaus 's columns called "The Public Square" and "While We're At It" and each issue of First Things hosts poetry. The magazine publishes articles every day in the "Web Exclusives" section of its website.

[ 38 ] List of editors [ edit ] Editor-in-chief Richard John Neuhaus (1990–2009), Lutheran/Catholic Editors James Nuechterlein (1990–2004), Lutheran Damon Linker (2004–2005), Jewish/Catholic [ 39 ] Joseph Bottum (2005–2010), Catholic James Nuechterlein ( ad interim , 2010–2011), Lutheran R. R. Reno (2011–present), Catholic Executive/senior editors David P. Goldman (2009–2010), Jewish David Blum (2010), Catholic David Mills (2011–2013), Catholic Midge Decter ( ad interim , 2013–2014), Jewish Mark Bauerlein (2014–2019), Catholic Matthew Schmitz (2017–2022), Catholic Julia Yost (since 2017), Catholic Dan Hitchens (since 2021), Catholic [ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Masthead" .

First Things .

^ "First Things - America's Most Influential Journal of Religion & Public Life" .

First Things .

^ "Richard John Neuhaus, RIP" , The Atlantic blog, Ross Douthat , Jan. 8, 2009.

^ "Richard John Neuhaus, 1936–2009" , George Weigel , Newsweek , Jan. 10, 2009.

^ "FIRST THINGS: A Journal of Religion, Culture, and Public Life" . Archived from the original on September 21, 2010 . Retrieved October 6, 2009 .

^ a b Linker, Damon (September 4, 2007).

The Theocons . Anchor Books. pp.

94– 104.

ISBN 9780307387653 . Retrieved October 9, 2022 .

^ Rosman, Artur (May 6, 2015).

"Just Another Atheist Jewish Catholic: An Interview With Damon Linker" .

^ "Damon Linker's Faith Journey" . May 7, 2015.

^ Neuhaus, “While We're At It” Archived 2014-03-28 at the Wayback Machine , First Things, February 2009.

^ "First Things - About Us: Masthead" .

archive.org . May 27, 2009. Archived from the original on May 27, 2009 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "First Things' New Old Direction" .

ncregister.com . February 11, 2011 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "About Us: Masthead - First Things" .

archive.org . December 31, 2010. Archived from the original on December 31, 2010 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Reno new editor of First Things - Communio" .

stblogs.org . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "Trustworthy Guides - R. R. Reno" .

firstthings.com . January 20, 2011 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "First Things? - R. R. Reno" .

firstthings.com . April 4, 2011 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ Cessario, Romanus.

"Non Possomus" . First Things . Retrieved October 9, 2022 .

^ Momigliano, Anna.

"Why Some Catholics Defend The Kidnapping of a Jewish Boy" . The Atlantic . Retrieved October 9, 2022 .

^ Renn, Aaron (February 2022).

"The Three Worlds of Evangelicalism" .

First Things . Retrieved December 31, 2024 .

^ "Our Most Popular Articles of 2022" .

First Things . December 20, 2022 . Retrieved December 31, 2024 .

^ Bennett, Daniel (May 10, 2024).

"Christians Shouldn't Run from a 'Negative World.' But They Can Depend on It Less" .

Christianity Today . Retrieved December 31, 2024 .

^ "The Evangelical Catholic Tradition - Mathew Block" .

firstthings.com . December 15, 2014 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "Dr. Robert Louis Wilken: Former Lutheran Minister - The Coming Home Network" .

chnetwork.org . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "The Future of the End of Democracy - J. Budziszewski" .

firstthings.com . March 1999 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "The End of Democracy? The Judicial Usurpation of Politics - Various" .

firstthings.com . November 1996 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "Stanley Hauerwas's Pacifism" .

The Weekly Standard . May 13, 2002. Archived from the original on August 29, 2016 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "Masthead" . Archived from the original on July 4, 2010.

^ "About First Things" .

archive.org . April 12, 1997. Archived from the original on April 12, 1997 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "About First Things" .

archive.org . January 9, 1998. Archived from the original on January 9, 1998 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Directors & Officers – Arthur N. Rupe Foundation" .

^ "ISI Speakers Bureau | Intercollegiate Studies Institute: Educating for Liberty" .

home.isi.org . Archived from the original on February 25, 2017.

^ a b "First Things Masthead" . January 27, 2017. Archived from the original on January 27, 2017.

^ Felice, Flavio (March 5, 2018).

Prospettiva "neocon": capitalismo, democrazia, valori nel mondo unipolare . Rubbettino Editore.

ISBN 9788849810240 – via Google Books.

^ "Culture Wars: Manhattan Declaration" .

www.culturewars.com .

^ "How Modernity Swallowed Islamism | Shadi Hamid" .

First Things . October 1, 2022 . Retrieved February 9, 2024 .

^ "Issues Archive" .

firstthings.com . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "Issues Archive" .

First Things .

^ Reno (May 2017).

"Benedict Option" .

^ "Web Exclusives" .

First Things .

^ Damon Linker (August 29, 2018).

"The unbearable ugliness of the Catholic Church" .

theweek . Retrieved February 9, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Neoconservatism General American exceptionalism Democratization Globalization Humanitarian intervention Interventionism Liberal internationalism Bush Doctrine Axis of evil Pax Americana Constitutional Federalism Figures William Kristol Robert Kagan Frederick Kagan Irving Kristol Paul Wolfowitz Richard Perle Charles Krauthammer David Frum Elliott Abrams Norman Podhoretz David Wurmser Douglas Feith Paul Bremer Peter Berkowitz Douglas Murray David Aaronovitch Anne Applebaum Oliver Kamm Max Boot Eliot A. Cohen Jeane Kirkpatrick Michael Novak Jonah Goldberg Joshua Muravchik Jennifer Rubin Irwin Stelzer Bret Stephens Zalmay Khalilzad Scooter Libby Yuval Levin Michael Ledeen James Kirchick Michael Gerson Dan Senor Eli Lake Reuel Marc Gerecht James Woolsey Clifford May Larry Diamond Niall Ferguson Major influences Leo Strauss Bernard Lewis Henry M. Jackson James Burnham John Courtney Murray Organisations Project for the New American Century National Endowment for Democracy Foundation for Defense of Democracies Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs Henry Jackson Society Emergency Committee for Israel American Enterprise Institute Foreign Policy Initiative NGO Monitor Publications Commentary The Weekly Standard The Public Interest National Affairs Encounter Harry's Place First Things Crisis Related articles Timeline of modern American conservatism Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism British neoconservatism Clash of Civilizations Idealism in international relations Liberal hawk Pro-war Left Anti-Stalinist left ( New York Intellectuals and Trotskyism ) Republican in Name Only (pejorative) Cuckservative (pejorative) Never Trump movement Euston Manifesto Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=First_Things&oldid=1300755001 " Categories : Monthly magazines published in the United States Political magazines published in the United States Conservative magazines published in the United States Magazines established in 1990 Religious magazines published in the United States Christianity studies journals Magazines published in New York City Christian magazines Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 06:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents First Things 4 languages Add topic

