Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Topics in Food physical chemistry 2 Related fields 3 Techniques gallery: High-Field NMR, CARS (Raman spectroscopy), Fluorescence confocal microscopy and Hyperspectral imaging 4 See also 5 References 6 Journals 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Food physical chemistry 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of food chemistry Food physical chemistry is considered to be a branch of food chemistry [ 1 ] [ 2 ] concerned with the study of both physical and chemical interactions in foods in terms of physical and chemical principles applied to food systems, as well as the applications of physical/chemical techniques and instrumentation for the study of foods.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] This field encompasses the "physiochemical principles of the reactions and conversions that occur during the manufacture, handling, and storage of foods." [ 7 ] Food physical chemistry concepts are often drawn from rheology , theories of transport phenomena, physical and chemical thermodynamics , chemical bonds and interaction forces, quantum mechanics and reaction kinetics,  biopolymer science, colloidal interactions, nucleation, glass transitions, and freezing, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] disordered/noncrystalline solids.

This section needs expansion with: actual complete English sentence containing relevance to food physical chemistry. You can help by adding to it .

( January 2022 ) Techniques utilized range widely from dynamic rheometry, optical microscopy , electron microscopy , AFM , light scattering , X-ray diffraction / neutron diffraction , [ 10 ] to MRI , spectroscopy ( NMR , [ 11 ] FT- NIR / IR , NIRS, ESR and EPR , [ 12 ] [ 13 ] CD/ VCD , [ 14 ] Fluorescence , FCS , [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] HPLC , GC-MS , [ 20 ] [ 21 ] and other related analytical techniques.

Understanding food processes and the properties of foods requires a knowledge of physical chemistry and how it applies to specific foods and food processes. Food physical chemistry is essential for improving the quality of foods, their stability, and food product development . Because food science is a multi-disciplinary field, food physical chemistry is being developed through interactions with other areas of food chemistry and food science, such as food analytical chemistry , food process engineering / food processing , food and bioprocess technology , food extrusion , food quality control, food packaging , food biotechnology , and food microbiology .

Topics in Food physical chemistry [ edit ] The following are examples of topics in food physical chemistry that are of interest to both the food industry and food science: Starch, 800x magnified, under polarized light Macaroni is an extruded hollow pasta.

Water in foods Local structure in liquid water Micro-crystallization in ice cream emulsions Dispersion and surface-adsorption processes in foods Water and protein activities Food hydration and shelf-life Hydrophobic interactions in foods Hydrogen bonding and ionic interactions in foods Disulfide bond breaking and formation in foods Food dispersions Structure-functionality in foods Food micro- and nano- structure Food gels and gelling mechanisms Cross-linking in foods Starch gelatinization and retrogradation Physico-chemical modification of carbohydrates Physico-chemical interactions in food formulations Freezing effects on foods and freeze concentration of liquids Glass transition in wheat gluten and wheat doughs Drying of foods and crops Rheology of wheat doughs, cheese and meat Rheology of extrusion processes Food enzyme kinetics Immobilized enzymes and cells Microencapsulation Carbohydrates structure and interactions with water and proteins Maillard browning reactions Lipids structures and interactions with water and food proteins Food proteins structure, hydration and functionality in foods Food protein denaturation Food enzymes and reaction mechanisms Vitamin interactions and preservation during food processing Interaction of salts and minerals with food proteins and water Color determinations and food grade coloring Flavors and sensorial perception of foods Properties of food additives Related fields [ edit ] Visualisation of the human interactome network topology with the blue lines between proteins (represented as points) showing protein-protein interactions Food chemistry Food physics and Rheology Biophysical chemistry Physical chemistry Spectroscopy -applied Intermolecular forces Nanotechnology and nanostructures Chemical physics Molecular dynamics Surface chemistry and Van der Waals forces Chemical reactions and Reaction chemistry Quantum chemistry Quantum genetics Molecular models of DNA and Molecular modelling of proteins and viruses Bioorganic chemistry Polymer chemistry Biochemistry and Biological chemistry Enzymology Protein–protein interactions Biomembranes Complex system biology Integrative biology Mathematical biophysics Systems biology Genomics , Proteomics , Interactomics , Structural bioinformatics and Cheminformatics Food technology , Food engineering , Food safety and Food biotechnology Agricultural biotechnology Immobilized cells and enzymes Microencapsulation of food additives and vitamins, etc.

Chemical engineering Plant biology and Crop sciences Animal sciences Techniques gallery: High-Field NMR, CARS (Raman spectroscopy), Fluorescence confocal microscopy and Hyperspectral imaging [ edit ] Stoks and anti-Stokes shifts CARS Raman Spectroscopy Hyperspectral Imaging Cube Multi-spectral Imaging principle Confocal Imaging Principle Fluorescence microscope Yeast membrane protein imaging Dividing cell fluorescence HeLa cancer cells FISH fluorescence technique Red blood cell pathology Carboxyzome See also [ edit ] Food portal Chemistry portal Physics portal Example of a GC-MS instrument An FTIR interferogram. The central peak is at zero retardation, ZPD) where the maximum amount of light passes through the interferometer to the detector.

Food chemistry Food Chemistry (journal) NMR ESR FTIR NIR FCS HPLC GC-MS Biophysical chemistry Protein–protein interactions Food processing Food engineering Food rheology Food extrusion Food packaging , food biotechnology Food safety Food science Food technology International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science List of important publications in chemistry § Physical chemistry List of unsolved problems in chemistry § Physical chemistry problems References [ edit ] ^ John M. de Man.1999.

Principles of Food Chemistry (Food Science Text Series), Springer Science, Third Edition ^ John M. de Man. 2009. Food process engineering and technology, Academic Press, Elsevier: London and New York, 1st edn.

^ Pieter Walstra. 2003.

Physical Chemistry Of Foods . Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, 873 pages ^ Physical Chemistry Of Food Processes: Fundamental Aspects .1992. van Nostrand-Reinhold vol.1., 1st Edition, ^ Henry G. Schwartzberg, Richard W. Hartel. 1992.

Physical Chemistry of Foods . IFT Basic Symposium Series, Marcel Dekker, Inc.:New York, 793 pages ^ Physical Chemistry of Food Processes, Advanced Techniques, Structures and Applications . 1994. van Nostrand-Reinhold vols.1-2., 1st Edition, 998 pages; 3rd edn. Minuteman Press, 2010; vols. 2-3, fifth edition ( in press ) ^ Pieter Walstra. 2003.

Physical Chemistry Of Foods . Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, 873 pages ^ Pieter Walstra. 2003.

Physical Chemistry Of Foods . Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, 873 pages ^ Physical Chemistry Of Food Processes: Fundamental Aspects .1992.van Nostrand-Reinhold vol.1., 1st Edition, ^ Physical Chemistry of Food Processes, Advanced Techniques, Structures and Applications .1994. van Nostrand-Reinhold vols.1-2., 1st Edition, 998 pages; 3rd edn. Minuteman Press, 2010; vols. 2-3, fifth edition ( in press ) ^ https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1952/ First Nobel Prize for NMR in Physics, in 1952 ^ http://www.ismrm.org/12/aboutzavoisky.htm ESR discovery in 1941 ^ Abragam, A.; Bleaney, B.

Electron paramagnetic resonance of transition ions . Clarendon Press:Oxford, 1970, 1,116 pages.

^ Physical Chemistry of Food Processes, Advanced Techniques, Structures and Applications .1994. van Nostrand-Reinhold vols.1-2., 1st Edition, 998 pages; 3rd edn. Minuteman Press, 2010; vols. 2-3, fifth edition ( in press ) ^ Magde D.; Elson E. L.; Webb W. W. (1972). "Thermodynamic fluctuations in a reacting system: Measurement by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy, (1972)".

Phys Rev Lett .

29 (11): 705– 708.

doi : 10.1103/physrevlett.29.705 .

^ Ehrenberg, M., Rigler, R. (1974). "Rotational brownian motion and fluorescence intensity fluctuations".

Chem Phys .

4 (3): 390– 401.

Bibcode : 1974CP......4..390E .

doi : 10.1016/0301-0104(74)85005-6 .

ISSN 0301-0104 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Elson E. L., Magde D. (1974). "Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy I. Conceptual basis and theory, (1974)".

Biopolymers .

13 : 1– 27.

doi : 10.1002/bip.1974.360130102 .

S2CID 97201376 .

^ Magde D.; Elson E. L.; Webb W. W. (1974). "Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy II. An experimental realization, (1974)".

Biopolymers .

13 (1): 29– 61.

doi : 10.1002/bip.1974.360130103 .

PMID 4818131 .

S2CID 2832069 .

^ Thompson N L 1991 Topics in Fluorescence Spectroscopy Techniques vol 1, ed J R Lakowicz (New York: Plenum) pp 337–78 ^ Gohlke, R. S. (1959). "Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry and Gas-Liquid Partition Chromatography".

Analytical Chemistry .

31 (4): 535– 541.

doi : 10.1021/ac50164a024 .

^ Gohlke, R; McLafferty, Fred W. (1993). "Early gas chromatography/mass spectrometry".

Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry .

4 (5): 367– 71.

doi : 10.1016/1044-0305(93)85001-E .

PMID 24234933 .

Journals [ edit ] Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry Journal of the American Oil Chemists' Society Biophysical Chemistry journal Magnetic Resonance in Chemistry Starke/ Starch Journal Journal of Dairy Science (JDS) Chemical Physics Letters Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie (1887) Biopolymers Journal of Food Science (IFT, USA) International Journal of Food Science & Technology Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics (1947) Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture Polymer Preprints (ACS) Integrative Biology Journal of the Royal Society of Chemistry Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry (An RSC Journal) Nature Nature Precedings Journal of Biological Chemistry Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Food physical chemistry .

ACS Division of Agricultural and Food Chemistry (AGFD) American Chemical Society (ACS) Institute of Food Science and Technology (IFST), (formerly IFT) Dairy Science and Food Technology Physical Chemistry . (Keith J. Laidler, John H. Meiser and Bryan C. Sanctuary) The World of Physical Chemistry (Keith J. Laidler, 1993) Physical Chemistry from Ostwald to Pauling (John W. Servos, 1996) 100 Years of Physical Chemistry (Royal Society of Chemistry, 2004) The Cambridge History of Science: The modern physical and mathematical sciences (Mary Jo Nye, 2003) v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Major branches of physics Divisions Pure Applied Engineering Approaches Experimental Theoretical Computational Classical Classical mechanics Newtonian Analytical Celestial Continuum Acoustics Classical electromagnetism Classical optics Ray Wave Thermodynamics Statistical Non-equilibrium Modern Relativistic mechanics Special General Nuclear physics Particle physics Quantum mechanics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Atomic Molecular Modern optics Condensed matter physics Solid-state physics Crystallography Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Atmospheric physics Biophysics Chemical physics Geophysics Materials science Mathematical physics Medical physics Ocean physics Quantum information science Related History of physics Nobel Prize in Physics Philosophy of physics Physics education research Timeline of physics discoveries Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Food_physical_chemistry&oldid=1303061248 " Categories : Food chemistry Physical chemistry Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles to be expanded from January 2022 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 22:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Food physical chemistry 1 language Add topic

