Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scotus 2 Gilles Deleuze 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Univocity of being 9 languages Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Latina Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical (ontological) concept Part of a series on John Duns Scotus Scotism Scholasticism Univocity Haecceity Immaculate Conception Beatific vision Formal distinction Hylomorphism Scotistic realism Substance theory ( ousia ) Accident Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Individuation Existence of God Christology Platonic realism Categories (Aristotle) Problem of universals Metaphysics Christianity and slavery Works Opus Oxoniense Tractatus de Primo Principio Quaestiones Quodlibetales Influences Aristotle ("The Philosopher") St. Paul ("The Apostle") Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine ("The Theologian") St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard ("The Master") Averroes ("The Commentator") Maimonides ("Rabbi Moses") St. Albertus Magnus ("The Universal Doctor") St. Thomas Aquinas ("The Angelic Doctor") People Andreas Aureoli Balic Barnewall Baron Bonet Caracciolo Carletti Faber Ferchi Frassen Horan Mac Cathmhaoil Mastrius de Mayronis d'Orbellis Ó Fithcheallaigh Pelagius Punch Scotellus Scriptoris Thomae Sixtus IV Wadding Related Aristotelianism Franciscan Order Oxford University Catholic theology List of Franciscan theologians Empiricism Philosophy Portal Catholicism Portal v t e Univocity of being is the idea that words describing the properties of God mean the same thing as when they apply to people or things. It is associated with the doctrines of the Scholastic theologian John Duns Scotus .

Scotus [ edit ] In medieval disputes over the nature of God , many theologians and philosophers (such as Thomas Aquinas ) held that when one says that "God is good" and that "man is good", man's goodness is only analogous to, i.e. similar to but distinct from, God's goodness.

John Duns Scotus , while not denying the analogy of being of Thomas Aquinas, nonetheless holds to a univocal concept of being.

Scotus does not believe in a "univocity of being", but rather to a common concept of being that is proper to both God and man, though in two radically distinct modes: infinite in God, finite in man.

[ 1 ] The claim here is that we understand God because we can share in his being, and by extension, the transcendental attributes of being, namely, goodness, truth, and unity.

[ 2 ] So far as Scotus is concerned, we need to be able to understand what ‘being’ is as a concept in order to demonstrate the existence of God, lest we compare what we know - creation - to what we do not - God. Thomas Williams has defended a version of this argument.

[ 3 ] Gilles Deleuze [ edit ] Gilles Deleuze borrowed the doctrine of ontological univocity from Scotus.

[ 4 ] He claimed that being is univocal, i.e., that all of its senses are affirmed in one voice. Deleuze adapts the doctrine of univocity to claim that being is, univocally, difference. "With univocity, however, it is not the differences which are and must be: it is being which is Difference, in the sense that it is said of difference. Moreover, it is not we who are univocal in a Being which is not; it is we and our individuality which remains equivocal in and for a univocal Being." [ 5 ] Deleuze at once echoes and inverts Spinoza , [ 6 ] who maintained that everything that exists is a modification of the one substance , God or Nature . He claims that it is the organizing principle of Spinoza's philosophy, despite the absence of the term from any of Spinoza's works. For Deleuze, there is no one substance, only an always-differentiating process , an origami cosmos , always folding, unfolding, refolding. Deleuze and Guattari summarize this ontology in the paradoxical formula " pluralism = monism ".

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Unus mundus Fundamental ontology Henology Law of noncontradiction References [ edit ] ^ cf. John Duns Scotus, 1265–1965 p. 250-262 ^ Ordinatio I, d. 3: On The Knowability of God ^ Williams, T. (2005). The doctrine of univocity is true and salutary.

Modern Theology , 21 (4), 575-585.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0025.2005.00298.x ^ Widder, Nathan (2009).

"John Duns Scotus", in Deleuze's Philosophical Lineage, ed. by Graham Jones and Jon Roffe (PDF) . Edingburgh: Edinburgh University Press. pp.

27– 43.

ISBN 9780748632992 .

^ Gilles Deleuze, Difference and Repetition , 1994, p. 39.

^ Berressem, Hanjo and Leyla Haferkamp (2009).

Deleuzian Events: Writing History, ed. Hanjo Berressem and Leyla Haferkamp . Münster: LIT Verlag. p. 210.

ISBN 978-3643101747 .

^ Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus , 1987, p. 20.

v t e Gilles Deleuze – Félix Guattari Concepts and theories Affect Arborescent Assemblage Body without organs Desiring-production Deterritorialization Difference Erewhon Event Haecceity Immanent evaluation Individuation Line of flight Minority Molar configuration Multiplicity Plane of immanence Reterritorialization Rhizome Schizoanalysis Societies of control Socius Subjectification Transcendental empiricism Univocity of being Virtual Works by Deleuze and Guattari Capitalism and Schizophrenia Anti-Oedipus A Thousand Plateaus Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature Rhizome Nomadology: The War Machine What Is Philosophy?

Works by Deleuze Empiricism and Subjectivity Nietzsche and Philosophy Kant's Critical Philosophy Proust and Signs Nietzsche Bergsonism Masochism: Coldness and Cruelty Difference and Repetition Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza The Logic of Sense Spinoza: Practical Philosophy The Intellectuals and Power: A Discussion Between Gilles Deleuze and Michel Foucault Dialogues Superpositions Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation Cinema 1: The Movement Image Cinema 2: The Time-Image Foucault The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque Périclès et Verdi: La philosophie de Francois Châtelet Negotiations Essays Critical and Clinical Bartleby, la formula della creazione Pure Immanence: Essays on a Life Desert Islands and Other Texts 1953-1974 Two Regimes of Madness Works by Guattari Psychanalyse et transversalité Molecular Revolution Desire and Revolution L'inconscient machinique. Essais de Schizoanalyse L’intervention institutionnelle Les années d'hiver Pratique de l'institutionnel et politique Communists Like Us Molecular Revolution in Brazil The Three Ecologies Cartographies schizoanalytiques Chaosmose Chaosophy Soft Subversions The Guattari Reader The Anti-Oedipus Papers Chaos and Complexity Related topics L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze La Borde Clinic Deleuze and Guattari A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity Further reading [ edit ] * Horan, Daniel P. OFM (December 1, 2014), Postmodernity and Univocity - A Critical Account of Radical Orthodoxy and John Duns Scotus , Fortress Press, Minneapolis, 144 p.

OCLC 1404520838 , doi : 10.2307/j.ctt9m0v6z , JSTOR j.ctt9m0v6z , ISBN 978-1451465723 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Univocity_of_being&oldid=1279956137 " Categories : Medieval philosophy Religious philosophical concepts Scotism Conceptions of God Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 March 2025, at 15:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Univocity of being 9 languages Add topic

