Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Versions 2 Predicables 3 Porphyrian Tree 4 Problem of universals 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Isagoge 18 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Latina Nederlands 日本語 Português کوردی Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Textbook on Logic by Prophyry Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e The Isagoge ( Greek : Εἰσαγωγή , Eisagōgḗ ; / ˈ aɪ s ə ɡ oʊ dʒ iː / ) or "Introduction" to Aristotle's "Categories" , written by Porphyry in Greek and translated into Latin by Boethius , was the standard textbook on logic for at least a millennium after his death. It was composed by Porphyry in Sicily during the years 268–270, and sent to Chrysaorium, according to all the ancient commentators Ammonius , Elias , and David . The work includes the highly influential hierarchical classification of genera and species from substance in general down to individuals, known as the Tree of Porphyry , and an introduction which mentions the problem of universals .

Boethius ' translation of the work, in Latin, became a standard medieval textbook in European scholastic universities, setting the stage for medieval philosophical-theological developments of logic and the problem of universals .  Many writers, such as Boethius himself, Averroes , Peter Abelard , Duns Scotus , wrote commentaries on the book. Other writers such as William of Ockham incorporated them into their textbooks on logic.

Versions [ edit ] Iluminure from the Hunayn ibn-Ishaq al-'Ibadi manuscript of the Isagoge.

Arabic manuscript of the Isagoge The earliest Latin translation, which is now no longer extant, was made by Gaius Marius Victorinus in the fourth century.

Boethius heavily relied upon it in his translation. The earliest known Syriac translation was made in the seventh century by Athanasius II Baldoyo , the Patriarch of Antioch . An early Classical Armenian translation of the work also exists.

[ 1 ] The Introduction was translated into Arabic by ibn al-Muqaffa‘ from a Syriac version. With the Arabicized name Isāghūjī , it long remained the standard introductory logic text in the Muslim world and influenced the study of theology, philosophy, grammar,  and jurisprudence. Besides the adaptations and epitomes of this work, many independent works on logic by Muslim philosophers have been entitled Isāghūjī . Porphyry's discussion of accident sparked a long-running debate on the application of accident and essence .

[ 2 ] Predicables [ edit ] The predicables (Lat.

praedicabilis , that which may be stated or affirmed, sometimes called quinque voces or five words ) is, in scholastic logic , a term applied to a classification of the possible relations in which a predicate may stand to its subject . The list given by the schoolmen and generally adopted by modern logicians is based on the original fourfold classification given by Aristotle ( Topics , a iv. 101 b 17–25): definition ( horos ), genus ( genos ), property ( idion ), accident ( sumbebekos ). The scholastic classification, obtained from Boëthius's version of the Isagoge , modified Aristotle's by substituting differentia ( diaphora ) and species ( eidos ) for definition ( horos ).  The method of definition by diairesis , or differentiation, was known and practiced by Aristotle.

Porphyrian Tree [ edit ] Main article: Porphyrian tree In medieval textbooks, the all-important Porphyrian tree illustrates his logical classification of substance. To this day, taxonomy benefits from concepts in the Porphyrian tree in classifying living organisms: see cladistics .

Problem of universals [ edit ] The work is celebrated for prompting the medieval debate over the status of universals .  Porphyry writes: For the moment, I shall naturally decline to say, concerning genera and species, whether they subsist, whether they are bare, pure isolated conceptions, whether, if subsistent, they are corporeal or incorporeal, or whether they are separated from or in sensible objects, and other related matters. This sort of problem is of the very deepest, and requires more extensive investigation.

αὐτίκα περὶ τῶν γενῶν τε καὶ εἰδῶν τὸ μὲν εἴτε ὑφέστηκεν εἴτε καὶ ἐν μόναις ψιλαῖς ἐπινοίαις κεῖται εἴτε καὶ ὑφεστηκότα σώματά ἐστιν ἢ ἀσώματα καὶ πότερον χωριστὰ ἢ ἐν τοῖς αἰσθητοῖς καὶ περὶ ταῦτα ὑφεστῶτα, παραιτήσομαι λέγειν βαθυτάτης οὔσης τῆς τοιαύτης πραγματείας καὶ ἄλλης μείζονος δεομένης ἐξετάσεως.

[ 3 ] Though he did not mention the problem further, his formulation constitutes the most influential part of his work, since it was these questions that formed the basis of medieval debates about the status of universals.  Do universals exist in the mind, or in reality?  If in reality, are they physical things, or not?  If physical, do they have a separate existence from physical bodies, or are they part of them?

References [ edit ] ^ "Porphyry, Introduction (or Isagoge) to the logical Categories ofAristotle. Preface to the online edition" .

^ "Isagoge" at Encyclopædia Iranica ^ Aristotelis opera omnia. Ad optimorum librorum fidem accurate ...

, Volume 8 Bibliography [ edit ] Barnes, Jonathan (2003). Introduction to Introduction by Porphyry. Clarendon Press (modern translation of the Isagoge ) King, Daniel (2010).

The Earliest Syriac Translation of Aristotle's Categories: Text, Translation and Commentary . Brill "Porphyrii Isagoge translatio" .

Corpus scriptorum latinorum (in Latin). Archived from the original on September 2, 2003 . Retrieved 2008-05-03 .

Pearse, R.

"Porphyry, Introduction (or Isagoge) to the logical Categories of Aristotle. Preface to the online edition" .

Manuscripts . Retrieved 2008-05-03 .

Porphyry, Isagoge , translation by Octavius Freire Owen (1853) MS 484/15 Commentum super libro Porphyrii Isagoge; De decim predicamentis at OPenn v t e Porphyry of Tyre Works Against the Christians Isagoge On Abstinence from Eating Animals On the Cave of the Nymphs in the Odyssey Miscellaneous Porphyrian tree Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Poland 2 3 Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 3 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Isagoge&oldid=1291031798 " Categories : Logic literature 3rd-century books Works by Porphyry of Tyre Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text CS1: unfit URL CS1 Latin-language sources (la) This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 17:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Isagoge 18 languages Add topic

