Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and arguments 2 Conquest and military occupation 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Right of conquest 10 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Català Español فارسی Français עברית Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in political science This article appears to be slanted towards recent events .

Please try to keep recent events in historical perspective and add more content related to non-recent events.

( July 2019 ) Part of a series on War ( outline ) History Prehistoric Ancient Thermal Gunpowder Timeline Post-classical Castles Early modern Military revolution Pike and shot Napoleonic warfare Late modern Industrial warfare Fourth-gen warfare AI warfare Military Organization Command and control Defense ministry Reserves Ranks Branches: Army Navy Air force Marines Coast guard Border guard Special forces Cyber force Space force Specialties: Staff Engineers Intel Recon Medical Police Diving Pilot Land units: Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special forces Signal corps Naval units: Warships Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ships Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Combat systems: Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo data computer Development: Basic training Military manoeuvrers Combat training Battlespace Aerospace Aerial Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Fortification Jungle Mountain Urban Subterranean Tunnel Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Seabed Cyber Information Weapons Air defence Armor Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Horses Air cavalry Chemical Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone / Robot Electromagnetic Firearms Infantry Loitering Missile Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Submarine Unconventional Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Air assault Airbridge Airdrop Anti-aircraft Anti-sub Anti-tank Battle Cavalry Charge CQC Counterattack Counterinsurgency Convoy Defeat in detail Foxhole Drone Envelopment Formation Guerrilla Naval Rapid dominance Encirclement Investment Siege Swarm Screen Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Special Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Raid Covert Stay-behind Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Anti-access Attrition Commerce raiding Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Empty fort Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Nuclear Naval Offensive Scorched earth Grand strategy Asymmetric Blockade Broken-backed Class Cold war Colonial Conquest Containment Divide and conquer Economic Endemic Fleet in being Irregular Liberation Limited Network-centric New generation Perpetual Political Princely Proxy Religious Resource Strategic Succession Technology Theater Total war World war Administrative Branch Policy Staff Training Service Sociology Organization Area of responsibility Chain of command Command and control Doctrine Order of battle Principles of war Economy of force Medicine Engineers Intelligence Ranks Technology and equipment Personnel Recruitment Conscription Draft evasion Mobilization Training Specialism Soldier Morale Volunteer Women Children Transgender Harassment Conscientious objector Conscription and sexism Counter-recruitment Logistics History War economy Arms industry Materiel Supply-chain management Military–industrial complex Base MOB FOB Outpost Science Power projection Loss-of-strength gradient Lanchester's laws Force multiplication Morale Law Belligerent Occupation Armistice Ceasefire Court-martial Desertion Geneva Conventions Geneva Protocol Islamic rules Justice Lawful / Unlawful combatant Perfidy Regular / Irregular Jewish laws on war Right of conquest Right of self-defence Rules of engagement Self-determination Martial law War crime War and genocide War treason Theory Air supremacy Appeasement Command of the sea Deterrence theory Full-spectrum dominance Overmatch Just war theory Principles of war Philosophy of war Security dilemma Tripwire force Wargaming Simulation Exercises Combat effectiveness Center of gravity Non-warfare Arms control Counter-insurgency Deterrence Disaster response Grey-zone Gunboat diplomacy Humanitarian aid Law enforcement Low-intensity conflict Military engineering Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Peace through strength Show of force Culture Awards and decorations Battle cry Warrior War film Military science fiction War novel Anti-war movement Foot drill War song Uniform Wargame Militarization / Militarism Antimilitarism Camp follower Books Seven Military Classics The Art of War De re militari Strategemata Related Women in war War resister War studies Horses in warfare Wartime sexual violence Fifth column Mercenary Pacifism Privateer Private military company Soldiers are murderers Lists Battles Military occupations Military terms Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e The right of conquest was historically a right of ownership to land after immediate possession via force of arms. It was recognized as a principle of international law that gradually deteriorated in significance until its proscription in the aftermath of World War II following the concept of crimes against peace introduced in the Nuremberg Principles . The interdiction of territorial conquests was confirmed and broadened by the UN Charter , which provides in article 2, paragraph 4, that "All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations ." Nations that have resorted to the use of force since the Charter came into effect have typically invoked self-defense or the right of collective defense .

[ 1 ] History and arguments [ edit ] Proponents state that the right of conquest acknowledges the status quo , and that denial of the right is meaningless unless one is able and willing to use military force to deny it.

[ citation needed ] Further, the right was traditionally accepted because the conquering force, being by definition stronger than any lawfully entitled governance which it may have replaced, was, therefore, more likely to secure peace and stability for the people, and so the right of conquest legitimizes the conqueror towards that end.

[ not verified in body ] [ citation needed ] The completion of colonial conquest of much of the world (see the Scramble for Africa ), the devastation of World War I and World War II , and the alignment of both the United States and the Soviet Union with the principle of self-determination led to the abandonment of the right of conquest in formal international law. The 1928 Kellogg–Briand Pact , the post-1945 Nuremberg and Tokyo Trials , the UN Charter , and the UN role in decolonization saw the progressive dismantling of this principle.

[ citation needed ] The UN Charter's guarantees the " territorial integrity " of member states, but enforcement difficulties in the 21st century [ 2 ] lead to a contentious debate on possible re-emergence of the right of conquest as international law .

[ 3 ] Conquest and military occupation [ edit ] Until 1945, the disposition of territory acquired under the principle of conquest had to be conducted according to the existing laws of war . This meant that there had to be military occupation followed by a peace settlement, and there was no reasonable chance of the defeated sovereign regaining the land.  While a formal peace treaty "makes good any defects in title", [ 4 ] it was not required.  Recognition by the losing party was not a requirement: "the right of acquisition vested by conquest did not depend on the consent of the dispossessed state".

[ 5 ] However, the alternative was annexation (part or in whole) which if protested as unlawful, a peace treaty was the only means to legitimize conquest in a time of war.  Essentially, conquest itself was a legal act of extinguishing the legal rights of other states without their consent.  Under this framework, it is notable that conquest and subsequent occupation outside of war were illegal.

[ 5 ] In the post-World War II era, not all wars involving territorial acquisitions ended in a peace treaty . For example, the fighting in the Korean War paused with an armistice , without any peace treaty covering it. As of 2025, North Korea is still technically at war with South Korea and the United States.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Colonialism Conquest Debellatio Discovery doctrine Fait accompli Franz Oppenheimer 's "conquest theory" of the state Imperialism Invasion Jungle justice Just war theory Mandate of Heaven Manifest destiny Might makes right Prize (law) Prize of war Realism (international relations) Revanchism Responsibility to protect Roerich Pact Status quo ante bellum Survival of the fittest Uti possidetis Vae victis War of aggression War trophy References [ edit ] ^ Silke Marie Christiansen (2016).

Climate Conflicts – A Case of International Environmental and Humanitarian Law . Springer. p. 153.

ISBN 9783319279459 .

^ Jeria, Michelle Bachelet (2016).

"The Challenges to International Law in the 21st Century" .

Proceedings of the ASIL Annual Meeting .

110 : 3– 11.

doi : 10.1017/S0272503700102435 .

ISSN 0272-5037 .

^ Mulligan, Michael (2020).

"The Re-Emergence of Conquest: International Law and the Legitimate Use of Force" .

Liverpool Law Review .

41 (3): 293– 313.

doi : 10.1007/s10991-020-09250-3 .

^ Korman 1996 , p. 127.

^ a b Korman 1996 , p. 128.

^ "The Korean War never technically ended. Here's why" .

History . June 24, 2020. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021.

Works cited [ edit ] Korman, Sharon (1996).

The Right of Conquest: The Acquisition of Territory by Force in International Law and Practice . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-828007-6 .

Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_of_conquest&oldid=1292059198 " Categories : Law of war legal terminology Property law Political theories Political terminology International law Sovereignty Property law legal terminology International law legal terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles slanted towards recent events from July 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 00:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right of conquest 10 languages Add topic

