Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Administration 2 Facilities 3 Challenges 4 Venture Incubation Program 5 Notable companies 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Innovation Labs 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American institution Harvard Innovation Labs Industry Education Founded 2011 ; 14 years ago ( 2011 ) Headquarters Boston , Massachusetts , United States Key people Matthew M. Segneri (executive director) Thomas Eisenmann (faculty chair) Website innovationlabs.harvard.edu Harvard Innovation Labs (i-Lab) is an institution which aims to promote team-based and entrepreneurial activities among Harvard students, faculty, entrepreneurs, and members of the Allston and Greater Boston communities.

[ 1 ] The i-Lab has incubated more than 4,000 teams and early-stage companies ranging through various stages of the entrepreneurship lifecycle, and these companies have collectively raised over $7 Billion.

[ 2 ] Administration [ edit ] Gordon Jones was named the inaugural director of the i-Lab in 2011.

[ 3 ] Jodi Goldstein succeeded Jones in 2015 and served in the position through the 2019-20 academic year. Chris Colbert, the cousin of comedian Stephen Colbert , served alongside Goldstein from 2016 as the director of i-Lab until 2019.

[1] The current executive director of the i-Lab is Matthew M. Segneri who most recently served as director of the Social Enterprise Initiative at Harvard Business School before succeeding Goldstein in 2020.

[ 4 ] Professor Srikant Datar serves as faculty chairperson. The i-Lab has approximately 14 administrative and support staff members.

[ 5 ] Facilities [ edit ] The i-Lab is headquartered at 125 Western Avenue, Allston, MA 02163. The i-Lab occupies over 30,000 square feet of space divided into three areas: the lobby area which is open to the public, a multi-media lecture hall used to host RSVP events, and a flex-space open area for registered i-Lab residents. The i-Lab also has more than 20 reservable conference rooms and a stocked kitchen.

In 2014, the facilities were extended to include the Harvard Launch Lab, [ 6 ] a space for Harvard alumni to continue business incubation. Unlike the i-Lab, which is free for Harvard students, the Launch Lab functions on a pay-for-table model. In 2015, the Launch lab added an addendum facility to foster 35 more teams.

[ 7 ] Challenges [ edit ] The i-Lab hosts several competitions open to students across the university ("Challenges"). The Challenges are similar to traditional business plan competitions in which teams submit proposals, give presentations, and are judged by a panel of experts. There are cash and in-kind prizes awarded to Challenge winners. Challenges at the i-Lab include: President's Challenge: The President's Challenge is designed to help students develop and execute solutions to complex systemic problems facing the world. Past winners and finalists include Vaxess Technologies [ 8 ] and SurgiBox .

[ 9 ] Deans' Cultural Entrepreneurship Challenge: The Deans’ Cultural Entrepreneurship Challenge calls upon visionary and entrepreneurial students to develop solutions for expanding the role of the arts in society and supporting arts and artists in a sustainable manner.

Deans' Health and Life Sciences Challenge: The Deans’ Health and Life Sciences Challenge encourages students from across the University to find entrepreneurial solutions to the task of delivering affordable health.

Venture Incubation Program [ edit ] The Venture Incubation Program (VIP) is open to full-time degree-seeking students and select alumni of any of the Harvard schools that are working on an entrepreneurial  or innovative ventures.

[ 10 ] The 12-week program has fall, spring, and summer cohorts. As of November 2018, 1,146 VIP student teams have participated.

[ 11 ] In the first half of 2020, several VIP teams played significant roles in addressing the COVID-19 global pandemic, from making personal protection equipments (PPE) to providing key economic data for the Harvard COVID-19 Business Impact Center.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] In February 2022, the Harvard Innovation Labs announced its largest-ever Venture Program cohort, with 628 ventures participating.

[ 15 ] While the program does not provide funding to teams, it does provide them with: Shared co-working space Private workshops Industry-specific roundtables Mentor-matching program Founder Dinners with visiting entrepreneurs Exclusive Office Hours with guest experts i-Lab Staff Advisor Technical resources including hosting credits Access to an Augmented Reality Studio Access to a hardware prototyping lab Notable companies [ edit ] The following is an incomplete list of notable companies (Raised $100M+ in venture funding) that were incubated at the Harvard Innovation Labs [ 16 ] Alfred Catalant Evisort Handy Mark43 Philo Plastiq RapidSOS RightHand Robotics SES Shield AI TetraScience Tomorrow.io Whoop Zoomcar Zumper References [ edit ] ^ "Take a tour of Harvard's i-Lab (Boston.com 02-19-2013)" .

The Boston Globe .

^ "Top 10 Innovation Moments of 2023" .

Harvard Innovation Labs .

^ "Harvard Innovation Lab Appoints Director (Xconomy 04-29-2011)" .

^ "Harvard University Appoints Matt Segneri New Executive Director of I-Lab - News - Harvard Business School" .

www.hbs.edu . Retrieved 2020-05-01 .

^ "Harvard Innovation Lab Website: Our Staff (i-lab.harvard.edu 06-16-2016)" .

^ "First look: Harvard's new Launch Lab, a home for alumni startups (betaboston.com 06-16-2016)" .

^ "First look: Harvard's Launch Lab turns one, adds space for 35 more alumni startups (betaboston.com 06-16-2016)" .

^ "10 finalists in President's Challenge" .

^ "Harvard i-lab honors student innovators - The Boston Globe" .

BostonGlobe.com . Retrieved 2021-11-17 .

^ "Venture Incubation Program – The Harvard Innovation Lab" . Retrieved 2016-09-29 .

^ "Apply for the i-Lab's Spring 2016 Venture Incubation Program" . 2015-12-11 . Retrieved 2016-09-29 .

^ "Two weeks of sleepless nights turn 3D card maker into PPE provider" .

Lovepop . Retrieved 2020-06-16 .

^ Library, HBS Baker.

"Read emerging HBS faculty research and insights on COVID-19's impact on the economy" .

www.hbs.edu . Retrieved 2020-06-16 .

^ Library, HBS Baker.

"Global Policy Tracker | Baker Library | Bloomberg Center | Harvard Business School" .

www.hbs.edu . Retrieved 2020-06-16 .

^ Green, Hannah (February 28, 2022).

"Exclusive: Harvard's i-lab announces largest-ever venture program cohort" .

Boston Business Journal .

^ "10 Years" .

Harvard Innovation Labs . Retrieved 2023-10-07 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Innovation_Labs&oldid=1297110117 " Category : Harvard University research institutes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Innovation Labs 1 language Add topic

