Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Controversy over demolition Toggle Controversy over demolition subsection 1.1 Legal battles 1.2 Demolition 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Stone Hall (Ithaca, New York) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°26′55″N 76°28′46″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.44861°N 76.47944°W ﻿ / 42.44861; -76.47944 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia United States historic place Stone Hall U.S. National Register of Historic Places The rear of Stone Hall can be seen to the center right in this ca. 1984 photo. Roberts Hall is the larger connected building to the left.

Show map of New York Show map of the United States Location Cornell University campus, Ithaca, New York Coordinates 42°26′55″N 76°28′46″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.44861°N 76.47944°W ﻿ / 42.44861; -76.47944 Built 1905 Architect Heins, George L.; Kantrowitz, Morris Architectural style Classical Revival, Beaux Arts, Renaissance MPS New York State College of Agriculture TR NRHP reference No.

84003860 Added to NRHP September 24, 1984 [ 1 ] Stone Hall was a building on the campus of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York , named after John Lemuel Stone, a CALS professor of farm practice during the early 1900s.

[ 2 ] Stone, Roberts, and East Roberts Hall were three joined buildings on the Agriculture Quadrangle, with the larger Roberts in the center and Stone and East Roberts on the west and east sides, respectively. The three buildings made up the original New York State College of Agriculture , built 1905–1906. The three were demolished in the late 1980s, despite the efforts of the City of Ithaca and local preservationists to save the buildings.

Controversy over demolition [ edit ] The State University of New York determined that the three buildings were in poor and deteriorating condition. A 1973 study conducted by State University of New York suggested that renovation would cost over $14 million.

[ 3 ] Instead, they planned to first raze Stone Hall to make room for a new administrative building to be called Academic I . After Academic I's completion, the state planned to raze Roberts and East Roberts to build a new plant sciences building.

[ 4 ] Legal battles [ edit ] Local preservationist group Historic Ithaca, in an attempt to save the building, had the structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1984, [ 1 ] as well as designated a city historic landmark. Starting in 1982, the city and Historic Ithaca launched a series of lawsuits and appeals in an attempt to block demolition.

[ 5 ] The city argued in court that the buildings could not be altered without approval from the Ithaca Landmarks Preservation Commission.

[ 3 ] Demolition [ edit ] On February 10, 1986, about "one tenth" of Stone Hall was demolished, ahead of the late February date which was expected.

[ 6 ] A state Supreme Court issued a temporary restraining order, pointing out that a demolition permit had not been granted by the city.

[ 7 ] [ 5 ] In July 1986, a State Supreme court judge ruled that state college campus buildings are not protected by local preservation orders.

[ 5 ] After standing partially-demolished for much of the year, the remainder of the building was removed in December 1986.

[ 5 ] Construction of "Academic I" (now known as Kennedy Hall) began in May 1987.

[ 8 ] Citing the legal precedent of Stone Hall, the State University officials proceeded with the demolition of Roberts Hall and East Roberts Hall in July 1990.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall References [ edit ] ^ a b "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . April 15, 2008.

^ "Albert R. Mann Library | John Lemuel Stone" .

www.mannlib.cornell.edu . Archived from the original on September 7, 2006.

^ a b Gesensway, Deborah (September 4, 1985).

"State report recommends wrecking ball for Stone Hall" . The Ithaca Journal. pp. 1, 11 . Retrieved August 27, 2023 .

^ Genensway, Deborah (February 5, 1986).

"Battle over Ag Quad buildings continues in court" . Ithaca, New York: The Ithaca Journal . Retrieved August 27, 2023 .

^ a b c d Tredway, Helena (December 2, 1986).

"State continues its demolition of Stone Hall" . Ithaca, New York: The Ithaca Journal. pp. 3A, 5A . Retrieved August 27, 2023 .

^ Sharpe, Rochelle (February 22, 1986).

"Decision on Stone Hall could come Monday from Albany" . Ithaca, New York: The Ithaca Journal. Gannett News Service. pp. 1, 8 . Retrieved August 27, 2023 .

^ Gesensway, Deborah (March 25, 1986).

"State judge rules Cornell needed permit to demolish Stone Hall" . Ithaca, New York: The Ithaca Journal . Retrieved August 27, 2023 .

^ "CU's Academic I getting on its feet" . Ithaca, New York: The Ithaca Journal. May 2, 1987. p. 3A . Retrieved August 27, 2023 .

^ Yaukey, John (November 16, 1989).

"Cornell buildings set for wrecking ball" . Ithaca, New York: The Ithaca Journal. p. 3A . Retrieved August 27, 2023 .

^ "Going down" . Ithaca, New York: The Ithaca Journal. July 26, 1990. p. 3A . Retrieved August 27, 2023 .

... workers tear down Roberts Hall at Cornell University Wednesday ... there are no future plans for the site ...

v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places in New York Topics Contributing property Keeper of the Register Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places National Park Service Property types Lists by county Albany Allegany Bronx Broome Cattaraugus Cayuga Chautauqua Chemung Chenango Clinton Columbia Cortland Delaware Dutchess Erie Essex Franklin Fulton Genesee Greene Hamilton Herkimer Jefferson Kings (Brooklyn) Lewis Livingston Madison Monroe Montgomery Nassau New York (Manhattan) Niagara Oneida Onondaga Ontario Orange Orleans Oswego Otsego Putnam Queens Rensselaer Richmond (Staten Island) Rockland Saratoga Schenectady Schoharie Schuyler Seneca St. Lawrence Steuben Suffolk Sullivan Tioga Tompkins Ulster Warren Washington Wayne Westchester Northern Southern Wyoming Yates Lists by city Albany Buffalo New Rochelle New York City Bronx Brooklyn Queens Staten Island Manhattan Below 14th St.

14th–59th St.

59th–110th St.

Above 110th St.

Minor islands Niagara Falls Peekskill Poughkeepsie Rhinebeck Rochester Syracuse Yonkers Other lists Bridges and tunnels National Historic Landmarks New York City Outside New York City Category List National Register of Historic Places Portal v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category This article about a historic property or district  in Tompkins County , New York , that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places , is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stone_Hall_(Ithaca,_New_York)&oldid=1301873201 " Categories : Cornell University buildings School buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in New York (state) University and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in New York (state) National Register of Historic Places in Tompkins County, New York Finger Lakes, New York Registered Historic Place stubs Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles using NRISref without a reference number Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 05:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stone Hall (Ithaca, New York) Add languages Add topic

