Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Statistics 3 Impact of climate change on the underwater environment 4 Impact of tourism on the underwater environment 5 Diving destinations and sites Toggle Diving destinations and sites subsection 5.1 Ari Atoll 5.2 Baa Atoll 5.3 South Malé Atoll 5.4 North Malé Atoll 5.5 Lhaviyani Atoll 5.6 Shaviyani Atoll 5.7 Addu Atoll 5.8 Fuvahmulah Atoll 6 Marine biodiversity 7 Economic importance 8 Facilities and legal constraints 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Diving in the Maldives 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Recreational diving region description This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Manta rays (Manta birostris) taken at Himandhoo Manta Point, Maldives The Maldives , officially the Republic of Maldives, is a small archipelagic state in South Asia. It lies in the Indian Ocean southwest of Sri Lanka and India, about 700 kilometres (430 mi) from the Asian continent's mainland. The chain of 26 atolls stretches across the Equator from Ihavandhippolhu Atoll in the north to Addu Atoll in the south. The land area is roughly 298 square kilometres (115 sq mi). Malé is the capital.

The Maldives has white sand beaches, coral reefs, clear warm waters, numerous scuba diving sites and rich marine life. Most holiday resorts in the Maldives have a scuba diving facility and there are a number of liveaboard operators offering scuba diving cruise holidays.

In the 1998 global coral bleaching , much of the coral in the Maldives was bleached due to the El Niño event combined with global warming . In 2016, global warming and the El Nino event heated the Maldives, which, with land reclamation and water pollution , bleached and killed 75% of corals in the Maldives.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2021 ) The Maldives has been growing in popularity as a scuba diving destination since the 1970s when the number of resorts began to increase.

[ citation needed ] Statistics [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2021 ) Tourist arrivals to the Maldives have been growing steadily for the past ten years, with the exception of 2005 (the year after the tsunami ), when the numbers dropped. Around 700,000 tourists visit the Maldives each year (2008).

[ 3 ] Impact of climate change on the underwater environment [ edit ] This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( July 2021 ) Climate change has severely impacted coral reefs around the world as has been widely reported such as the effects of the El Niño in late 1990s, according to some [ who?

] around 60%-80% of the corals have been bleached in several areas in the world including the Maldives reefs.

[ 4 ] Impact of tourism on the underwater environment [ edit ] Reports have described the socio-economic impact on the environment as a result of mass tourism expansion in the Maldives.

[ 5 ] [ clarification needed ] Diving destinations and sites [ edit ] Nurse sharks (Ginglymostoma cirratum) taken on a night dive in Alimatha Maldives The Maldives comprises mainly open water, with only 1% of the country being land-based. The land is spread over 1,192 islets, each of which forms part of an atoll. In total, there are 26 atolls in the Maldives. The following atolls are home to some of the dive sites.

[ 6 ] The Maldives offers different types of dives, but most are characterized by medium to strong currents.

[ 7 ] Each island in the Maldives has its own lagoon , which is usually not very deep.

[ quantify ] Terminology: A thila is an underwater pinnacle.

Kandu are diving spots around the border of the atoll.

Ari Atoll [ edit ] See also: Alif Alif Atoll This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Located in the western part of the Maldives, Ari Atoll is one of the largest atolls and has a wide selection of dive sites, including: Diguri Guri : A dive site near Ellaidhoo .

Broken Rock : A dive site named for the large broken rock at its center. It is home to soft and hard coral formations that attract a wide variety of reef fish.

Gangehi Kandu : Recommended only for advanced scuba divers, the Gangehi Kandu is a dive site in the northern part of the Ari Atoll. Currents here can be an issue, and the site should only be dived when the currents are flowing into the site.

Hukrueli Faru: Also known as Rangali Madivaru or just Madivaru, Hukrueli Faru has a colorful coral reef.

Kudarah Thila: Declared a “Protected Marine Area” by the Maldivian government, Kudarah Thila is a dive site with incoming currents.

Maalhos Thila : Maalhos Thila is only suitable for advanced scuba divers because the main part of the dive site lies deeper than 25 metres. Because of the strong currents, a safety float must be deployed to monitor divers’ location.

Maaya Thila : A spot for daytime and night-time scuba diving. However, when currents are strong it is recommended for only advanced divers and they will need to deploy a safety float.

Mushi Mas Mingili Thila : Fish Head or Mushi Mas Mingili is a popular dive sites in the Maldives.

Kalhahandi Kandu : Kalhahandi Kandu is recommended mainly for advanced scuba divers.

Gudrun Faru : Recommended only for advanced scuba divers and good snorkelers, the Gudrun Faru reef is in the northern part of the Ari Atoll.

Baa Atoll [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Blue Hole : A 22-meter underwater cave/chimney. Swim through, stingrays, blacktip reef sharks, moray eels, lionfish. The reef starts at around 1m with the top of the Blue Hole at around 6m, with a small exit at 12m and the bottom exit at around 22m.

Milaidhoo Caves : The top of the reef is at around 3m, sloping down to a sandy bottom at up to 40m with many small caves and overhangs along the reef wall.

Dhega Thila : The top of this thila is at 13m and there is a canyon at 24m. This advanced level dive site slopes down to 30m with interesting rock formations.

Dhigu Thila : This long, narrow thila is at 9m to 30m, and along the edge there are many caves and overhangs.

Dhonfanu Thila : This thila extends from 9m down to 35m, with some caves to explore and the swim-through starts at 25m.

Dharavandhoo Thila : The shallowest part of this thila is 6m, going down to 30m. There are caves at different depths and an abundance of marine life.

Nelivaru Thila : Starting at 5m, this thila is a hotspot for manta rays during the season, [ when?

] but throughout the year there is a vast assortment of marine life to see. Rock formations, fan corals, nurse sharks, stingrays, and schooling fishes Dhigali Thila : The top of this thila is at 10m, and it extends down to 30m, with canyons and caves to explore.

Aidhoo Corner : The shallow top reef at 3-5m slopes down to more than 40m. This corner dive on Aidhoo island has soft coral, groups of snappers and overhangs.

South Malé Atoll [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Male Atoll is divided into 2 sections, the North Male Atoll and the South Male Atoll.

Cocoa Corner (Cocoa Thila) : A dive site that can be explored in several different ways. With the right current and conditions, it is the best shark show around Male Atoll. A safety float is required, and divers should be prepared to make a midwater safety stop .

Guraidhoo Kandu South : Currents here are strong, making this a dive site appropriate only for advanced, experienced scuba divers. Divers should be very cautious at this dive site, as the currents can pull them away from the reef and there is often underwater turbulence.

North Malé Atoll [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The North Male Atoll is one of the most developed atolls in terms of hotel and resort development.

Underwater Habitat : Underwater Habitat, part of Hilton Maldives House Reef, is a unique project under the lead of the Resident Marine Biologist. With more than 2 300 logged dives it is one of the most visited Dive Sites in North Male Atoll.

[ 8 ] Banana Reef : Currents can be strong at times around this reef, with occasional turbulence occurring around the overhangs. The use of a safety float is recommended. The reef is big and banana-shaped with caves and overhangs. The reef top is between 3 and 8 meters from where it drops to 30+ meters.

[ 9 ] Kuda Haa : Kuda Haa is a pinnacle, or thila, dive. Kuda Haa consists of two connected thilas that can easily be spotted from the surface. One thila starts at 6 meters and the other one at around 14 meters. Both of them slope down to a sandy bottom at 30+ meters.

[ 10 ] Hulangu Kandu : Hulangu Kandu is located in the channel just north of Hilton Maldives Amingiri. The dive site itself sits at the corner of the outer reef. It is an interesting diving spot with changing reef structures. Hulangu Kandu on an incoming current is a classic shark dive. Watch large schools of grey reef sharks and white tips circling the deep waters.

[ 11 ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lhaviyani Atoll [ edit ] Lhaviyani Atoll is part of Maldives Northern Atolls with several Resort & Local Islands. Diver know Lhaviyani Atoll for its big turtle and dolphin population as well as its high biodiversity and famous House Reefs.

[ 12 ] Nemo Thila : Located inside a national park. Stunning colors and more juvenile fish and small sardines than you could ever imagine live here. Leopard sharks, grey reef sharks, lion fish, lobsters, mantis shrimp, moray eels and octopus. Also a lot of blue line snappers and many anemones.

[ 13 ] Le Meridien House Reef : Green turtles, hawksbill turtles, schools of snappers, tunas, stingrays, nemo, pufferfish, unicorn fish and much more. Out in the blue, passing reef sharks as well as eagle rays can be spotted! With a bit of luck, you may even encounter manta rays.

[ 14 ] Fushifaru Thila : This pinnacle is located in the northeast channel of Lhaviyani Atoll. You can find a large plateau covered in coral blocks that act as cleaning stations for the manta rays during the southwest monsoon.

[ 15 ] Bova Thila : Located north of Le Meridien and in the inside atoll, the dive site is suitable for beginners and experienced divers alike. The reef features large patches with beautiful black coral. It is a great spot to find turtles. Small cracks and overhangs are home to lobsters, moray eels and stone fish.

[ 16 ] Maduvvari Haa : This beautiful thila is located south west of Le Meridien Maldives. The top of the reef is at about 5 – 8 meters, going down to around 30 meters. In the South west is a nice overhang and the north east you'll find a beautiful coral garden mainly consisting of hard coral.

[ 17 ] Maduvvari Dhekunu Kann : Maduvvari Dhekunu Kann is located on a channel corner west of Le Meridien Maldives. This prime dive spot is suitable for experienced divers who feel comfortable with deep dives in potentially strong currents. There is fish just about everywhere with fusiliers and snappers in massive numbers, as well as schooling sharks, napoleons and all other pelagic.

[ 18 ] Meyyafushi Kandu : With the right current Meyyafushi Kandu is a great channel to cross and experience what so many people come to the Maldives for. Starting from either one of the corners the actual swim only takes about 20 minutes. Imagine schooling jack's and trevallies, Napoleon fish swimming in between and then the tunas that appear almost clumsy in between all of those gracious predators.

[ 19 ] Olhuveli Medhu Faru : Olhuveli Medhu Faru is located 5 minutes to the east of Le Meridien Maldives. The reef structure is unique. It starts from 2 meters and connects into separate reefs and small thilas all the way down to 30 meters. It is spread very wide and gives endless possibilities how to dive the area. Healthy hard corals and many different kinds of stingrays are home here. Both hawksbill and green turtles are abundant. Dragon heads have also been found here.

[ 20 ] Shaviyani Atoll [ edit ] Shaviyani Atoll is an Atoll located at the Northern Part of Maldives. Very few Resorts and far apart Local Islands make it some of the remotest Diving Areas in Maldives. Hard and soft Coral life is significant healthier than in the rest of Maldives. Shaviyani Atoll is also know for its big Manta and Grey Reef Shark Population.

[ 21 ] Two special Highlights for Scuba Divers can be found at Sirru Fen Fushi Private Lagoon Resort. A semi submerged Museum operated by its Resident Marine Biologist and Maldives longest House Reef with a length of 9 km are part of the Resort.

[ 22 ] Sirru Fen Fushi House Reef : Part of Sirru Fen Fushi's 9 km long House Reef host a total of 5 different Dive Sites including own Manta Cleaning Stations.

[ 23 ] Maroshi Thila : A seamount located in Shaviyani Atoll famous for its Guitarfish , Zebra (Leopard) Sharks and Silver Tip Sharks encounters.

[ 24 ] Addu Atoll [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Addu Atoll is the only area in the Maldives that was not affected by the 1998 global coral bleaching.

British Loyalty : The wreck is 134 metres long and lies at a depth of 33 metres, on its port side.

Kottey Outside : A series of plateaus, with a steep drop off.

Turtle Point : A possibility of waves, surge and currents. A lot of coral damage on most of the reef due to the wave action.

Bodu Hoholha : Wall diving site near to a man-made channel which is used by local fishing boats so divers should look and listen for boat traffic when ascending.

Maa Kandu Outside : Easy reef wall dive.

Mahaala : Maahala is on the end of Kuda Kan’du Channel, behind Fihali Fara. There may be surge and surf at the top of the reef, particularly in the shallower areas.

Fuvahmulah Atoll [ edit ] Diving in Fuvahmulah Fuvahmulah (locally known as Gnaviyani Atoll), a solitary island atoll situated on the equator in the far south of the Maldives, has become a significant destination for scuba divers seeking encounters with large pelagic marine life.

Unlike the central Maldivian atolls, which are primarily known for reef manta rays, Fuvahmulah's unique geographic location and underwater topography attract an exceptional variety of large open-ocean species for crucial activities such as feeding, grooming, and reproduction.

This confluence has established Fuvahmulah as a key location for observing marine life less commonly seen elsewhere in the archipelago.

The island has gained international recognition, particularly for its dense shark populations, earning it the reputation as a prime "place to be in Asia" for oceanic megafauna encounters.

[ citation needed ] Notably, Fuvahmulah is reported to have the highest concentration of tiger sharks globally, solidifying its status as a leading destination for divers interested in these apex predators.

Beyond tiger sharks, the waters surrounding Fuvahmulah are rich with other impressive species, including hammerheads, thresher sharks, oceanic whitetips, silvertip sharks, whale sharks, and oceanic manta rays, providing divers with remarkable underwater spectacles.

Marine Life Sightings Marine Life Best Time to See Tiger Sharks Year-round (best Nov-May) Thresher Sharks April–November, September–December Hammerhead Sharks January–March, September–December Whale Sharks January–May, June–October (more frequent) Oceanic Manta Rays January–May, March–May (mating) Silvertip Sharks January–March Black Oceanic Mantas March–May (mating) The consistent presence of such a diverse range of shark species, including those less frequently observed in other Maldivian regions, highlights the rich biodiversity and ecological importance of Fuvahmulah's marine environment.

Divers visiting Fuvahmulah can generally expect favorable underwater conditions throughout the year, with warm waters ranging from 26 °C to 30 °C.

Underwater visibility is often excellent, typically between 20 and 30 meters and occasionally exceeding 100 meters during the dry season from December to April.

However, currents around Fuvahmulah can vary from moderate to strong, making some dive sites more suitable for divers with intermediate to advanced experience.

These currents, while potentially challenging, are vital in attracting the abundant pelagic life that makes Fuvahmulah a highly sought-after diving destination.

Dive Site Information Dive Site Name Dive Type Main Marine Life Depth Range (m) Recommended Skill Level Key Feature Tiger Harbor (Tiger Zoo/Neremathi/Tiger Shark Point/Femunu Kol) Reef, Sandy Bottom Tiger sharks, silvertip reef sharks, giant trevallies, rainbow runners, snappers 8-30+ Open Water & Above Guaranteed tiger shark encounters due to harbor fish waste.

Farikede (Farimikede/South Reef/Plateau) Drift, Reef, Ocean Barracuda, sunfish (mola mola), tuna, sharks (various species), oceanic manta, hammerhead shark, humpback whale 30+ Advanced & Expert Prime spot for encountering a wide array of large pelagic species, strong currents.

Thoondu Kandu (Hudhukede/Thoondu Beach/Thundi) Drift, Reef, Wall Thresher sharks (cleaning stations), whale sharks, various other sharks, oceanic manta, turtles, reef fish 6-30+ Experienced/AOWD Known for thresher shark cleaning stations, swim-throughs.

Maaneyre (Maaneyreh) Reef, Wall Hard corals, colorful reef fish, macro life 12-30 Beginner Diverse hard corals, good for macro photography, safe harbor during northeast monsoon.

Kudhu Falhagando Reef, Wall, Ocean Whitetip reef shark, thresher shark, tiger shark, grey sharks, silvertip sharks, oceanic manta 30 Intermediate/Advanced Mix of reef and pelagic life, various shark and manta species.

Haandhi Elhe Reef, Wall, Ocean Pipefish, butterflyfish, scorpionfish, grouper, clownfish, tuna, barracuda, Napoleon fish, pelagic fish 30 Various Diverse fish life, both reef and pelagic species.

Aruh Fanno Reef, Wall, Ocean Grouper, moray eel, coral, reef fish, diverse hard and fire corals 30 Advanced Vibrant and healthy coral reefs.

Anbul Reef, Wall, Ocean Barracuda, grey sharks 30 Intermediate Good for spotting barracudas and grey sharks.

Neregando (Neregando Fanno/Nere Muli) Reef, Wall, Ocean Barracuda, sea turtles, trevally, reef sharks, silvertip sharks, hammerhead sharks, thresher shark, oceanic manta, sometimes whale sharks 20-30 Advanced Renowned for year-round hammerhead shark sightings, thriving coral.

GEMMISKIH FANNO (Gehmiskiy fanno/Gemmiskih Fanno) Reef, Wall, Ocean Coral, vibrant reef fish, schooling fish, milkfish, oceanic mantas, thresher sharks, whale sharks 30 Various Rich coral life, potential for large pelagic encounters.

Tiger Zoo (Tiger Wall Dive Site) Reef, Sandy Bottom Tiger shark, silvertip sharks, hard coral, reef fish 12 Various Unique wine glass-shaped bottom due to harbor construction.

Rasge Fanno (Rasgefaanu) Reef Colorful reef fish, trevallies, snappers, groupers, barracudas, mantas, thresher sharks 5-30 Various Cleaning stations for mantas and thresher sharks, good for snorkeling.

Bondo Fanno Reef Sea fans, soft corals, colorful reef fish, hard corals, mantas, tiger sharks 20-30 Various Beautiful reef with sea fans and soft corals, potential for large pelagic encounters.

Gotha Kandu Drift Diverse marine species, sharks, eagle rays, schools of barracuda Vertical Drop Experienced Thrilling current dives, vertical drops.

Wadi Kandu - Nurse sharks, colorful coral gardens, anemones, soft corals - Various Known for nurse sharks in sandy caves, good for underwater photography.

Masparra Thila Pinnacle Batfish, fusiliers, snappers, eagle rays, grey reef sharks, whale sharks - Various Underwater pinnacle attracting diverse aquatic life.

Kalho Akiri (Kalho akirigando) Drift Over 28 diverse hard coral species - Advanced Pristine coral gardens, delightful drift dive.

Hawwa Faro (Havihtha fanno) Drift Thriving reef with vibrant coral life, thresher sharks, sand tiger, oceanic manta rays, mola mola, sea turtles - Advanced Historic dive site, popular with fishermen.

Ebithe Faro Wall - 40-100+ Advanced Dramatic underwater landscape with a significant drop-off, popular for underwater photography.

Kandasho (Kandhoval) Reef - - Beginner Sheltered reef with a half-bay shape, favored by fishermen.

Thona Faro (Cheers) Reef Vibrant hard coral formations, diverse reef fish, occasional tiger shark sightings - Advanced Unique wine glass-shaped bottom due to harbor construction, thrilling currents.

Abadhas - Giant silvertips, threshers, tigers, whale sharks - Advanced/Expert Consistent encounters with large sharks.

Bilhifeyshi - Thresher sharks, whale sharks, oceanic manta rays - Various Known for encounters with thresher sharks, whale sharks, and mantas.

Detailed Profiles of Fuvahmulah Dive Sites Fuvahmulah offers a variety of dive sites, each with unique characteristics and marine life: Tiger Harbor (also known as Tiger Zoo, Neremathi, Tiger Shark Point, Femunu Kol): Located at the entrance of the island's harbor, this site features a reef and sandy bottom ranging from 8 to over 30 meters. It is world-famous for near-guaranteed, year-round encounters with numerous tiger sharks, attracted by historical fish waste disposal. Divers can also see silvertip reef sharks, giant trevallies, rainbow runners, and snappers, with occasional sightings of leopard sharks, star sharks, giant moray eels, and oceanic manta rays. Visibility is generally good, especially during the dry season (up to 100 meters), but strong waves can occur. Recommended for Open Water certified divers and above, with some operators suggesting Advanced Open Water certification and logged dives. The coordinates are approximately -0.30660 latitude and 73.44128 longitude, and also noted as -0.30181, 73.42623. The attraction of sharks through fish waste raises ethical considerations.

Farikede (also known as Farimikede, South Reef, Plateau): Situated at the southernmost tip of Fuvahmulah, this renowned drift dive site encompasses reef and ocean environments, with the reef top between 10 and 15 meters sloping to depths exceeding 30 meters and dropping off to over 300 meters. It attracts a vast array of pelagic species, including barracuda, sunfish (mola mola), tuna, whitetip reef sharks, thresher sharks, whale sharks, mako sharks, silvertip sharks, trevally, grey reef sharks, oceanic mantas, hammerhead sharks, oceanic whitetip sharks, and even humpback whales. Strong currents are frequent. Recommended for advanced and expert divers. Coordinates are approximately -0.33286 latitude and 73.44720 longitude. It is a Protected Marine Area.

Thoondu Kandu (also known as Hudhukede, Thoondu Beach, Thundi): Located on the northern corner, this site offers drift, reef, and wall environments, with the reef starting at around 6 meters and extending beyond 30 meters. It is known as a cleaning station for thresher sharks, often seen at depths of at least 30 meters. Other encounters include whale sharks, various reef sharks, turtles, oceanic mantas, tiger sharks, and diverse reef fish. Strong currents can occur. Visibility can reach up to 100 meters between December and April. Deeper sections are recommended for experienced divers with Advanced Open Water certification.

Maaneyre: Once a landing beach, this reef and wall dive site features abundant hard corals starting at 12 meters and sloping into the deep ocean. It is rich in colorful reef fish and known for macro life. During the northeast monsoon, it offers calm conditions. Maximum depth is around 30 meters, generally considered beginner-friendly.

Kudhu Falhagando: A reef, wall, and ocean dive site reaching approximately 30 meters. Known for attracting various shark species, including whitetip reef sharks, thresher sharks, tiger sharks, and grey sharks, as well as silvertip sharks and oceanic mantas.

Haandhi Elhe: This reef, wall, and ocean dive site with a maximum depth of around 30 meters is notable for its diverse fish population, including pipefish, butterflyfish, scorpionfish, grouper, clownfish, tuna, barracuda, Napoleon fish, and other pelagic species.

Aruh Fanno: A reef, wall, and ocean dive site extending to about 30 meters, captivating for its stunning array of corals, including large coral heads and healthy fire corals. Divers can also observe grouper, moray eels, and numerous other reef fish. Generally recommended for advanced divers.

Anbul: A reef, wall, and ocean dive site reaching approximately 30 meters, known as a good location for spotting barracuda and grey sharks.

Neregando (also known as Neregando Fanno, Nere Muli): Located on the northwestern reef, this reef, wall, and ocean dive site reaches around 30 meters. The thriving coral life attracts many reef fish. Certain coral blocks at 20–30 meters are congregation points for snappers, groupers, trevallies, and reef sharks. Pelagic species like thresher sharks, oceanic mantas, and occasionally whale sharks can be seen with favorable currents. Renowned for year-round hammerhead shark sightings. Divers may also encounter barracuda, sea turtles, and schools of trevally and silvertip sharks. Can experience challenging spinning currents in strong conditions. Generally recommended for advanced divers.

GEMMISKIH FANNO (also known as Gehmiskiy fanno, Gemmiskih Fanno): Situated on the north side, this reef, wall, and ocean dive site has a maximum depth of approximately 30 meters. It boasts countless varieties of vibrant reef fish grazing on rich coral life. Schooling fish and large milkfish are frequently seen. Opportunities exist to encounter oceanic mantas, thresher sharks, and whale sharks.

Tiger Harbor (Tiger Wall Dive Site): A reef and sandy bottom dive with a shallower maximum depth of around 12 meters, located near the southern coastline. Features a unique wine glass-shaped bottom from harbor construction, creating swirling effects with currents. Divers can observe tiger sharks, silvertip sharks, hard corals, and reef fish.

Rasge Fanno (also known as Rasgefaanu): A reef dive site where the top reef starts at 5 to 7 meters and slopes off. Healthy coral life harbors many colorful reef fish. Predatory fish patrol the blue waters. Scattered coral formations between 18 and 30 meters serve as cleaning stations for mantas and thresher sharks. Also suitable for snorkeling.

Bondo Fanno: Located north of the harbor, this beautiful reef features sea fans from 20 meters down, with many coral blocks and crevices with soft corals. Colorful reef fish and hard corals occupy the top reef down to 20 meters. Good chances of encountering mantas, tiger sharks, and other special marine life.

Gotha Kandu: Situated at the southernmost point, widely recognized for thrilling current dives and diverse marine species. Strong currents and vertical drops attract sharks, eagle rays, and barracuda schools. Experienced divers can enjoy drift dives, while less experienced divers can explore protected coral gardens.

Wadi Kandu: Located southeast, offering a unique diving experience with swim-throughs and underwater caves. Known for its nurse shark population lying on sandy cave bottoms, and colorful coral gardens with anemones and soft corals.

Masparra Thila: Just off the north coast, a fascinating underwater pinnacle famous for a wide range of aquatic life, including batfish, fusiliers, and snappers in shoals. Eagle rays, grey reef sharks, and whale sharks may also be seen.

Kalho Akiri (also known as Kalho akirigando): Located southwest, a thriving reef offering a delightful drift dive along pristine coral gardens with over 28 diverse hard coral species. For advanced divers.

Hawwa Faro (also known as Havihtha fanno): A historic dive site with a thriving reef and vibrant coral life, ideal for drift dives. Also popular with fishermen. Divers may encounter thresher sharks, sand tiger sharks, oceanic manta rays, mola mola, and sea turtles. Recommended for advanced divers.

Ebithe Faro: The southwest reef drops dramatically, starting with a 40-meter sandy slope plunging to over 100 meters. A favorite for underwater photographers and suitable for advanced divers.

Kandasho (also known as Kandhoval) : A well-known reef favored by fishermen for bait during the southwest monsoon. Its half-bay shape provides shelter from the main current. Suitable for beginner divers.

Thona Faro (also known as Cheers Reef) : Located near the south entrance, boasting a distinctive wine glass-shaped bottom from harbor construction, creating thrilling swirling currents. Features vibrant hard coral formations, diverse reef fish, and occasional tiger shark sightings. Recommended for advanced divers.

Abadhas: Situated midway between the harbor and the southernmost point, consistently delivering encounters with large sharks, including giant silvertips, threshers, tigers, and whale sharks. Recommended for advanced and expert divers due to strong currents and deep depths.

Bilhifeyshi: A notable dive site known for encounters with thresher sharks, whale sharks, and oceanic manta rays.

General Information for Diving in Fuvahmulah The optimal diving period in Fuvahmulah is generally between November and May, the dry season with calmer seas and better visibility. However, year-round diving is possible, with each season offering unique marine encounters.

General Information for Diving in Fuvahmulah Category Information Optimal Diving Period November to May (dry season) Year-Round Diving Possible, each season offers unique marine encounters Tiger Sharks Best Time November to May Thresher & Hammerhead Sharks Best Time September to December Whale Sharks & Manta Rays Best Time January to May Black Oceanic Mantas Mating March to May Whale Sharks More Frequent June to October (wet season) Water Temperatures 27 °C to 30 °C (can drop to 25 °C in deeper waters) Underwater Visibility 30 to 40 meters (most of the year), 15 to 20 meters (June to September), often exceeding 100 meters (February and March) Dive Operators Shark Expeditions Fuvahmulah, Scuba Expeditions, Dive Blue Maldives, Fuvahmulah Dive School, Fuvahmulah Central Dive Centre, Extreme Dive Fuvahmulah, Pelagic Divers Fuvahmulah, Scuba Shark Fuvahmulah, Island Todo Safety Measures Detailed briefings, experienced guides, well-maintained equipment, specific protocols (e.g., Tiger Zoo), orientation dives (sometimes required) Sustainability Emphasis No-baiting policies, small group sizes, responsible marine life interactions Conservation Initiatives Protected marine areas, citizen science projects, UNESCO Biosphere Reserve (2020) Dive Sites Skill Level Cater to various skill levels, some beginner-friendly, many for advanced divers Recommended Certification Advanced Open Water (AOWD), Deep Adventure Dive Course Tiger sharks are present throughout the year, with November to May being prime time.

Thresher and scalloped hammerhead sharks are most likely seen between September and December.

Whale sharks and oceanic manta rays are most common from January to May, with large congregations of black oceanic mantas for mating between March and May. Interestingly, whale sharks are reported more frequently during the wet season (June to October).

Water temperatures remain consistently warm, 27 °C to 30 °C, but can drop to around 25 °C in deeper waters, making a wetsuit advisable.

Underwater visibility is generally excellent, 30 to 40 meters for most of the year, potentially reducing to 15 to 20 meters during the wet season (June to September). February and March often have exceptional visibility, sometimes exceeding 100 meters.

[ citation needed ] Works cited [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Marine biodiversity [ edit ] See also: Maldives § Marine ecosystem , and Wildlife of Maldives Maldives soft coral Oriental sweetlips ( Plectorhinchus vittatus ) at Meeru Island , North Male Atoll The Maldives have a range of different habitats including deep sea, shallow coast, and reef ecosystems, fringing mangroves, wetlands and dry land. There are 187 species of coral forming the coral reefs . This area of the Indian Ocean, alone, houses 1,100 species of fish, 5 species of sea turtle , 21 species of whale and dolphin, 400 species of mollusc, and 83 species of echinoderms. The area is also populated by a number of crustacean species: 120 copepods, 15 amphipods, more than 145 crab and 48 shrimp species.

[ 35 ] Among the many marine families represented are pufferfish , fusiliers , jackfish , lionfish , oriental sweetlips , reef sharks , groupers , eels , snappers , bannerfish , batfish , humphead wrasse , spotted eagle rays , scorpionfish , lobsters , nudibranches , angelfish , butterflyfish , squirrelfish , soldierfish , glassfish , surgeonfish , unicornfish , triggerfish , Napoleon wrasse , and barracuda .

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] These coral reefs provide habitats to a variety of marine organisms that vary from plankton to whale sharks.

[ 38 ] The most Biodiverse Atolls are Lhaviyani Atoll and Baa Atoll . Both Atolls are located next to each other in the North. Due to its status of UNESCO Biosphere Reserve, Baa Atoll receives a significant higher exposure for its Biodiversity. However, the amount of different species is noteworthy higher in Lhaviyani Atoll. This is mainly based on the high occurrence of Seagrass Meadows in Lhaviyani Atoll.

[ 39 ] Economic importance [ edit ] See also: Maldives § Economy , and Economy of the Maldives This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( July 2021 ) Facilities and legal constraints [ edit ] See also: List of legislation regulating underwater diving Medical facilities for treatment of diving injuries.

Legal constraints on underwater activity. The Maldives Recreational Diving Regulation, 2003 requires that recreational diving service providers are to be licensed. No recreational diving is allowed deeper than 30 meters or requiring decompression stops. Divers must show evidence of certification and recent experience, and solo diving is forbidden.

[ 40 ] Service infrastructure for scuba tourism is well developed. Common facilities for Scuba Diving in Maldives are Dive Centers and Liveaboards. While in most cases Scuba Diving from Liveaboards is more cost effective, the Dive Quality of Land-based Diving is usually higher. Divers in Maldives will get the best Diving Experience if Diving from Resort Islands with a reputable Dive Center.

[ 41 ] This section needs expansion with: details of these items. You can help by adding to it .

( July 2021 ) References [ edit ] ^ Rasheed, Zaheena (31 May 2016).

"Can Maldives reefs recover from El Nino?" .

Maldives Independent .

^ "UN Expert: Maldives Stuck Between Rock and Hard Place on Climate Change Issue | United Nations in Maldives" .

maldives.un.org . Retrieved 2024-08-15 .

^ "Tourism Yearbook 2009" . tourism.gov.mv. Archived from the original on 15 August 2024.

^ "More than 60% of Maldives' coral reefs hit by bleaching" .

TheGuardian.com . 8 August 2016.

^ "Is Paradise Lost? | Maldives Special Report" . Dive Magazine. 13 February 2018.

^ "Best Diving in Maldives" . diveglobal.com. Archived from the original on 15 August 2024.

^ Diving in Maldives ^ "Underwater Habitat by Sub Oceanic at Hilton Maldives" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "Banana Reef - Fee Gaa Giri" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "Kuda Haa" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "Hulangu Kandu" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "The Dive Center at Maldives best House Reef" .

Sub Oceanic Maldives . Retrieved 2025-03-20 .

^ "NEMO THILA" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-20 .

^ "House Reef at Le Meridien Maldives Resort & Spa" .

Sub Oceanic Maldives . Retrieved 2025-03-20 .

^ "Fushifaru Thila" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "BOAVA THILA" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "MADUVVARI HAA" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "MADUVVARI DHEKUNU KANN" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "MEYYAFUSHI KANDU" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "OLHUVELI MEDHU FARU" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "Diving the Shaviyani Atoll" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-20 .

^ "Sirru Fen Fushi - Luxury Resort in the Maldives" .

Sirru Fen Fushi - Private Lagoon Resort, Maldives . Retrieved 2025-03-20 .

^ "Diving Maldives: The Best Dive Sites Await You at Sirru Fen Fushi" .

Sub Oceanic Maldives . Retrieved 2025-03-20 .

^ "Maroshi Thila" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 2025-03-20 .

^ * "Fuvahmulah Diving - Maldives Deep South - Dive The World". Dive The World.

[1] ( https://www.dive-the-world.com/diving-sites-maldives-deep-south-fuvahmulah.php ).

^ * "EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT SCUBA DIVING IN FUVAHMULAH, MALDIVES". Pelagic Divers Fuvahmulah.

[2] ( https://www.pelagicdiversfuvahmulah.com/scuba-diving-in-fuvahmulah-maldives/ ).

^ * "A guide to diving in Fuvahmulah - ZuBlu". ZuBlu.

[3] ( https://www.zubludiving.com/articles/zublu-insights/divers-guide-fuvahmulah ).

^ * "Fuvahmulah Diving Guide". Shark School Fuvahmulah.

[4] ( https://sharkschoolfuvahmulah.com/fuvahmulah-diving-guide/ ).

^ * "The Ultimate Guide to Diving in Fuvahmulah, Maldives". Maldives Travel Insider.

[5] ( https://maldivestravelinsider.com/the-ultimate-guide-to-diving-in-fuvahmulah/ ).

^ * "Top dive sites in Fuvahmulah (Gnaviyani Atoll) | PADI". PADI.

[6] ( https://www.padi.com/dive-sites/fuvahmulah-gnaviyani-atoll/ ).

^ * "Dive Sites | Extreme Dive Fuvahmulah". Extreme Dive Fuvahmulah.

[7] ( https://www.extremedivefuvahmulah.com/dive-site-in-fuvahmulah-maldives ).

^ * "Dive Sites in Fuvahmulah - Scubabutler". Scubabutler.

[8] ( https://www.scubabutler.com/dive-sites-in-fuvahmulah ).

^ * "Tiger shark dive site - PADI". PADI.

[9] ( https://www.padi.com/dive-site/maldives/tiger-shark-dive-site/ ).

^ "Fuvahmulah Dive Sites ^ "Fourth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity of Maldives" (PDF) . Ministry of Housing and Environment. p. 7.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 November 2015 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ "Maldives Marine Life" . Scubadivemaldives.com. Archived from the original on 22 December 2011 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ "Sharks of the Maldives" .

TheMaldives.com .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2017 . Retrieved 12 February 2017 .

^ "Regional Workshop on the Conservation and Sustainable Management of Coral Reefs" . Fao.org.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ "Facts About Maldives You Need to Know - Expert FAQ Answers" .

Sub Oceanic Maldives . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

^ "Maldives Recreational Diving Regulation" (PDF) . Ministry of Tourism, Republic of Maldives. 2003 . Retrieved 16 November 2016 .

^ "Back to the Roots - Maldives Diving by Liveaboard is overrated" .

Sub Oceanic Maldives . 2024-11-19 . Retrieved 2025-03-26 .

External links [ edit ] Diving in Maldives: INFO v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7b7cddf567‐ct5kt
Cached time: 20250812092240
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.908 seconds
Real time usage: 1.097 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5488/1000000
Revision size: 45257/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 608080/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5855/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 131669/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.446/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6978486/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  706.913      1 -total
 27.21%  192.363      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 26.47%  187.122      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 17.41%  123.041     27 Template:Cite_web
 14.89%  105.279     35 Template:Navbox
 11.52%   81.438      1 Template:Cite_journal
 10.94%   77.312     13 Template:Ambox
 10.25%   72.487      1 Template:Short_description
  7.25%   51.248      1 Template:More_footnotes_needed
  6.05%   42.738      6 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25351715:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812092240 and revision id 1300634214. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diving_in_the_Maldives&oldid=1300634214 " Categories : Diving in the Maldives Underwater diving by country Economy of the Maldives Tourism in the Maldives Environment of the Maldives Water in the Maldives Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with a promotional tone from June 2025 All articles with a promotional tone Articles to be expanded from July 2021 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2021 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with empty sections from July 2021 All articles with empty sections This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 14:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diving in the Maldives 1 language Add topic

