Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Tenured Radicals 4 The Fortunes of Permanence 5 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 5.1 As author 5.2 As editor and contributor 5.3 As editor 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Roger Kimball 7 languages العربية Español Italiano مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American publisher Roger Kimball Born 1953 (age 71–72) Education Bennington College ( BA ) Yale University ( MA , MPhil ) Occupations Art critic social commentator editor Employer The New Criterion This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Roger Kimball (born 1953) is an American art critic and conservative social commentator. He is the editor and publisher of The New Criterion and the publisher of Encounter Books . Kimball first gained notice in the early 1990s with the publication of his book Tenured Radicals: How Politics Has Corrupted Higher Education .

He currently serves on the board of the Manhattan Institute , and as a Visitor of Ralston College , a start-up liberal arts college based in Savannah, Georgia .

[ 1 ] He is Chairman of the William F. Buckley, Jr. Program in New Haven [ 2 ] and has also served on the Board of Visitors of St. John's College (Annapolis and Santa Fe) and the board of Transaction Publishers .

[ citation needed ] On May 7, 2019, he was awarded the Bradley Prize in Washington, D.C.

[ 3 ] On September 12, 2019, he was awarded the Thomas L. Phillips Career Achievement Award from The Fund for American Studies .

[ 4 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Kimball was educated at Cheverus High School , a Jesuit school in Portland, Maine , and then at Bennington College , where he received a B.A. in philosophy and classical Greek. After graduating, Kimball attended Yale University , where he earned an M.A. in 1978 and an M.Phil. in 1982 in philosophy.

[ 5 ] Career [ edit ] Kimball lectures widely and is a contributor to many newspapers and journals, including The Wall Street Journal , National Review , The Spectator , The New Criterion , The Times Literary Supplement , The New York Sun , Modern Painters , Literary Review , The Public Interest , Commentary , The New York Times Book Review , The Sunday Telegraph , The American Spectator , The Weekly Standard , and The National Interest . Kimball also blogs at The New Criterion' s weblog Dispatch .

Some of Kimball's work as a writer is polemical, directed against what he sees as the politicization and " dumbing down " of Western culture and the arts. Many of Kimball's essays in The New Criterion, and in books including Experiments Against Reality and Lives of the Mind, focus on figures from the Western canon whose work he feels has been neglected or misunderstood. These figures include G.C. Lichtenberg , Robert Musil , Walter Pater , Anthony Trollope , Milan Kundera , and P. G. Wodehouse , as well as philosophers and historians such as Plutarch , Hegel , Walter Bagehot , George Santayana , David Stove , Raymond Aron , and Leszek Kołakowski .

Kimball also writes regularly about art. He has written essays on artists including Delacroix , Vuillard , Robert Motherwell , Frank Stella , and Robert Rauschenberg . Recently, some of his essays have called for renewed attention to Classical Realism and other contemporary art movements that champion traditional values and techniques of representational art.

In 2012, Kimball edited The New Leviathan , a collection of essays that discusses a variety of conservative political topics. The book carries a preface by George Will and includes contributions from John R. Bolton , Richard Epstein , Victor Davis Hanson , Andrew C. McCarthy , Michael B. Mukasey , Glenn Reynolds , and others.

Kimball endorsed Donald Trump for President.

[ 6 ] In July 2017, Kimball wrote an article comparing Trump's 2017 speech in Warsaw to the Funeral Oration of Pericles of Athens during the Peloponnesian War .

[ 7 ] He has been criticized for being "determined to minimize, dispute, divert, and debunk the contention that Donald Trump is a person of bad character." [ 8 ] Kimball responded that Trump, "despite his imperfections, is a man of good character" because he repeatedly demonstrated willingness "to storm the cockpit of our corrupt, sclerotic, and increasingly unaccountable governmental apparatus." [ 9 ] In 2020, Kimball attracted criticism for promoting the allegation that Joe Biden's victory in the 2020 election was due to widespread electoral fraud.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Tenured Radicals [ edit ] First published in 1990, Tenured Radicals: How Politics Has Corrupted Our Higher Education was updated in 1998 and again in 2008. The most recent third edition includes a new introduction by Kimball as well as the preface to the 1998 edition. It criticizes the ways in which humanities are taught and studied in American universities. The book argues that modern humanities have become politicized and seek to subvert "the tradition of high culture embodied in the classics of Western art and thought".

[ 12 ] Kimball maintains that yesterday's radical thinker has become today's tenured professor carrying out "ideologically motivated assaults on the intellectual and moral substance of our culture." The book generated controversy, with the New York Times Book Review' s Roger Rosenblatt noting, "Mr. Kimball names his enemies precisely.... This book will breed fistfights." [ 13 ] When it was first published, some of its critics aligned Tenured Radicals with Allan Bloom 's The Closing of the American Mind: How Higher Education has Failed Democracy and Impoverished the Souls of Today's Students and former Secretary of Education William Bennett 's Report on the Humanities in Higher Education .

[ 14 ] The Fortunes of Permanence [ edit ] In The Fortunes of Permanence: Culture and Anarchy in an Age of Amnesia, published in 2012, Kimball discussed the cultivation of the mind as an explicitly religious endeavor with regard to inherited cultural instructions.

[ 15 ] Michael Uhlmann noted, "If it weren't otherwise already apparent, the publication of The Fortunes of Permanence confirms Roger Kimball's status as America's foremost cultural critic. In truth, 'cultural critic,' as that term is commonly employed, hardly does justice to the breadth and depth of an essayist whose keen observations range comfortably and gracefully across politics, history, religion, philosophy, education, literature, and art." [ 16 ] Publications [ edit ] As author [ edit ] The Fortunes of Permanence: Culture and Anarchy in an Age of Amnesia , St. Augustine's Press: South Bend, 2012.

The Rape of the Masters: How Political Correctness Sabotages Art, Encounter Books : San Francisco , 2004.

Art's Prospect: The Challenge of Tradition in an Age of Celebrity , Ivan R. Dee : Chicago, 2003.

Lives of the Mind: The Use and Abuse of Intelligence from Hegel to Wodehouse , Ivan R. Dee : Chicago 2002.

Experiments Against Reality: The Fate of Culture in the Postmodern Age , Ivan R. Dee : Chicago 2000.

The Long March: How the Cultural Revolution of the 1960s Changed America , Encounter Books: San Francisco, 2000.

Tenured Radicals: How Politics Has Corrupted Our Higher Education , HarperCollins, New York, 1990; revised edition, Ivan R. Dee , Chicago, 1998; third, expanded edition, Ivan R. Dee , Chicago, 2008.

Brazilian Edition of Tenured Radicals: ″ Radicals in the Universities: How politics has corrupted higher education in the United States of America″ (Peixoto Neto Publishing House, 2010) As editor and contributor [ edit ] Where Next? Western Civilization at the Crossroads ,  edited and with an introduction by Roger Kimball, Encounter Books: New York, 2022.

The Critical Temper: Interventions From The New Criterion at 40 ,  edited and with an introduction by Roger Kimball, Encounter Books: New York, 2021.

Who Rules?: Sovereignty, Nationalism, and the Fate of Freedom in the Twenty-First Century , edited and with an introduction by Roger Kimball, Encounter Books: New York, 2020.

Vox Populi: The Perils and Promises of Populism , edited by Roger Kimball, Encounter Books : New York, 2017.

The Consequences of Richard Weaver ,  Foreword to an expanded edition of "Ideas Have Consequences" by Richard Weaver University of Chicago Press : Chicago 2013.

"Mental Hygiene and Good Manners: The Contribution of George Santayana," in The Genteel Tradition in American Philosophy and Character and Opinion in the United States, edited by James Seaton , Yale University Press : New Haven , 2009.

Counterpoints: 25 Years of The New Criterion on Art and Culture, co-edited by Roger Kimball & Hilton Kramer , Ivan R. Dee : Chicago, 2007.

Lengthened Shadows: America and Its Institutions in the Twenty-first Century, co-edited by Roger Kimball & Hilton Kramer , Encounter Books : San Francisco , 2004.

The Survival of Culture: Permanent Values in a Virtual Age co-edited by Roger Kimball & Hilton Kramer , Ivan R. Dee : Chicago 2002.

The Betrayal of Liberalism: How the Disciples of Freedom and Equality Helped Foster the Illiberal Politics of Coercion and Control, co-edited by Roger Kimball & Hilton Kramer , Ivan R. Dee : Chicago, 2000 The Future of the European Past co-edited by Roger Kimball & Hilton Kramer Ivan R. Dee : Chicago 1997.

Against the Grain: The New Criterion on Art and Intellect in the Twentieth Century co-edited by Roger Kimball & Hilton Kramer , Ivan R. Dee : Chicago 1994.

As editor [ edit ] Saving the Republic: The Fate of Freedom in the Age of the Administrative State. Interventions by Encounter Books , edited by Roger Kimball and with a foreword by Victor Davis Hanson , Encounter Books : New York, 2018.

The New Leviathan: The State Versus the Individual in the Twenty-first Century. A Collection of Encounter Broadsides , edited, with an introduction, by Roger Kimball and a foreword by George Will , Encounter Books : New York, 2012.

Athwart History: Half a Century of Polemics, Animadversions, and Illuminations: A William F. Buckley Jr.

Omnibus , co-edited by Roger Kimball and Linda Bridges, introduction by Roger Kimball, Encounter Books : New York, 2010.

The Age of the Avant Garde: 1956-1972, by Hilton Kramer , introduction by Roger Kimball, Transaction Publishers : New Brunswick , 2008.

The Treason of the Intellectuals, by Julien Benda , introduction by Roger Kimball, Transaction Publishers : New Brunswick , 2006.

Art in Crisis, by Hans Sedlmayr , introduction by Roger Kimball, Transaction Publishers : New Brunswick , 2006.

Darwinian Fairytales: Selfish Genes, Errors of Heredity, and Other Fables of Evolution, by David Stove , edited and with an Introduction by Roger Kimball, Encounter Books : New York, 2006.

Diversions And Animadversions: Essays from the New Criterion by Alexander Coleman, edited with a preface by Roger Kimball, introduction by Denis Donoghue , Transaction Publishers : New Brunswick , 2005.

Physics and Politics: Or: Thoughts on the Application of the Principles of 'Natural Selection' and 'Inheritance' to Political Society, by Walter Bagehot , edited and with an introduction by Roger Kimball, Ivan R. Dee : Chicago, 1999.

Against the Idols of the Age, by David Stove , edited and with an introduction by Roger Kimball, Transaction Publishers : New Brunswick , 1999.

References [ edit ] ^ "Ralston College | Home | To think is to be free" .

^ "Home | Buckley Program" .

^ "Roger Kimball 2019 Bradley Prize Winner" .

^ "TFAS Journalism Awards Dinner" . September 12, 2019.

^ "John Templeton Foundation: Participants" .

templeton.org . John Templeton Foundation . Retrieved June 6, 2018 .

^ "Why I joined the list of intellectuals for Trump" .

The Spectator . Retrieved November 10, 2019 .

^ "Donald Trump as Pericles" .

American Greatness . Retrieved July 7, 2017 .

^ Goldberg, Jonah (2019-01-03).

"Obscuring the Issue of Trump's Character" .

National Review . Retrieved 2022-07-12 .

^ Kimball, Roger (February 7, 2021).

"The Character That Matters" .

American Greatness . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ Friedberg, Aaron L.; Schonfeld, Gabriel (10 November 2020).

"Donald Trump's Last (?) Big Lie" .

The Bulwark . Archived from the original on 29 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 February 2021 .

Roger Kimball, editor of the New Criterion and Encounter Books, sees a vast conspiracy at work: "The forces arrayed behind Biden knew that the whole bureaucracy of the state—the poll workers and postal workers in battleground states, for example—would be on board for Biden and would be carefully coached in deploying techniques to manufacture or suppress ballots, as necessary, and skew the vote." ^ Chavez, Linda (10 December 2020).

"The "Intellectual" Right's Assault on Democracy" .

The Bulwark . Archived from the original on 13 February 2021.

Roger Kimball, who is publisher of Encounter Books and won the prestigious 2019 Bradley Prize "for advancing liberty and preserving democratic culture," has amplified claims of suspicious vote tallies in multiple jurisdictions, mostly cities with large black populations.

^ Kimball, Roger (2008).

Tenured Radicals: How Politics Has Corrupted Our Higher Education . Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. p.

322 .

ISBN 978-1-56663-796-1 .

^ Rosenblatt, Roger.

"The Universities Under Attack" .

The New York Times Book Review . Retrieved August 3, 2011 .

^ Bennett, William J.

"To Reclaim a Legacy: A Report on the Humanities in Higher Education" (PDF) . National Endowment for the Humanities (NFAH), Washington, D.C.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 26, 2022.

[from the ABSTRACT] << Teaching and learning of the humanities at the baccalaureate level were assessed by a blue-ribbon study group of 31 nationally prominent authorities on higher education convened by the National Endowment for the Humanities. Some attention was also given in the context of the humanities to how secondary and graduate education have affected under-graduate education and been affected by it. Answers were sought to three basic questions: (1) What is the condition of learning in the humanities? (2) Why is it as it is? (3) What, if anything, should be done about it? The five sections of the report cover the following topics: (1) Why study the humanities? (2) How should the humanities be taught and learned? (3) How well are the humanities being taught and learned? (4) The role of academic officials in strengthening the place of the humanities; (5) How colleges and universities might do a better job in transmitting the accumulated wisdom of our civilization. Four kinds of information aided discussion: [...] >> ^ Kimball, Roger (2012).

The Fortunes of Permanence: Culture and Anarchy in an Age of Amnesia . South Bend, IN: St. Augustine's Press. p. 360.

ISBN 978-1-58731-256-4 .

^ "Wisdom of the Ages" .

Claremont Review of Books . Retrieved November 9, 2019 .

External links [ edit ] The New Criterion : Roger Kimball .

Appearances on C-SPAN Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Korea Poland Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roger_Kimball&oldid=1302626917 " Categories : 1953 births Living people American art critics American book editors American book publishers (people) American magazine publishers (people) American political writers American male non-fiction writers American critics of postmodernism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 16:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roger Kimball 7 languages Add topic

