Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Philosophy 3 Views and opinions Toggle Views and opinions subsection 3.1 Palestine and Israel 3.1.1 Accusations of antisemitism 4 Selected works 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Gianni Vattimo 29 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian philosopher and politician (1936–2023) Gianni Vattimo Born Gianteresio Vattimo ( 1936-01-04 ) 4 January 1936 Turin , Kingdom of Italy Died 19 September 2023 (2023-09-19) (aged 87) Turin, Italy Education Education University of Turin ( laurea , 1959) Academic advisors Hans-Georg Gadamer Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Phenomenology Hermeneutics Notable students Maurizio Ferraris Main interests Ethics Political philosophy Notable ideas Pensiero debole (weak thought), hermeneutic communism This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e Gianteresio Vattimo ( Italian: [ˈvattimo] ; 4 January 1936 – 19 September 2023) was an Italian philosopher and politician.

Biography [ edit ] Vattimo at Pride event at Como , 1999.

Gianteresio Vattimo was born in Turin , Piedmont . He studied philosophy under the existentialist Luigi Pareyson at the University of Turin , and graduated with a laurea in 1959. In 1963 he moved to the University of Heidelberg and studied with Karl Löwith , Jürgen Habermas and Hans-Georg Gadamer with a scholarship from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation .

[ 1 ] Then, Vattimo returned to Turin where he became assistant professor in 1964, and later full professor of Aesthetics in 1969. While remaining at Turin, becoming Professor of Theoretical Philosophy in 1982, he had been a visiting professor at a number of American Universities.

For his works, he received honorary degrees from the universities of La Plata , Palermo , Madrid , Havana , and San Marcos of Lima.

Vattimo said he was exempted from military service.

[ 2 ] After being active in the Radical Party , the short-lived Alleanza per Torino , and the Democrats of the Left , Vattimo joined the Party of Italian Communists . He was elected a member of the European Parliament first time in 1999 and for a second mandate in 2009.

Vattimo was openly gay.

[ 3 ] In 2010, he delivered the Gifford Lectures on The End of Reality at the University of Glasgow .

[ 4 ] In the same year he participated in the Subversive Film Festival .

[ 5 ] In March 2012, he was a speaker at the national congress of the Grand Orient of Italy in Rimini .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Vattimo died in Turin on 19 September 2023, at the age of 87.

[ 8 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Vattimo's philosophy can be characterized as postmodern with his emphasis on pensiero debole (weak thought). This requires that the foundational certainties of modernity with its emphasis on objective truth founded in a rational unitary subject be relinquished for a more multi-faceted conception closer to that of the arts . He draws on the philosophy of Martin Heidegger with his critique of foundations and the hermeneutic philosophy of his teacher Hans-Georg Gadamer . Perhaps his greatest influence though is the thought of Friedrich Nietzsche , whose "discovery of the 'lie', the discovery that alleged ' values ' and metaphysical structures are just a play of forces" (1993:93), plays an important role in Vattimo's notion of "weak thought".

Vattimo embraced Friedrich Nietzsche 's nihilist idea of God's death .

[ 3 ] Vattimo rejected any notion of a transcendental structure of reason or reality that would be given once and for all. This does not imply the loss of truth , but a Heideggerian reinterpretation of truth as the opening of horizons. Such truth is deeper than propositions which are made possible by such openings. Philosophies then are always responses to contingent questions, they are ' ontologies of actuality ,' a thesis that can be confirmed by the historico-cultural links of particular philosophies. For hermeneutics to be consistent with its own rejection of metaphysics , it must present itself, argues Vattimo "as the most persuasive philosophical interpretation of a situation or ' epoch '" (1997:10). To do this, Vattimo proposed a reading of hermeneutics as having a "nihilistic" vocation.

[ 9 ] To Vattimo, hermeneutics has become boring and vague, lacking any clear significance for philosophical problems. His answer was to insist on the nihilistic consequences of hermeneutics. The claim that "there are no facts only interpretations and this too is an interpretation" amounts to saying that hermeneutics cannot be seen as the most accurate/true description of the permanent structures of the reality of human existence . Hermeneutics is not a metaphysical theory in this sense and so can only be "proved" by being presented as the response to a history of being, a history of the fabling of the world, of the weakening of structures, that is, as the occurrence of nihilism.

This nihilistic reading of history involves a certain attitude towards modernity , whereby modernity is dissolved from within through a twisting, distorting radicalisation of its premises. Vattimo uses Heidegger's term Verwindung to capture this post-modern recovery from modernity.

History as a process of weakening (secularisation and disenchantment are other terms Vattimo uses) "assumes the form of a decision for non-violence" (1992:95). An ethics of communication along the lines suggested by Jürgen Habermas suffers, according to Vattimo, from finding itself in a substantially ahistorical position, while oscillating between formalism and cultural relativism (1992:117). For Vattimo it is only when hermeneutics accepts its nihilistic destiny that "it can find in 'negativity,' in dissolution as the 'destiny of Being ' ... the orientating principle that enables it to realize its own original inclination for ethics whilst neither restoring metaphysics nor surrendering to the futility of a relativistic philosophy of culture" (1992:119).

In 2004, after leaving the party of the Democrats of the Left, he endorsed Marxism , reassessing positively its projection principles and wishing for a "return" to the thought of the Trier philosopher and to a communism , rid of distorted Soviet developments, which have to be dialectically overcome. Vattimo asserted the continuity of his new choices with the "weak thought," thus having changed "many of his ideas." He, namely, referred to a "weakened Marx," [ 10 ] as an ideological basis capable of showing the real nature of communism. The new Marxist approach, therefore, emerged as a practical development of the "weak thought" into the frame of a political perspective. His next political book, co-authored with Santiago Zabala, is Hermeneutic Communism: From Heidegger to Marx (2011).

The authors explain the book Hermeneutic Communism as follows: "Although the material published here had never been released before, there are two books that have determined the production of this text: Gianni's Ecce Comu: Come si diventa cio che si era (2007) and Santiago's The Remains of Being: Hermeneutic Ontology After Metaphysics (2009). In the former, Vattimo emphasized the political necessity of reevaluating communism ; in the latter, Zabala insisted on the progressive nature of hermeneutics .

Hermeneutic Communism can be considered a radical development of both." [ 11 ] Views and opinions [ edit ] Palestine and Israel [ edit ] Vattimo added his name to a petition released on 28 February 2009, calling on the European Union to remove Hamas from its list of terrorist organizations and grant it full recognition as a legitimate voice of the Palestinian people .

On 22 July 2014, in response to the IDF military operation on Gaza , Vattimo said he would personally like to "shoot those bastard Zionists " and thinks Europeans should raise money "to buy Hamas some more rockets".

[ 2 ] He expressed his willingness to go to Gaza and fight side by side with Hamas and asserted, when asked if he would shoot at Israelis, that: 'By nature I'm non-violent, but I'd shoot at those (of them) who bomb hospitals, private clinics and children.' Vattimo added that for him these were 'pure Nazis', the state itself a Nazi state (uno stato nazista) perhaps somewhat worse even than Hitler because, in Israel's case, they have the support of the great Western democracies.

[ 12 ] Accusations of antisemitism [ edit ] Vattimo had been accused of anti-Semitism due to his anti-Zionism .

Renzo Gattegna , the president of the Union of Italian Jewish Communities , accused him of antisemitism, writing "words of hatred that don't add anything new and are accompanied by the squalid reproposal of anti-Semitic stereotypes".

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Rabbi Barbara Aiello, Italy's first female rabbi, also accused Vattimo of antisemitism. Reacting to his "Zionist bastards" statements and to others like it, the foreign ministers for Italy, France and Germany said that they condemn such language as well as violence that has occurred at pro-Palestinian demonstrations in Europe.

[ 15 ] Pronounced in a moment of indignation against the prolonged bombing of Gaza by the Israeli army, Vattimo apologized to an Israeli newspaper ( Haaretz ). "In a telephone interview [...], Gianni Vattimo said he “regrets” such words and “feels ashamed” by them", [ 16 ] claiming he was "provoked" by the hosts of the show on which he made his comments.

[ 17 ] Selected works [ edit ] Vattimo in Lima, Perú, in 2010 (1991) The End of Modernity: Nihilism and Hermeneutics in Post-modern Culture , translated by John R. Snyder, Polity Press, 1991. Translation of La fine della modernità , Garzanti, Milan, 1985 (1992) The Transparent Society , translated by David Webb, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994. Translation of La società trasparente , Garzanti, Milan, 1989 (1993) The Adventure of Difference: Philosophy after Nietzsche and Heidegger , translated by Thomas Harrison and Cyprian P. Blamires, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993. Translation of Le avventure della differenza , Garzanti, Milan, 1980 (1997) Beyond Interpretation: The Meaning of Hermeneutics for Philosophy , translated by David Webb, Stanford University Press, 1997. Translation of Oltre l'interpretazione , Laterza, Rome-Bari, 1994 (1998) Religion by Jacques Derrida, edited by Gianni Vattimo, translated by David Webb, Stanford University Press, 1998 (1999) Belief by Gianni Vattimo, et al., Polity Press, 1999. Translation of Credere di credere , Garzanti, Milan, 1996 (2002a) Nietzsche: Philosophy as Cultural Criticism , translated by Nicholas Martin Stanford University Press, 2002. Translation of Introduzione a Nietzsche , Laterza, Rome-Bari,1985 (2002b) After Christianity , New York: Columbia University Press, 2002.

(2004) Nihilism and Emancipation: Ethics, Politics and Law , edited by Santiago Zabala, Columbia University Press, 2004 (2005) The Future of Religion , Richard Rorty and Gianni Vattimo, edited by Santiago Zabala, Columbia University Press, 2005 (2006) After the Death of God , John D. Caputo and Gianni Vattimo, edited by Jeffrey W. Robbins, Columbia University Press.

(2008) Dialogue with Nietzsche , Gianni Vattimo, Columbia University Press.

(2008) Art's Claim to Truth , Gianni Vattimo, edited by Santiago Zabala, Columbia University Press.

(2009) Christianity, Truth, and Weak Faith , Gianni Vattimo and René Girard, edited by P. Antonello, Columbia University Press.

(2010) The Responsibility of the Philosopher , Gianni Vattimo, edited by Franca D'Agostini, Columbia University Press.

(2011) Hermeneutic Communism , Gianni Vattimo and Santiago Zabala, Columbia University Press.

(2012) Weak Thought , translated by Peter Carravetta , SUNY series in Contemporary Italian Philosophy, 2012. Translation of Il pensiero debole , Feltrinelli, Milano, 1983 (2014) Deconstructing Zionism: A Critique of Political Metaphysics , edited by Gianni Vattimo and Michael Marder , Bloomsbury.

See also [ edit ] Anti-Zionism#View that the two are not interlinked Deconstruction Post-Marxism Postmodern Christianity Nihilism References [ edit ] ^ Gianni Gattino (13 July 2019).

"Sul sentiero dei filosofi due righe cambiano tutto" .

La Stampa (in Italian) . Retrieved 21 June 2021 .

^ a b Well-known Italian philosopher: 'I’d like to shoot those bastard Zionists' ^ a b Robert Savino Oventile (23 September 2006).

" "Mellow Nihilism": A Review of Gianni Vattimo's Nihilism and Emancipation" .

Sobriquet Magazine . Retrieved 17 July 2007 .

^ "The Glasgow Gifford Lectures" .

gla.ac.uk . University of Glasgow.

^ M. P. (27 April 2011).

" 'Nove emancipacijske borbe' na ovogodišnjem Subversiveu - tportal.hr /kultura/" . Tportal.hr . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ "Rimini, 3,000 Freemasons divided at the congress. Transparent in words, but armored lists" (in Italian).

Il Fatto Quotidiano . 26 March 2012.

^ "Rimini 30 March 1 April 2012–"Beyond the crisis, the compass of values to rediscover Man" Grand Lodge of the Grand Orient of Italy" (in Italian).

Grand Orient of Italy . 24 March 2012.

^ "Gianni Vattimo è morto: il filosofo aveva 87 anni" . La Repubblica. 19 September 2023 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 .

^ Matthias Riedl.

Riedl, Matthias (January 2010).

"The Permanence of the Eschatological: Reflections on Gianni Vattimo's Hermeneutic Age" .

Discursing the Post-Secular .

in Discoursing the Post-Secular: Essays on the Habermasian Post-Secular Turn . Edited by Péter Losonczi and Aakash Singh. LIT: Münster 2010, pp. 111-126.

^ Gianni Vattimo.

Ecce comu. Come si ri-diventa ciò che si era . Fazi. Rome, 2007 ^ Gianni Vattimo and Santiago Zabala.

Hermeneutic Communism: From Heidegger to Marx Columbia University Press. 2011. Pg. VII ^ Gisella Ruccia, 'Israele? Nazisti puri, forse peggio di Hitler,' Archived 2015-12-10 at the Wayback Machine Il Fatto Quotidiano 16 July 2014.

^ "Italian philosopher politician slammed as antiSemite" .

Gazzetta del Mezzogiorno . Bari, Italy. 17 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ "Spiritual leaders incite violence in Gaza conflict" .

i24 News . Luxemburg: Newslux Sarl. 23 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ Giuffrida, Angela (23 July 2014).

" 'Shoot those bastard Zionists': Italian scholar" .

The Local . Rome: The Local Europe AB . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ "Italian Philosopher Apologizes for Saying He Wanted to 'Shoot Those Bastard Zionists' " .

Haaretz .

^ [1] , sur "<Haaretz>".

Further reading [ edit ] Marta Frascati-Lochhead.

Kenosis and Feminist Theology. The Challenge of Gianni Vattimo (SUNY, 1998) Rossano Pecoraro , Niilismo e Pós (Modernidade). Introdução ao pensamento fraco de Gianni Vattimo , Rio de Janeiro-São Paulo, PUC-Loyola ED. 2005.

Martin G. Weiss, Gianni Vattimo. Einführung. Mit einem Interview mit Gianni Vattimo , Passagen Verlag, 2. Auflage: Wien 2006.

ISBN 3-85165-738-1 .

Giovanni Giorgio, Il pensiero di Gianni Vattimo. L'emancipazione dalla metafisica tra dialettica ed ermeneutica , Franco Angeli, Milano, 2006 Davide Monaco, Gianni Vattimo. Ontologia ermeneutica, cristianesimo e postmodernità , Ets, Pisa 2006 Weakening Philosophy. Essays in Honour of Gianni Vattimo , Edited by Santiago Zabala (with contributions from U. Eco, C. Taylor, R. Rorty, J-L. Nancy, F. Savater and many others), Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2007.

Enrico Redaelli, Il nodo dei nodi. L'esercizio del pensiero in Vattimo, Vitiello, Sini , Ets, Pisa 2008.

Wolfgang Sützl, Emancipación o Violencia. Pacifismo estético en Gianni Vattimo.

Barcelona: Icaria 2007.

Ashley Woodward, Review of Weakening Philosophy. Essays in Honour of Gianni Vattimo , Edited by Santiago Zabala", in "Colloquy" Issue 15 June 2008.

Mario Kopić , Gianni Vattimo Čitanka (Gianni Vattimo Reader) , Zagreb, Antibarbarus, 2008.

ISBN 978-953-249-061-9 Between Nihilism and Politics. The Hermeneutics of Gianni Vattimo.

Edited by Silvia Benso and Brian Schroeder. New York: Suny 2010.

ISBN 978-1-4384-3285-4 Matthew Edward Harris, Essays on Gianni Vattimo: Religion, Ethics and the History of Ideas . Newcastle-Upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2016.

Tommaso Franci, Vattimo o del nichilismo , Roma, Armando, 2011.

Ricardo Milla, Vattimo y la hermenéutica política, en Isegoria (Madrid), 2011, julio, No 44, pp. 339–343 Lozano Pino, Jesús, "El amor es el límite. Reflexiones sobre el cristianismo hermenéutico de G. Vattimo y sus consecuencias teológico-políticas", Madrid, Dykinson, 2015.

ISBN 978-84-9085-269-9 ISBN electrónico: 978-84-9085-282-8 Brais González Arribas, Reduciendo la violencia. La hermenéutica nihilista de Gianni Vattimo . Madrid, Dykinson, 2016.

Emilio Carlo Corriero, "Nietzsche's Death of God and Italian Philosophy". Preface by Gianni Vattimo, Rowman & Littlefield, London - New York, 2016 Lozano Pino, Jesús, "El último Vattimo: Lección inaugural curso 2019-2020 de los Centros Teológicos de Málaga, Diócesis de Málaga, D.L. 2019. Depósito Legal:MA 1158-2019, ISBN 978-84-0914742-7 .

Pierfrancesco Stagi, Gianni Vattimo , in Il pensiero filosofico-religioso italiano nel Novecento , Edited by O. Brino and C. Belloni, "Associazione Italiana di Filosofia della Religione" (AIFR), University of Urbino, 2024: https://www.pensierofilosoficoreligiosoitaliano.org/node/94 External links [ edit ] "Gianni Vattimo" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Vattimo in a discussion on Articles of Vattimo in swif.uniba.it Interview with Gianni Vattimo: “Democracy is not possible with absolute truths about co-existence” , Barcelona Metropolis , 2011.

Interview with Gianni Vattimo: "Only Weak Communism Can Save Us" , MRZine, 2013 Europe's Times and Unknown Waters, Cluj-Napoca, Marga, Andrei (April 2009). "The Chaotic Society (Gianni Vattimo, The Transparent Society" v t e Philosophers and theologians associated with death of God theology Thomas J. J. Altizer Paul van Buren (association disavowed) John D. Caputo Meister Eckhart (posthumous attribution) William Hamilton G. W. F. Hegel Friedrich Nietzsche Pseudo-Dionysius (posthumous attribution) John Robinson Richard L. Rubenstein Paul Tillich Gabriel Vahanian Gianni Vattimo Slavoj Žižek John S. Dunne (observer-attributed) William Blake (posthumous attribution) Peter Carravetta Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People MEP directory Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gianni_Vattimo&oldid=1306306073 " Categories : 1936 births 2023 deaths 20th-century Italian philosophers 21st-century Italian philosophers Marxist theorists Italian gay writers Philosophers of nihilism Death of God theologians Italian gay politicians People from Turin Writers about communism Italy of Values MEPs MEPs for Italy 2009–2014 MEPs for Italy 1999–2004 LGBTQ MEPs for Italy LGBTQ philosophers Party of Italian Communists politicians Democrats of the Left politicians University of Turin alumni Members of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts Academic staff of the University of Turin Heidegger scholars Nietzsche scholars Hermeneutists Italian anti-Zionists Italian Freemasons Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2023 Articles with hCards Pages with Italian IPA Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gianni Vattimo 29 languages Add topic

