Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Impersonal 3 Interpersonal Toggle Interpersonal subsection 3.1 Biological basis 3.2 Psychological basis 3.2.1 Love as a necessity 3.3 Evolutionary basis 3.4 Adaptive benefit 3.5 Comparison of scientific models 3.6 Health 4 Cultural views Toggle Cultural views subsection 4.1 Ancient Greek 4.2 Ancient Roman 4.3 Chinese 4.4 Japanese 4.5 Indian 4.6 Persian 5 Religious views Toggle Religious views subsection 5.1 Abrahamic 5.1.1 Judaism 5.1.2 Christianity 5.1.3 Islam 5.1.4 Bahá'í Faith 5.2 Dharmic 5.2.1 Buddhism 5.2.2 Hinduism 6 Political views Toggle Political views subsection 6.1 Free love 7 Philosophical views 8 Literature depictions 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 11 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Love 178 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni Gungbe 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Li Niha Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Tyap Тыва дыл Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing IsiNdebele seSewula Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Strong, positive emotional/mental states For other uses, see Love (disambiguation) .

This article contains special characters .

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols .

Part of a series on Love Red-outline heart icon Types of love Affection Bonding Broken heart Compassionate love Conjugal love Courtly love courtship troubadours Falling in love Friendship cross-sex romantic zone Infatuation Interpersonal relationship Intimacy Limerence Love addiction Love at first sight Love triangle Lovesickness Lovestruck Obsessive love Parental love Passion Passionate and companionate love Platonic love Puppy love Queerplatonic relationship Romance Self-love Amour de soi Unconditional love Unrequited love Social views Anarchist Free love Patriotism Chinese Ren Yuanfen French Amour-propre Greek words for love Agape Eros Ludus Mania Philautia Philia Pistis Pragma Storgḗ Xenia Indian Kama Bhakti Maitrī Islamic Ishq Jewish Chesed Latin Amor Caritas Portuguese Saudade Yaghan Mamihlapinatapai Concepts Color wheel theory of love Bhakti yoga Biology of romantic love Interpersonal attraction Love letter Love of Christ Love of God in Christianity Love magic Valentine's Day Philosophy Religious views love deities Sacred Heart Similarity Physical attractiveness Triangular theory of love v t e Part of a series on Emotions Affect Classification In animals Emotional intelligence Mood Self-regulation Interpersonal Dysregulation Valence Emotions Acceptance Admiration Affection Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Anxiety Apathy Arousal Awe Belongingness Boredom Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Curiosity Depression Desire Determination Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Elevation Embarrassment Emotional detachment Empathy Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Faith Fear Frustration Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Hatred Hope Horror Hostility Hubris Humiliation Interest Jealousy Joy Kindness Limerence Loneliness Love Lust Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity Pleasure Pride Rage Regret Rejection Relief Remorse Resentment Sadness Saudade Schadenfreude Self-pity Shame Shock Shyness Social connection Sorrow Suffering Surprise Suspicion Trust Wonder Worry v t e Love is a feeling of strong attraction, affection, emotional attachment or concern for a person, animal, or thing.

[ 1 ] It is expressed in many forms, encompassing a range of strong and positive emotional and mental states , from the most sublime virtue , good habit, deepest interpersonal affection , to the simplest pleasure.

[ 2 ] An example of this range of meanings is that the love of a mother differs from the love of a spouse , which differs from the love of food .

Love is considered to be both positive and negative, with its virtue representing kindness , compassion , and affection —"the unselfish, loyal, and benevolent concern for the good of another"—and its vice representing a moral flaw akin to vanity , selfishness , amour-propre , and egotism . It may also describe compassionate and affectionate actions towards other humans, oneself, or animals.

[ 3 ] In its various forms, love acts as a major facilitator of interpersonal relationships , and owing to its central psychological importance, is one of the most common themes in the creative arts .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Love has been postulated to be a function that keeps human beings together against menaces and to facilitate the continuation of the species .

[ 6 ] Ancient Greek philosophers identified six forms of love : familial love ( storge ), friendly love or platonic love ( philia ), romantic love ( eros ), self-love ( philautia ), guest love ( xenia ), and divine or unconditional love ( agape ). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of love: fatuous love , unrequited love , empty love , companionate love , consummate love , compassionate love , infatuated love ( passionate love or limerence ), obsessive love , amour de soi , and courtly love . Numerous cultures have also distinguished Ren , Yuanfen , Mamihlapinatapai , Cafuné , Kama , Bhakti , Mettā , Ishq , Chesed , Amore , charity , Saudade (and other variants or symbioses of these states ), as culturally unique words, definitions, or expressions of love in regard to specified "moments" currently lacking in the English language.

[ 7 ] The colour wheel theory of love defines three primary, [ i ] three secondary, [ ii ] and nine tertiary [ iii ] love styles, describing them in terms of the traditional color wheel.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The triangular theory of love suggests intimacy, [ iv ] passion, [ v ] and commitment [ vi ] are core components of love.

[ 10 ] Love has additional religious or spiritual meaning. This diversity of uses and meanings, combined with the complexity of the feelings involved, makes love unusually difficult to consistently define, compared to other emotional states.

Definitions The word "love" can have a variety of related but distinct meanings in different contexts. Many other languages use multiple words to express some of the different concepts that in English are denoted as "love"; one example is the plurality of Greek concepts for "love" ( agape , eros , philia , storge ).

[ 11 ] Cultural differences in conceptualizing love makes it difficult to establish a universal definition.

[ 12 ] Although the nature or essence of love is a subject of frequent debate, different aspects of the word can be clarified by determining what is not love (antonyms of "love"). Love, as a general expression of positive sentiment (a stronger form of like ), is commonly contrasted with hate (or neutral apathy ). As a less sexual and more emotionally intimate form of romantic attachment, love is commonly contrasted with lust . As an interpersonal relationship with romantic overtones, love is sometimes contrasted with friendship , although the word love is often applied to close friendships or platonic love. Further possible ambiguities come with usages like "girlfriend", "boyfriend", and "just good friends".

Fraternal love (Prehispanic sculpture from 250 to 900 CE , of Huastec origin).

Museum of Anthropology in Xalapa , Veracruz , Mexico Abstractly discussed, love usually refers to a feeling one person experiences for another person. Love often involves caring for, or identifying with, a person or thing (cf.

vulnerability and care theory of love ), including oneself (cf.

narcissism ). In addition to cross-cultural differences in understanding love, ideas about love have also changed greatly over time. Some historians date modern conceptions of romantic love to courtly Europe during or after the Middle Ages , although the prior existence of romantic attachments is attested by ancient love poetry.

[ 13 ] The complex nature of love often reduces its discourse to a thought-terminating cliché . Several common proverbs regard love, from Virgil 's " Love conquers all " to The Beatles ' " All You Need Is Love ".

St. Thomas Aquinas , following Aristotle , defines love as "to will the good of another." [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Bertrand Russell describes love as a condition of [ clarification needed ] "absolute value," as opposed to relative value .

[ 16 ] Philosopher Gottfried Leibniz said that love is "to be delighted by the happiness of another." [ 17 ] Meher Baba stated that in love there is a "feeling of unity" and an "active appreciation of the intrinsic worth of the object of love." [ 18 ] Biologist Jeremy Griffith defines love as "unconditional selflessness".

[ 19 ] According to Ambrose Bierce , love is a temporary insanity curable by marriage.

[ 20 ] Impersonal People can express love towards things other than humans; this can range from expressing a strong liking of something, such as "I love popcorn" or that something is essential to one's identity, such as "I love being an actor".

[ 21 ] People can have a profound dedication and immense appreciation for an object, principle, or objective, thereby experiencing a sense of love towards it. For example, compassionate outreach and volunteer workers' "love" of their cause may sometimes be born not of interpersonal love but impersonal love, altruism , and strong spiritual or political convictions.

[ 3 ] People can also "love" material objects, animals, or activities if they invest themselves in bonding or otherwise identifying with those things. If sexual passion is also involved, then this feeling is called paraphilia .

[ 22 ] Interpersonal Relationships ( Outline ) Types Genetic or adoptive Kinship Family Stepfamily Parent Father Mother Son Daughter Grandparent Sibling Brother Sister Cousin Aunt Uncle Niece and nephew By marriage Spouse Husband Wife Open marriage Polygamy Polyandry Polygyny Group marriage Mixed-orientation Partner(s) Significant other Boyfriend Girlfriend Cohabitation Long-distance Online Same-sex Queerplatonic Intimate and sexual Casual Committed Monogamy Non-monogamy Mutual monogamy Polyamory Polyfidelity Affair Cicisbeo Concubinage Courtesan Mistress Activities Bonding Courtship Dating Engagement Bachelor's Day Mating Meet market Romance Singles event Wedding Endings Breakup Legal / marital separation Annulment Divorce Widowhood Emotions and feelings Affinity Attachment Intimacy Jealousy Limerence Love Friend zone Platonic Romantic friendship Unconditional Passion Sexuality Non-romantic friendship Alliance Cross-sex Female Male Practices Bride price dower dowry service Homogamy Hypergamy Infidelity Sexual activity Transgression Repression Abuse Child Dating Domestic Elderly Narcissistic parent Controlling behavior Stalking v t e Interpersonal love refers to love between human beings. It is a much more potent sentiment than liking a person.

Unrequited love refers to feelings of love that are not reciprocated. Interpersonal love is most closely associated with interpersonal relationships .

[ 3 ] Such love might exist between family members, friends, and couples. There are several psychological disorders related to love, such as erotomania .

Throughout history, philosophy and religion have speculated about the phenomenon of love. In the 20th century, the science of psychology has studied the subject. The sciences of anthropology , neuroscience , and biology have also added to the understanding of the concept of love.

Biological basis Main article: Biology of romantic love Simplistic overview of chemicals implicated in love Biological models tend to view romantic love as a mammalian drive or motivation system, much like hunger or thirst.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Helen Fisher , an anthropologist and human behavior researcher, divides the experience of love into three brain systems which can operate independently of one another: lust , attraction , and attachment .

Lust is the feeling of sexual desire ; attraction determines what partners find attractive and pursue, conserving time and energy by choosing a preferred mating partner over others; and attachment involves sharing a home, parental duties, mutual defense, and in humans involves feelings of safety and security.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Pair of Lovers . 1480–1485 Lust is the initial passionate sexual desire that promotes mating , and involves the increased release of hormones such as testosterone and estrogen . These effects rarely last more than a few weeks or months.

Attraction is the more individualized and romantic desire for a specific candidate for mating, which develops out of lust as commitment to an individual mate form. Recent studies in neuroscience have indicated that as people fall in love, the brain consistently releases a certain set of chemicals, including the neurotransmitter hormones dopamine , norepinephrine , and serotonin , the same compounds released by amphetamine , stimulating the brain's pleasure center and leading to side effects such as increased heart rate , reduced appetite and sleep , and an intense feeling of excitement . Research indicates that this stage generally lasts from one and a half to three years.

[ 28 ] Since the lust and attraction stages are both considered temporary, a third stage is needed to account for long-term relationships.

Attachment is the bonding that promotes relationships lasting for many years and even decades. Attachment is generally based on commitments such as marriage and children, or mutual friendship based on things like shared interests. It has been linked to higher levels of the chemicals oxytocin and vasopressin , to a greater degree than what is found in short-term relationships.

[ 28 ] Enzo Emanuele and coworkers reported the protein molecule known as the nerve growth factor (NGF) has high levels when people first fall in love, but these return to previous levels after one year.

[ 29 ] Psychological basis Further information: Human bonding Grandmother and grandchild in Sri Lanka Psychologist Robert Sternberg formulated a triangular theory of love in which love has three components: intimacy, commitment, and passion. Intimacy is when two people share confidences and various details of their personal lives, and is usually shown in friendships and romantic love affairs. Commitment is the expectation that the relationship is permanent. Passionate love is shown in infatuation as well as romantic love. All forms of love are viewed as varying combinations of these three components. Non-love does not include any of these components. Liking only includes intimacy. Infatuated love only includes passion. Empty love only includes commitment. Romantic love includes both intimacy and passion. Companionate love includes intimacy and commitment. Fatuous love includes passion and commitment. Consummate love includes all three components.

[ 10 ] American psychologist Zick Rubin sought to define love by psychometrics in the 1970s. His work identifies a different set of three factors that constitute love: attachment, caring, and intimacy.

[ 30 ] Following developments in electrical theories such as Coulomb's law , which showed that positive and negative charges attract, analogs in human life were envisioned, such as "opposites attract". Research on human mating has generally found this not to be true when it comes to character and personality—people tend to like people similar to themselves. However, in a few unusual and specific domains, such as immune systems , it seems that humans prefer others who are unlike themselves (e.g., with an orthogonal immune system), perhaps because this will lead to a baby that has the best of both worlds.

[ 31 ] In recent years, various human bonding theories have been developed, described in terms of attachments, ties, bonds, and affinities.
Some Western authorities disaggregate [ clarification needed ] into two main components, the altruistic and the narcissistic. This view is represented in the works of Scott Peck , whose work in the field of applied psychology explored the definitions of love and evil. Peck maintains that love is a combination of the "concern for the spiritual growth of another" and simple narcissism.

[ 32 ] In combination, love is an activity , not simply a feeling.

Psychologist Erich Fromm maintained in his book The Art of Loving that love is not merely a feeling but is also actions, and that in fact the "feeling" of love is superficial in comparison to one's commitment to love via a series of loving actions over time.

[ 3 ] Fromm held that love is ultimately not a feeling at all, but rather is a commitment to, and adherence to, loving actions towards another, oneself, or many others, over a sustained duration.

[ 3 ] Fromm also described love as a conscious choice that in its early stages might originate as an involuntary feeling, but which then later no longer depends on those feelings, but rather depends only on conscious commitment.

[ 3 ] Love as a necessity The extent to which love can be labelled as a necessity varies in psychology . For infants, attachment theory states that there is a need to form a close relationship with at least one primary caregiver to ensure their survival, and to develop healthy social and emotional functioning (particularly between the ages of six months and two years). As children grow, they use these attachment figures as a secure base from which to explore the world and return to for comfort.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Psychiatrist Stephanie Cacioppo states, "the need for love might be less immediate than the need to avoid danger, but it is by no means a luxury", [ 35 ] vaguely placing love neither as a complete need or want, but in between. Professor Ingrid V. Albrecht suggests that "love participates in a unique form of practical necessity, different from both moral and psychological necessity, yet bearing resemblances to each." It is further described as "an engagement with a person as essentially particular, rather than as an instance of a rational agent in general." Ingrid's view suggests that morality or rationality are not the limiting factors of love, but that love is its own distinct need independent of those factors.

[ 36 ] Psychologist Abraham Maslow places love as a basic and foundational human need .

[ 37 ] In his model, love is a driving factor of human behavior that a person necessitates to fulfill their psychological needs. For many people, it is usually prioritized after one's physiological and safety needs are met.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Evolutionary basis Wall of Love on Montmartre in Paris: "I love you" in 250 languages, by calligraphist Fédéric Baron and artist Claire Kito (2000) Evolutionary psychology has attempted to provide various reasons for love as a survival tool. Humans are dependent on parental help for a large portion of their lifespans compared to other mammals. Love has therefore been seen as a mechanism to promote parental support of children for this extended time period. Furthermore, researchers as early as Charles Darwin identified unique features of human love compared to other mammals and credited love as a major factor for creating social support systems that enabled the development and expansion of the human species.

[ citation needed ] Another factor may be that sexually transmitted diseases can cause, among other effects, permanently reduced fertility , injury to the fetus, and increase complications during childbirth . This would favor monogamous relationships over polygamy .

[ 40 ] Adaptive benefit Interpersonal love between a man and woman provides an evolutionary adaptive benefit since it facilitates mating and sexual reproduction .

[ 41 ] However, some organisms can reproduce asexually without mating. Understanding the adaptive benefit of interpersonal love depends on understanding the adaptive benefit of sexual reproduction as opposed to asexual reproduction. Richard Michod reviewed evidence that love, and consequently sexual reproduction, provides two major adaptive advantages.

[ 41 ] First, sexual reproduction facilitates repair of damages in the DNA that is passed from parent to progeny (during meiosis , a key stage of the sexual process). Second, a gene in either parent may contain a harmful mutation , but in the progeny produced by sexual reproduction, expression of a harmful mutation introduced by one parent is likely to be masked by expression of the unaffected homologous gene from the other parent.

[ 41 ] Comparison of scientific models Biological models tend to view romantic love as a mammalian drive or motivation system, much like hunger or thirst.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Psychology sees love as more of a social and cultural phenomenon. Love is influenced by hormones (such as oxytocin ), neurotrophins (such as NGF ), and pheromones , and how people think and behave in love is influenced by their conceptions of love. The conventional view in biology is that there are two major drives in love: sexual attraction and attachment . Attachment between adults is presumed to work on the same principles that lead an infant to become attached to its mother. The traditional psychological view sees love as being a combination of companionate love and passionate love. Passionate love is intense longing, and is often accompanied by physiological arousal (shortness of breath, rapid heart rate); companionate love is affection and a feeling of intimacy not accompanied by physiological arousal.

Health Love plays a role in human well-being and health.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Engaging in activities associated with love, such as nurturing relationships, has been shown to activate key brain regions responsible for emotion, attention, motivation, and memory. These activities also contribute to the regulation of the autonomic nervous system , leading to stress reduction over time, although the initial stages of love may induce stress.

[ 42 ] Love's social bonds enhance both physical and mental health, fostering resilience, compassion, and closeness. It boosts immune function and promotes healing, while also encouraging positive motivations and behaviors for individual flourishing and survival.

[ 42 ] Breakups can evoke a range of emotional states, including distrust, rejection, and anger, leading to trauma and various psychological challenges such as anxiety, social withdrawal, and even love addiction. Individuals may become fixated on past relationships, perpetuating emotional distress akin to addiction.

[ 44 ] Health benefits grow bigger when married couples are older, this is because the partners play a crucial role in promoting each other's well-being.

[ 45 ] Feeling unloved stunts human health in aspects such as growth and happiness.

[ 37 ] Cultural views Ancient authors imagined love as a striving for perfection in beauty and goodness. From the high Middle Ages, love was generally the central category of ruler relationships and the relationship between "the sovereign power and the subject". It functioned as a form of behavior that "structured and hierarchized the political space, not as a feeling related to subjectivity and authenticity as in the modern sense". Evidence shows that love was a subject taught in ruling houses until the 13th century. In the context of mirrors for princes , the ruler should come to love his subjects, and his subjects to love him in return. Some medieval texts (Machiavelli, Il principe , 1513/32; "The Prince") instruct the ruler to use fear as a means of maintaining the relationship, while others (Erasmus of Rotterdam, Institutio principis christiani , 1515; "Instruction of the Christian prince") advocate for "insight and experience".

[ 46 ] Unhealthy forms of love have always been apparent throughout the course of history. In the context of sexual violence, love in the context of desire was interpreted differently, as a "force" that caused men to rape women. Men were often described to be powerless against it, and the act of sexual violence was instead seen to be an act of love in the form of "seduction". Especially in courts of law, this concept was often used as an excuse to mask the alleged facts of sexual violence.

[ 46 ] Ancient Greek See also: Greek words for love Roman copy of a Greek sculpture by Lysippus depicting Eros , the Greek personification of romantic love Greek distinguishes several different senses in which the word "love" is used. Ancient Greeks identified three main forms of love: friendship or platonic desire ( philia ), sexual or romantic desire ( eros ), and self-emptying or divine love ( agape ).

[ 21 ] Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of romantic love.

[ 47 ] Agape ( ἀγάπη agápē ) Agape , often a Christian term, denotes a form of love that stands apart from the conventional understanding of affection. Rooted in theological discourse, agape represents a love that is characterized by its spontaneous nature and its independence from the inherent value of its object. Originating from the Greek term for "love", agape has been examined within theological scholarship, particularly in contrast to eros.

In the Christian tradition, agape is often attributed to the love of God for humanity, as well as humanity's reciprocal love for God and for one another, often termed as brotherly love.

Agape is considered to be unmerited and unmotivated by any inherent worthiness in its recipient. Instead, it is portrayed as an expression of the nature of God, exemplifying divine love that transcends human comprehension.

[ 21 ] Eros ( ἔρως érōs ) Eros originally referred to a passionate desire, often synonymous with sexual passion, reflecting an egocentric nature. However, its modern interpretation portrays it as both selfish and responsive to the merits of the beloved, thus contingent on reasons. Plato, in his Symposium , argued that sexual desire, fixated on physical beauty, is inadequate and should evolve into an appreciation of the beauty of the soul, culminating in an appreciation of the form of beauty itself.

[ 21 ] In Greek mythology, Eros symbolizes the state of being in love, extending beyond mere physical sexuality (referred to as "Venus"). Unrestrained Venus can reduce individuals to mere appetite, but when Eros is present, the focus shifts to the beloved, elevating intimacy beyond physical gratification. Eros is depicted as divine yet potentially dangerous, capable of inspiring both altruism and selfishness.

[ 11 ] Philia ( φιλία philía ) Philia originally describing an affectionate regard or friendly feeling, extended to relationships like friendship, family members, business partners, and one's nation. Similar to eros , philia is often seen as responsive to positive attributes in the beloved. This similarity has led scholars to think whether the primary difference between romantic eros and philia lies solely in the sexual dimension of the former. The distinction between the two becomes more complex with attempts from scholars to diminish the importance of the sexual aspect in eros, contributing to a nuanced understanding of these forms of love.

[ 21 ] Philia was articulated by Aristotle in his Nicomachean Ethics .

Aristotle suggests that philia can be motivated by considerations for either one's own benefit or the benefit of the other.

Philia often arises from the utility found in the relationship or from admiration for the character or virtues of the other individual. Aristotle further elucidates that the foundation of philia rests on objective grounds; individuals must share similar dispositions, refrain from holding grudges, and embody qualities such as justice, among others.

[ 48 ] Ancient Roman In Latin, friendship was distinctly termed amicitia, while amor encompassed erotic passion, familial attachment, and, albeit less commonly, the affection between friends.

Cicero , in his essay On Friendship reflects on the innate human tendency to both love oneself and seek out another with whom to intertwine minds, nearly blending them into a singular entity. This suggests that while friends remain distinct individuals, they also, in some sense, become intertwined, embodying a shared essence.

[ 49 ] Lucretius perceives love as a disruptive and irrational force, leading to madness and despair. To him, it is an affliction distorting reality, a primal urge rooted in the biological need for species to propagate. He emphasizes love's futility and self-destructive nature. In contrast, Ovid acknowledges the pleasure of love alongside its risks and complexities. He views love as a game of manipulation and deception, marked by a blend of hedonism and cynicism . Ovid recognizes the transient nature of passion and the inevitable disappointment in romantic relationships.

[ 50 ] Chinese 愛 ; ài , the traditional Chinese character for love, contains a heart ( 心 ) in the middle.

Ren ( Chinese : 仁 ), a concept in Confucianism philosophy, embodies the essence of humanity and virtue. It is regarded as the sum of all virtues within a person, encompassing traits such as selflessness and self-cultivation. Ren emphasizes the cultivation of harmonious relationships within society, starting from the family unit and extending outward. Within Confucianism, these relationships are delineated by five main categories: father-son, older brother-younger brother, husband-wife, older friend-younger friend, and lord-servant.  In Confucianism, one displays benevolent love by performing actions such as filial piety from children, kindness from parents, loyalty to the king and so forth.

[ 51 ] Central to the concept of ren is the notion of reciprocity and empathetic understanding. It is often interpreted as akin to love ( 愛 ; ài ), but sometimes it also considered a stage between ai and ling , characterized by the sincere and open-hearted expression of human feelings. Through genuine love for others, individuals cultivate ren and foster deeper connections that bridge the gap between the human and the divine.

Ren ' s significance lies in its ability to foster genuine human connection and empathy, laying the foundation for harmonious relationships within society.

[ 52 ] Mozi, a Chinese philosopher, articulated a philosophy centered on the principle of universal love. At the core of his teachings lay the belief that genuine harmony and societal well-being could only be achieved through love for others, transcending narrow self-interest. Mozi contended that universal love was not merely an abstract concept but a practical imperative, requiring individuals to actively promote the welfare of all members of society through their actions.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] In Mozi's philosophical framework, universal love was not only a moral obligation but also a divine principle originating from Heaven itself. He argued that this principle was exemplified through the actions of sage-kings from ancient times, who demonstrated how love could manifest in tangible ways within human interactions. Mozi's advocacy for universal love extended beyond interpersonal relationships; he believed it should guide the selection of rulers and the structuring of society, emphasizing reciprocity and egalitarianism as foundational principles for a harmonious social order.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] In Taoism , the concept of ci ( 慈 ) embodies compassion or love, with connotations of tender nurturing akin to a mother's care. It emphasizes the idea that creatures can only thrive through raising and nurturing.

Ci serves as the wellspring of compassion or love that transcends preconceived notions of individuals, instead fostering compassion for people as they are. As depicted in the Tao Te Ching , love is as open and responsive to each person's unique circumstances. Taoism juxtaposes human beings with the vastness of nature, likening the creation of people to the formation of waves in the ocean. Unlike Confucianism, Taoist responses to the loss of a loved one as portrayed in the Zhuangzi may involve either mourning their death or embracing the loss and finding joy in new creations. Taoist love seeks connections that surpass distinctions and superficial reflections.

[ 55 ] Japanese The Japanese language uses three words to convey the English equivalent of love — ai ( 愛 ) , koi ( 恋 or 孤悲 ) and ren'ai ( 恋愛 ) . The term ai carries a multiple meanings, encompassing feelings of feelings from superior to inferiors, compassion and empathy towards others and selfless love, originally referred to beauty and was often used in a religious context. Initially synonymous with koi , representing romantic love between a man and a woman, emphasizing its physical expression, ai underwent a transformation during the early Meiji era . It evolved into a euphemistic term for renbo ( 恋慕 ) or love attachment, signifying a shift towards a more egalitarian treatment and consideration of others as equals. Prior to Western influence, the term koi generally represented romantic love.

Koi describes a longing for a member of the opposite sex and is typically interpreted as selfish and wanting. The term's origins come from the concept of lonely solitude as a result of separation from a loved one. Though modern usage of koi focuses on sexual love and infatuation, the Manyō used the term to cover a wider range of situations, including tenderness, benevolence, and material desire. The fusion of ai and koi gave rise to the modern term ren'ai ; its usage more closely resembles that of koi in the form of romantic love.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] The concept amae ( 甘え ) , the dependency and emotional bonds between an infant and its mother—a bond that lays the foundation for the archetypal concept of love. Japanese culture traditionally distinguishes between marriage and love, valuing practical considerations and complementarity within family units.

[ 57 ] Indian The love stories of the Hindu deities Krishna and Radha have influenced the Indian culture and arts. Above: Radha Madhavam by Raja Ravi Varma .

In ancient India , there was an understanding of erotics and the art of love. References in the Rigveda suggest the presence of romantic narratives in ancient Indo-Aryan society, evident in dialogues between deities like Yama and Yami , and Pururavas and Urvashi . The Sanskrit language , offered various terms to convey the concept of love, such as kama, sneha, priya, vatsalya, bhakti , priti and prema .

[ 58 ] In Indian literature, there are seven stages of love. The first is preska , characterized by the desire to see something pleasant. Next is abhilasa, involving constant thoughts about the beloved. Then comes raga, signifying the mental inclination to be united with the beloved. Following that is shena , which involves favorable activities directed towards the beloved.

Prema is the stage where one cannot live without the beloved. Then there is rati , which involves living together with the beloved. Finally, srngara represents the playful interaction with the beloved.

[ 58 ] Kama initially representing desire and longing. Later, Vātsyāyana , the author of the Kama Sutra , explored the concept of kama , defining it as the enjoyment of sensory pleasures with conscious awareness. However, there were also teachings cautioning against becoming overly attached to desire, advocating for the pursuit of genuine happiness through transcending desires. The Atharvaveda ,  presents kama as the tender affection between partners.

[ 58 ] Nevertheless, kama is also often associated with insatiable sexual desire intertwined with intense emotions like anger and greed, portraying it as potentially harmful. Over time, kama took on anthropomorphic qualities, evolving into the figure of the Indian Cupid.

[ 58 ] Sneha , considered the emotional facet of love, stands in contrast to the intense passion of kama with its calm demeanor. Characterized by moisture and viscosity, the term originally denoted oiliness. It is often compounded with words for family members, reflecting attachment to individuals like mothers, fathers, and sons. Those experiencing sneha tend to exhibit great concern for one another. While traditionally attributed to sensing, the Harshacharita presents a spontaneous perspective, suggesting it lacks a definitive cause. Due to its emotional nature, sneha is transient, emerging without reason and disappearing likewise.

[ 58 ] Preman represents a heightened stage in the development of love, characterized by the unbearable feeling of separation from the beloved. Etymologically, it denotes the sense of endearment akin to one's own.

Priti , similar to preman , denotes fondness for anything delightful and familiar. It encompasses a general liking for arts, sports, and objects, while also encompassing a human instinct.

Priti is built on foundations of trust and fidelity. Friendly relations ( priti ) may persist between individuals but are not necessarily bound by affection ( sneha ).

[ 58 ] Vatsalya originally signifies the tender affection exhibited by a cow towards her calf, extending to denote the love nurtured by elders or superiors towards the younger or inferior. This love is exemplified in the affection of parents towards their children, a husband's care for his wife, or a ruler's concern for their subjects. Conversely, bhakti denotes the love expressed by the younger towards the seniors, exemplified in a child's devotion to their parents.

[ 58 ] Persian Interpretations of Rumi's poetry and Sufi cosmology by scholars emphasize a divine-centric perspective, focusing on the transcendent nature of love. These interpretations emphasize Rumi's rejection of mortal attachments in favor of a love for the ultimate beloved, seen as embodying absolute beauty and grandeur. Scholars like William Chittick assert that all love stems from the divine, with God being both lover and beloved.

Leonard Lewisohn characterizes Rumi's poetry as part of a mystical tradition that celebrates love as pathways to union with the divine, highlighting a transcendent experience.

[ 59 ] The children of Adam are limbs of one body Having been created of one essence.

When the calamity of time afflicts one limb The other limbs cannot remain at rest.

If you have no sympathy for the troubles of others You are not worthy to be called by the name of "man".

Sa'di , Gulistan In Persian mysticism , the concept of creation stems from love, viewed as the fundamental essence from which all beings originate and to which they ultimately return. This notion, influenced by neoplatonism , portrays love as both earthly and transcendent, embodying a universal striving for reunion with the divine. Scholars such as Abdolhossein Zarrinkoob trace this philosophical stance, highlighting its fusion with ancient Persian religious beliefs in figures like Ibn Arabi . According to Islamicists like William Chittick and Leonard Lewisohn , all forms of love find their origin in divine love, with creation serving as a reflection of God's beauty and love. This perspective is evident in the poetry of Hafez and others, where the concept of tajalli , or divine self-manifestation, underscores the profound spiritual significance of love as it pertains to both human relationships and devotion to God.

[ 59 ] Religious views Main article: Religious views on love Until the 18th century, the concept of love in relationships had been largely based on the former principles of God. Authors of the high Middle Ages emphasized using God to help guide those of authority in relationships. As a result, consequences were seen as in accordance to divine order, "for the ruler's right to punish was directly derived from the obligation of love towards the subject." [ 46 ] Abrahamic Robert Indiana 's 1977 Love sculpture spelling ahava Judaism See also: Jewish views on love In Hebrew , אהבה ( ahavah ) signifies the love of Israelites for God and each other. However, the concept hesed offers a deeper understanding of love within Jewish thought and life. It goes beyond mere passion, embodying a character trait that is actively expressed through generosity and grace.

Hesed has a dual nature: when attributed to God, it denotes grace or favor, while when practiced by humans, it reflects piety and devotion.

[ 55 ] [ page needed ] Hasidim , demonstrate their commitment and love for God through acts of hesed . The Torah serves as a guide, outlining how Israelites should express their love for God, show reverence for nature, and demonstrate compassion toward fellow human beings.

[ 55 ] The commandment "Love thy neighbor as thyself" from the Torah's, gives emphasis on ethical obligations and impartiality in judgment. It highlights the importance of treating all individuals equally before the law, rejecting favoritism and bribery; deuteronomy further emphasizes impartiality in judgment.

[ 60 ] As for love between marital partners, this is deemed an essential ingredient to life: "See life with the wife you love" ( Ecclesiastes 9:9 ). Rabbi David Wolpe writes that "love is not only about the feelings of the lover... It is when one person believes in another person and shows it." He further states that "love... is a feeling that expresses itself in action. What we really feel is reflected in what we do." [ 61 ] The biblical book Song of Solomon is considered a romantically phrased metaphor of love between God and his people, but in its plain reading it reads like a love song. The 20th-century rabbi Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler is frequently quoted as defining love from the Jewish point of view as "giving without expecting to take".

[ 62 ] Christianity Images highlighting the universality of God's love Love and the One-way Street The Christian understanding is that love comes from God , who is himself love ( 1 John 4:8 ). The love of man and woman— eros in Greek—and the unselfish love of others ( agape ), are often contrasted as "descending" and "ascending" love, respectively, but are ultimately the same thing.

[ 63 ] In ancient Christianity, the concept of caritas became a prominent topic, advocating love for one’s neighbor as the likeness of God (Augustine, De civitate Dei ).

[ 46 ] There are several Greek words for "love" that are regularly referred to in Christian circles.

agape In the New Testament , agapē is charitable, selfless, altruistic, and unconditional. It is parental love, seen as creating goodness in the world; it is the way God is seen to love humanity, and it is seen as the kind of love that Christians aspire to have for one another.

[ 11 ] phileo Also used in the New Testament, phileo is a human response to something that is found to be delightful. Also known as "brotherly love." Two other words for love in the Greek language , eros (sexual love) and storge (child-to-parent love), were never used in the New Testament.

[ 11 ] Christians believe that to love God with all your heart, mind, and strength and love your neighbor as yourself are the two most important things in life (the greatest commandment of the Jewish Torah , according to Jesus ; cf.

Gospel of Mark 12:28–34 ).

Saint Augustine summarized this when he wrote "Love God, and do as thou wilt." [ 64 ] The Old Testament is said to place greater emphasis on "the active character of love" than the New, which shifts its focus to the love of God "as a principle pervading the world". Out of the three divine virtues (faith, hope, and love) in Christianity, it is said that love has the highest status (1 Cor 13,13).

[ 46 ] The Apostle Paul similarly glorified love as the most important virtue of all. Describing love in the famous poetic interpretation in 1 Corinthians , he wrote, "Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It is not rude, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, and always perseveres." ( 1 Corinthians 13:4–7 ) The Apostle John wrote, "For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him." ( John 3:16–17 ) John also wrote, "Dear friends, let us love one another for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love." ( 1 John 4:7–8 ) Saint Augustine wrote that one must be able to decipher the difference between love and lust. Lust, according to Saint Augustine, is an overindulgence, but to love and be loved is what he has sought for his entire life. He even says, "I was in love with love." [ citation needed ] Finally, he does fall in love and is loved back, by God. Saint Augustine says the only one who can love you truly and fully is God because love with a human only allows for flaws such as "jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and contention." [ 65 ] : III.1 According to Saint Augustine, to love God is "to attain the peace which is yours." [ 65 ] : X.27 Augustine regards the duplex commandment of love in Matthew 22 as the heart of Christian faith and the interpretation of the Bible. After the review of Christian doctrine, Augustine treats the problem of love in terms of use and enjoyment until the end of Book I of De Doctrina Christiana (1.22.21–1.40.44).

[ 66 ] Christian theologians see God as the source of love, which is mirrored in humans and their own loving relationships. Influential Christian theologian C. S. Lewis wrote a book called The Four Loves .

Benedict XVI named his first encyclical God is love . He said that a human being, created in the image of God, who is love, is able to practice love; to give himself to God and others ( agape ) and by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation ( eros ). This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Mother Teresa and Mary, the mother of Jesus and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them.

[ 63 ] Teresa described feeling unloved as "the most terrible poverty".

[ 67 ] Pope Francis: the "Cross ( Jesus crucified ) is the greatest meaning of the greatest love".

[ 68 ] Pope Francis asserts that the "Cross ( Jesus crucified ) is the greatest meaning of the greatest love," [ 68 ] and in the crucifixion is found everything, all knowledge and the entirety of God's love.

[ 69 ] Pope Francis taught that "True love is both loving and letting oneself be loved... what is important in love is not our loving, but allowing ourselves to be loved by God." [ 70 ] And so, in the analysis of a Catholic theologian, for Pope Francis, "the key to love... is not our activity. It is the activity of the greatest, and the source, of all the powers in the universe: God's." [ 71 ] In Christianity the practical definition of love is summarized by Thomas Aquinas , who defined love as "to will the good of another," or to desire for another to succeed.

[ 15 ] This is an explanation of the Christian need to love others, including their enemies. Thomas Aquinas explains that Christian love is motivated by the need to see others succeed in life, to be good people.

Regarding love for enemies, Jesus is quoted in the Gospel of Matthew: You have heard that it was said, "Love your neighbor and hate your enemy." But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that? Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.

— Matthew 5:43–48 Tertullian wrote regarding love for enemies: "Our individual, extraordinary, and perfect goodness consists in loving our enemies. To love one's friends is common practice, to love one's enemies only among Christians." [ 72 ] Islam In Islam, one of the 99 names of God is Al-Wadūd , which means "The Loving".

Love encompasses the Islamic view of life as universal brotherhood that applies to all who hold faith. Among the 99 names of God ( Allah ) is the name Al-Wadud , or "the Loving One," which is found in Surah 11:90 and 85:14 . God is also referenced at the beginning of every chapter in the Qur'an as Ar-Rahman and Ar-Rahim , or the "Most Compassionate" and the "Most Merciful", indicating that nobody is more loving, compassionate, and benevolent than God. The Qur'an refers to God as being "full of loving kindness." The Qur'an exhorts Muslim believers to treat all people, those who have not persecuted them [ clarification needed ] , with birr or "deep kindness" as stated in Surah 6:8-9 .

Birr is also used by the Qur'an to describe the love and kindness that children must show to their parents.

Ishq , or divine love, is emphasized by Sufism in the Islamic tradition. Practitioners of Sufism believe that love is a projection of the essence of God into the universe. God desires to recognize beauty, and as if one looks at a mirror to see oneself, God "looks" at himself within the dynamics of nature. Since everything is a reflection of God, the school of Sufism practices seeing the beauty inside the apparently ugly. Sufism is often referred to as the religion of love.

[ 73 ] God in Sufism is referred to in three main terms—Lover, Loved, and Beloved—with the last of these terms often seen in Sufi poetry. A common viewpoint of Sufism is that through love, humankind can return to its inherent purity and grace. The saints of Sufism are infamous for being "drunk" due to their love of God ; hence, the constant reference to wine in Sufi poetry and music.

Bahá'í Faith The Bahá'í concept of the human soul emphasizes its expression through capacities such as knowledge, love, and will. According to Bahá'í teachings, conscious recognition of one's Creator and a reciprocal love relationship with that Creator form the basis of obedience to religious law. This perspective grounds adherence to law within the spiritual dynamics of each individual's journey, portraying obedience as a conscious choice driven by love rather than as mere compliance with external dictates.

[ 74 ] Baháʼu'lláh , the founder of the Bahá'í Faith, emphasizes the importance of observing God's commandments out of love, describing them as "the lamps of My loving providence" and urging followers to adhere to them for "the love of My beauty." This framing positions love as the motive force for individuals striving to follow divine laws.

[ 74 ] In Bahá'í understanding, love is considered the fundamental universal law.

ʻAbdu'l-Bahá , Bahá'u'lláh's son and successor, describes love as the "most great law" and the force that binds together the diverse elements of the material world. He further asserts that love is the establisher of true civilization and the source of glory for every race and nation.

[ 74 ] From the Bahá'í perspective, God's revelation of laws to humanity is an act of love, and the legitimate reason for their application and adherence lies in their expression of love. This understanding underscores the intimate connection between spiritual principles, individual growth, and the practice of religious law within the Bahá'í Faith.

[ 74 ] Dharmic Buddhism In Buddhism , love is understood as a selfless, universal quality that serves as the foundation for compassion, joy in others' happiness, and equanimity . Together, these four qualities—loving-kindness ( maitrī ), compassion ( karuṇā ), sympathetic joy ( mudita ), and equanimity ( upekṣā )—are known as the brahmavihara . Loving-kindness, the first of the four, fosters goodwill toward all beings and leads naturally to compassion for those who suffer, joy in others' achievements, and, ultimately, to equanimity, a balanced state free from attachment and aversion. This progression helps practitioners to reduce negative tendencies like ill-will, jealousy, and possessiveness, with the ultimate aim of cultivating inner peace and a compassionate view toward all beings, supporting both personal growth and societal harmony.

[ 75 ] In Theravada , love and sympathy play key roles in shaping ethical behavior and social actions. Sympathy motivates altruistic acts like teaching and helping others, while loving-kindness is cultivated primarily through meditation, acting as a form of mental liberation. Together, these qualities encourage impartial love and empathy, fostering personal peace and societal harmony, and supporting both individual growth and a more compassionate world.

[ 76 ] In Mahayana , love is understood as profound compassion and a commitment to mutual support. This concept is central to the Bodhisattva ideal, where practitioners vow to help all beings reach enlightenment, often delaying their own liberation to support others. Mahayana teachings emphasize selfless love, blurring the boundary between self and others, and seeing all beings as interconnected. This love, framed within the Mahayana understanding of reality as ultimately illusory, transcends ego and guides both the practitioner and others toward collective liberation.

[ 77 ] In Vajrayana , love is a transformative force that, when disciplined, leads to spiritual enlightenment. Rather than rejecting desire, Vajrayana encourages the refinement of love and other potent energies as pathways to higher consciousness. By controlling and sublimating these energies, often represented through sexual energy as a life force ( k Kundalini ), practitioners unite the principles of wisdom and skill. Here, love becomes a symbol and method for ultimate unity, guiding practitioners to enlightenment by transforming personal desire into a universal connection.

[ 78 ] Hinduism Main articles: Kama and Kama Sutra Kama (left) with Rati on a temple wall of Chennakesava Temple , Belur In Hinduism , kāma is pleasurable, sexual love, personified by the god Kamadeva . For many Hindu schools, it is the third end ( Kama ) in life. Kamadeva is often pictured holding a bow of sugar cane and an arrow of flowers; he may ride upon a great parrot.

[ relevant?

] He is usually accompanied by his consort Rati and his companion Vasanta, lord of the spring season.

[ relevant?

] Stone images of Kamadeva and Rati can be seen on the door of the Chennakeshava Temple, Belur , in Karnataka , India .

[ relevant?

] Maara is another name for kāma .

[ citation needed ] In contrast to kāma , prema —or prem refers to "elevated" love.

Karuṇā is compassion and mercy, which impels one to help reduce the suffering of others.

Bhakti is a Sanskrit term meaning "loving devotion to the divine." A person who practices bhakti is called a bhakta . Hindu writers, theologians, and philosophers have distinguished nine forms of bhakti , which can be found in the Bhagavata Purana and works by Tulsidas . The philosophical work Narada Bhakti Sutra , written by an unknown author (presumed to be Narada ), distinguishes eleven forms of love.

In certain Vaishnava sects within Hinduism , attaining unadulterated, unconditional, and incessant love for the Godhead is considered the foremost goal of life.

Gaudiya Vaishnavas , who worship Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cause of all causes, consider Love for Godhead, ( Prema ), to act in two ways: sambhoga and vipralambha (union and separation)—two opposites.

[ 79 ] In the condition of separation, there is an acute yearning for being with the beloved and in the condition of union, there is supreme happiness. Gaudiya Vaishnavas consider that Krishna-prema (love for Godhead) burns away one's material desires, pierces the heart, and washes away everything—one's pride, one's religious rules, and one's shyness. Krishna-prema is considered to make one drown in the ocean of transcendental ecstasy and pleasure. The love of Radha, a cowherd girl, for Krishna is often cited as the supreme example of love for Godhead by Gaudiya Vaishnavas.

Radha is considered to be the internal potency of Krishna , and is the supreme lover of Godhead. Her example of love is considered to be beyond the understanding of the material realm, as it surpasses any form of selfish love or lust that is visible in the material world. The reciprocal love between Radha (the supreme lover) and Krishna (God as the Supremely Loved) is the subject of many poetic compositions in India , such as the Gita Govinda of Jayadeva and Hari Bhakti Shuddhodhaya.

In the Bhakti tradition within Hinduism , it is believed that execution of devotional service to God leads to the development of Love for God ( taiche bhakti-phale krsne prema upajaya ), and as love for God increases in the heart, the more one becomes free from material contamination ( krishna-prema asvada haile, bhava nasa paya ). Being perfectly in love with God or Krishna makes one perfectly free from material contamination, and this is the ultimate way of salvation or liberation. In this tradition, salvation or liberation is considered inferior to love, and just an incidental by-product. Being absorbed in Love for God is considered to be the perfection of life.

[ 80 ] Political views Free love Main article: Free love The term "free love" has been used [ 81 ] to describe a social movement that rejects marriage , which is seen as a form of social bondage. The free love movement's initial goal was to separate the state from sexual matters such as marriage, birth control , and adultery . It claimed that such issues were the concern of the people involved, and no one else.

[ 82 ] Many people in the early 19th century believed that marriage was an important aspect of life to "fulfill earthly human happiness." [ 83 ] Middle-class Americans wanted the home to be a place of stability in an uncertain world. This mentality created a vision of strongly defined gender roles, which provoked the advancement of the free love movement as a contrast.

[ 84 ] Advocates of free love had two strong beliefs: opposition to the idea of forceful sexual activity in a relationship and advocacy for a woman to use her body in any way that she pleases.

[ 85 ] These are also beliefs of feminism .

[ 86 ] Philosophical views Main article: Philosophy of love Philosophically, love is often categorized into four types: love as a union, robust concern, valuing, and emotion. Love as a union suggests love forms a "we" by merging individual identities, as proposed by thinkers like Roger Scruton and Robert Nozick , who argue this fusion enhances shared care. Critics, however, contend that union threatens individual autonomy, though Nozick and others believe this merging enriches love.

Michael Friedman offers a compromise with his federation model, where love unifies yet preserves individual identities.

[ 21 ] The Kiss , a painting by Edvard Munch , shows a couple kissing, their faces fusing as one in a symbolic representation of their unity Love as robust concern defines love as a deep care for the beloved's well-being without creating a union. This view prioritizes concern for the beloved's welfare, but critics argue it misses the interactive and emotional aspects of love. Supporters maintain that love's essence lies in respecting the beloved's autonomy.

Monique Wonderly adds that attachment complements this view, making the beloved important for both themselves and the lover.

[ 21 ] Love as valuing includes two approaches: appraisal and bestowal of value.

J. David Velleman argues that appraisal responds to the inherent dignity in others, making love a unique emotional vulnerability. However, this view struggles to explain love's selectivity and constancy.

Peter Singer's bestowal view posits that love creates intrinsic value in the beloved, yet critics question how this explains love's discernment.

[ 21 ] Love as an emotion is seen either as an emotion proper or as an emotion complex. Emotion properly treats love as a specific motivational response, but some find this too simplistic. The emotion complex perspective suggests that love is a dynamic, interconnected emotional history shaped by the relationship. Figures like Annette Baier and Neera K. Badhwar highlight emotional interdependence, though critics wonder how this distinguishes love from other relationships and defines its unique narrative.

[ 21 ] Literature depictions Romeo and Juliet , depicted as they part on the balcony in Act III, 1867 by Ford Madox Brown This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( May 2023 ) See also Color wheel theory of love – Psychological theory created by John Alan Lee Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Finger heart – Hand gesture Hand heart – Affectionate hand gesture Heart in hand – Symbol of charity ILY sign – American Sign Language gesture Love at first sight – Falling in long-lasting love with someone on first sight Polyamory – Intimacy with multiple partners Relationship science – Field dedicated to the scientific study of interpersonal relationship processes Romance (love) – Type of love that focuses on feelings Self-love – Concept in philosophy and psychology References Notes ^ Eros (sexual), Ludus (playful), and Storge (serious).

^ Mania (Eros & Ludus), characterized by obsession and overattachment, Agape (Eros & Storge) by altruism and trust, and Pragma (Ludus & Storge) by realism and practicality.

^ Manic eros, Manic ludus, Manic storge, Agapic eros, Agapic ludus, Agapic storge, Pragmatic eros, Pragmatic ludus, and Pragmatic storge; there is inconclusive evidence for sufficient differentiation.

^ Intimacy is the attachment and bonding component in the triangular model. This type of relationship is associated with connection and understanding.

^ Passion is the drive and excitement component in the triangular model. This type of relationship is associated with romance and sexual desire.

^ Commitment is the decision and continuation component in the triangular model. This type of relationship is associated with finality and the future.

Citations ^ Oxford Illustrated American Dictionary . Oxford University Press. 1998. p.

485 .

"Love Definition & Meaning" .

Merriam-Webster . 27 December 1987.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2019 . Retrieved 30 September 2021 .

"Love Definition & Meaning" .

YourDictionary .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ "Definition of love in English" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Archived from the original on 2 May 2018 . Retrieved 1 May 2018 .

"Meaning of love in English" .

Cambridge English Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 2 May 2018 . Retrieved 1 May 2018 .

Karandashev, Victor (2017).

Romantic Love in Cultural Contexts . Cham: Springer International Publishing.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-42683-9 .

ISBN 978-3-319-42681-5 .

[ page needed ] Hongladarom, Soraj; Joaquin, Jeremiah Joven, eds. (2021).

Love and Friendship Across Cultures . Singapore: Springer Singapore.

doi : 10.1007/978-981-33-4834-9 .

ISBN 978-981-334-833-2 .

S2CID 243232407 .

[ page needed ] Treger, Stanislav; Sprecher, Susan; Hatfield, Elaine C. (2014). "Love".

Encyclopedia of Quality of Life and Well-Being Research . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. pp.

3708– 3712.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-0753-5_1706 .

ISBN 978-94-007-0752-8 .

Love is a universal human experience.

^ a b c d e f Fromm, Erich (1956).

The Art of Loving (Original English ed.). Harper Perennial.

ISBN 978-0-06-095828-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Abbas, Azhar (11 April 2011).

"Just Love" . Archived from the original on 30 May 2012 . Retrieved 13 September 2011 .

^ Callerame, Emmanuelle (3 February 2022).

"An Exploration of Love in Art History" .

Artsper Magazine . Retrieved 24 August 2023 .

^ Fisher, Helen (2004).

Why We Love: the nature and chemistry of romantic love . Henry Holt & Co.

ISBN 978-0805069136 .

^ Catron, Adrian (5 December 2014).

"What Is Love? A Philosophy of Life" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 2 October 2020 .

Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert (1940). "φιλία".

A Greek-English Lexicon . Oxford: Clarendon Press. Archived from the original on 3 January 2017.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) The Bhagavad Gita . Penguin Classics. Translated by Mascaró, Juan. Penguin. 2003.

ISBN 978-0-14-044918-1 .

^ Lee, John A. (1976).

Lovestyles . Abacus.

^ Garth, F. O., Simpson, J. A., Campbell, L., & Overall, N. C. (2019). The Science of Intimate Relationships (second). Wiley-Blackwell.

^ a b Sternberg, R.J. (1986). "A triangular theory of love".

Psychological Review .

93 (2): 119– 135.

doi : 10.1037/0033-295x.93.2.119 .

^ a b c d Nygren, Anders Theodor Samuel (1936).

Agape and Eros .

^ Kay, Paul; Kempton, Willett (March 1984). "What is the Sapir–Whorf Hypothesis?".

American Anthropologist . New Series.

86 (1): 65– 79.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1984.86.1.02a00050 .

ISSN 0002-7294 .

^ "Ancient Love Poetry" .

TrueOpenLove . Archived from the original on 30 September 2007.

^ Aristotle .

Nicomachean Ethics .

VIII .

^ a b Aquinas, Thomas (1485).

Summa Theologiae . New Advent.

I–II, Q26, Art.4 .

^ Kirsh, Marvin Eli (2013).

"Philosophy, Science and Value" .

SSRN Electronic Journal .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2250431 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

SSRN 2250431 .

^ Leibniz, Gottfried (1673).

"Confessio philosophi" . Wikisource edition.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2009 . Retrieved 25 March 2009 .

^ Baba, Meher (1995).

Discourses . Myrtle Beach: Sheriar Press. p. 113.

ISBN 978-1-880619-09-4 .

^ Griffith, Jeremy (2011). "What is love?".

The Book of Real Answers to Everything!

.

ISBN 978-1-74129-007-3 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2013.

^ "Love" entry in The Devil's Dictionary at Dict.org ^ a b c d e f g h i Helm, Bennett (2021), "Love" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2021 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 15 April 2024 ^ "Paraphilia" .

DiscoveryHealth . Archived from the original on 12 December 2007 . Retrieved 16 December 2007 .

^ a b Lewis, Thomas; Amini, F.; Lannon, R. (2000).

A General Theory of Love . Random House.

ISBN 978-0-375-70922-7 .

^ a b Langeslag, Sandra (2024).

"Refuting Six Misconceptions about Romantic Love" .

Behavioral Sciences .

14 (5): 383.

doi : 10.3390/bs14050383 .

PMC 11117554 .

PMID 38785874 .

^ a b Aron, Arthur ; Fisher, Helen ; Mashek, Debra J.; Strong, Greg; Li, Haifang; Brown, Lucy L. (2005).

"Reward, Motivation, and Emotion Systems Associated With Early-Stage Intense Romantic Love" .

Journal of Neurophysiology .

94 (1): 327– 337.

doi : 10.1152/jn.00838.2004 .

PMID 15928068 .

S2CID 396612 .

^ Fisher, Helen E.; Aron, Arthur; Mashek, Debra; Li, Haifang; Brown, Lucy L. (2002).

"Defining the Brain Systems of Lust, Romantic Attraction, and Attachment" (PDF) .

Archives of Sexual Behavior .

31 (5): 413– 419.

doi : 10.1023/A:1019888024255 .

PMID 12238608 .

S2CID 14808862 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2011 . Retrieved 3 October 2011 .

^ Fisher, Helen; Aron, Arthur; Brown, Lucy (13 November 2006).

"Romantic love: a mammalian brain system for mate choice" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society .

361 (1476): 2173– 2186.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2006.1938 .

PMC 1764845 .

PMID 17118931 .

^ a b Holt World History: The Human Legacy . Holt, Rinehart, & Winston. 1 January 2008.

ISBN 978-0-03-093780-4 .

^ Emanuele, E.; Polliti, P.; Bianchi, M.; Minoretti, P.; Bertona, M.; Geroldi, D. (2005).

"Raised plasma nerve growth factor levels associated with early-stage romantic love" .

Psychoneuroendocrinology .

31 (3): 288– 294.

doi : 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2005.09.002 .

PMID 16289361 .

S2CID 18497668 .

Archived from the original on 6 December 2006 . Retrieved 3 December 2006 .

^ Rubin, Zick (1970). "Measurement of Romantic Love".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

16 (2): 265– 273.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.452.3207 .

doi : 10.1037/h0029841 .

PMID 5479131 .

Rubin, Zick (1973).

Liking and Loving: an invitation to social psychology . New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

ISBN 978-0030830037 .

^ Berscheid, Ellen ; Walster, Elaine H. (1969).

Interpersonal Attraction . Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.

ISBN 978-0-201-00560-8 .

LCCN 69-17443 .

^ Peck, Scott (1978).

The Road Less Traveled . Simon & Schuster. p.

169 .

ISBN 978-0-671-25067-6 .

^ Cassidy J (1999).

"The Nature of a Child's Ties" . In Cassidy J, Shaver PR (eds.).

Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications . New York: Guilford Press. pp.

3–20 .

ISBN 1-57230-087-6 .

^ Abrams, David B.; Turner, J. Rick; Baumann, Linda C.; Karel, Alyssa; Collins, Susan E.; Witkiewitz, Katie; Fulmer, Terry; Tanenbaum, Molly L.; Commissariat, Persis; Kupperman, Elyse; Baek, Rachel N.; Gonzalez, Jeffrey S.; Brandt, Nicole; Flurie, Rachel; Heaney, Jennifer; Kline, Christopher; Carroll, Linda; Upton, Jane; Buchain, Patrícia Cardoso; Vizzotto, Adriana Dias Barbosa; Martini de Oliveira, Alexandra; Ferraz Alves, Tania C. T.; Cordeiro, Quirino; Cohen, Lorenzo; Garcia, M. Kay; Marcano-Reik, Amy Jo; Ye, Siqin; Gidron, Yori; Gellman, Marc D.; Howren, M. Bryant; Harlapur, Manjunath; Shimbo, Daichi; Ohta, Keisuke; Yahagi, Naoya; Franzmann, Elizabeth; Singh, Abanish; Baumann, Linda C.; Karel, Alyssa; Johnson, Debra; Clarke, Benjamin L.; Johnson, Debra; Millstein, Rachel; Niven, Karen; Niven, Karen; Miles, Eleanor; Turner, J. Rick; Resnick, Barbara; Gidron, Yori; Lennon, Carter A.; DeMartini, Kelly S.; MacGregor, Kristin L.; Collins, Susan E.; Kirouac, Megan; Turner, J. Rick; Singh, Abanish; Gidron, Yori; Yamamoto, Yoshiharu; Nater, Urs M.; Nisly, Nicole; Johnson, Debra; Johnston, Derek; Zanstra, Ydwine; Johnston, Derek; Kim, Youngmee; Matheson, Della; McInroy, Brooke; France, Christopher; Fukudo, Shin; Tsuchiya, Emiko; Katayori, Yoko; Deschner, Martin; Anderson, Norman B.; Barrett, Chad; Lumley, Mark A.; Oberleitner, Lindsay; Bongard, Stephan; Ye, Siqin; Marcano-Reik, Amy Jo; Hurley, Seth; Hurley, Seth; Patino-Fernandez, Anna Maria; Phillips, Anna C.; Akechi, Tatsuo; Phillips, Anna C.; Marcano-Reik, Amy Jo; Brandt, Nicole; Flurie, Rachel; Aldred, Sarah; Lavoie, Kim; Harlapur, Manjunath; Shimbo, Daichi; Jansen, Kate L.; Fortenberry, Katherine T.; Clark, Molly S.; Millstein, Rachel; Okuyama, Toru; Whang, William; Al’Absi, Mustafa; Li, Bingshuo; Gidron, Yori; Turner, J. Rick; Pulgaron, Elizabeth R.; Wile, Diana; Baumann, Linda C.; Karel, Alyssa; Schroeder, Beth; Davis, Mary C.; Zautra, Alex; Stark, Shannon L.; Whang, William; Soto, Ana Victoria; Gidron, Yori; Wheeler, Anthony J.; DeBerard, Scott; Allen, Josh; Mitani, Akihisa; Mitani, Akihisa; Pulgaron, Elizabeth R.; Mitani, Akihisa; Carter, Jennifer; Whang, William; Schroeder, Beth; Hicks, Angela M.; Korbel, Carolyn; Baldwin, Austin S.; Spink, Kevin S.; Nickel, Darren; Richter, Michael; Wright, Rex A.; Thayer, Julian F.; Richter, Michael; Wright, Rex A.; Wiebe, Deborah J. (2013). "Attachment Theory".

Encyclopedia of Behavioral Medicine . New York, NY: Springer New York. pp.

149– 155.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4419-1005-9_939 .

ISBN 978-1-4419-1004-2 .

Bowlby (1969, 1988) described an attachment as an emotional bond that is characterized by the tendency to seek out and maintain proximity to a specific attachment figure, particularly during times of distress.

^ "Are We Hard-Wired for Love? | Psychology Today" .

www.psychologytoday.com . Retrieved 16 March 2025 .

^ Albrecht, Ingrid (3 February 2013).

Love, self-constitution, and practical necessity (Thesis). University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

^ a b Geher, Glenn (27 May 2022).

"The Psychology of Feeling Unloved" .

Psychology Today . Retrieved 2 July 2025 .

^ Maslow, Abraham H. (1943).

"A theory of human motivation" .

Psychological Review .

50 (4): 370– 396.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.334.7586 .

doi : 10.1037/h0054346 .

hdl : 10983/23610 .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2017 . Retrieved 13 March 2007 – via psychclassics.yorku.ca.

^ Maslow, Abraham H. (1954).

Motivation and personality . New York, NY: Harper.

ISBN 978-0-06-041987-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Campbell, Lorne; Ellis, Bruce J. (2005). "Commitment, Love, and Mate Retention". In Buss, David M. (ed.).

The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology . John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

^ a b c Michod, Richard E. (1989). "What's love got to do with it? The solution to one of evolution's greatest riddles".

The Sciences : 22– 27.

doi : 10.1002/j.2326-1951.1989.tb02156.x .

^ a b c Esch, Tobias; Stefano, George B. (June 2005). "Love promotes health".

Neuro Endocrinology Letters .

26 (3): 264– 267.

ISSN 0172-780X .

PMID 15990734 .

^ Hemberg, Jessica; Eriksson, Katie; Nystrom, Lisbet (2017). "Love as the Original Source of Strength for Life and Health".

International Journal of Caring Sciences .

10 (2).

S2CID 45264075 .

^ Timmreck, Thomas C. (April 1990).

"Overcoming the Loss of a Love: Preventing Love Addiction and Promoting Positive Emotional Health" .

Psychological Reports .

66 (2): 515– 528.

doi : 10.2466/pr0.1990.66.2.515 .

ISSN 0033-2941 .

PMID 2190254 .

^ Rauer, Amy J.; Sabey, Allen; Jensen, Jakob F. (August 2014).

"Growing old together: Compassionate love and health in older adulthood" .

Journal of Social and Personal Relationships .

31 (5): 677– 696.

doi : 10.1177/0265407513503596 .

ISSN 0265-4075 .

^ a b c d e Jarzebowski, C. (2015).

"Love. In F. Jaeger (ed.)" .

Encyclopedia of Early Modern History Online. Brill .

doi : 10.1163/2352-0272_emho_COM_023397 .

^ Stendhal , in his book On Love ("De l'amour"; Paris, 1822), distinguished carnal love, passionate love, a kind of uncommitted love that he called "taste-love", and love of vanity.

Denis de Rougemont in his book Love in the Western World traced the story of passionate love ( l'amour-passion ) from its courtly to its romantic forms.

Benjamin Péret , in the introduction to his Anthology of Sublime Love (Paris, 1956), further identified "sublime love", a state of realized idealisation perhaps equatable with the romantic form of passionate love.

^ "Philosophy of Love | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Retrieved 23 April 2024 .

^ Konstan, David (19 July 2018).

In the Orbit of Love . Vol. 1. Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190887872.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-088787-2 .

^ Singer, Irving (1965).

"Love in Ovid and Lucretius" .

The Hudson Review .

18 (4): 537– 559.

doi : 10.2307/3849704 .

ISSN 0018-702X .

JSTOR 3849704 .

^ Havens, Timothy (2013).

"Confucianism as Humanism" (PDF) .

CLA Journal .

^ Wang, Huaiyu; 王懷聿 (2012).

" "Ren" and "Gantong": Openness of Heart and the Root of Confucianism" .

Philosophy East and West .

62 (4): 463– 504.

doi : 10.1353/pew.2012.0067 .

ISSN 0031-8221 .

JSTOR 41684476 .

^ a b Wang, Yuxi (Candice) (28 April 2016).

"Mozi: Universal Love and Human Agency" .

2016 Claremont Colleges Library Undergraduate Research Award .

^ a b Cotesta, Vittorio (2021), The Heavens and the Earth: Graeco-Roman, Ancient Chinese, and Mediaeval Islamic Images of the World , Brill, ISBN 978-90-04-46472-8 , retrieved 25 April 2024 ^ a b c Martin, Adrienne M., ed. (21 December 2018).

The Routledge Handbook of Love in Philosophy . New York: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781315645209 .

ISBN 978-1-315-64520-9 .

^ Ryang, Sonia (2006).

Love in Modern Japan: Its Estrangement from Self, Sex and Society . Routledge. pp.

13 –14.

ISBN 978-1-135-98863-0 .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2016 . Retrieved 3 February 2016 .

^ a b Palmer, Gary B.; Occhi, Debra J. (15 December 1999).

Languages of Sentiment: Cultural constructions of emotional substrates . John Benjamins Publishing.

ISBN 978-90-272-9995-6 .

^ a b c d e f g Hara, Minoru (2007).

"Words for love in Sanskrit" .

Rivista degli studi orientali .

80 (1/4): 81– 106.

JSTOR 41913379 .

^ a b Vali-Zadeh, Mahdieh (2 June 2022).

"Agency of the Self and the Uncertain Nature of the Beloved in Persian Love Mysticism: Earthly, Ethereal, Masculine, or Feminine?" .

Teosofi: Jurnal Tasawuf Dan Pemikiran Islam .

12 (1): 22– 42.

doi : 10.15642/teosofi.2022.12.1.22-42 .

ISSN 2442-871X .

^ Goodman, Lenn Evan.

Love Thy Neighbor as Thyself . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2008, 13.

^ Wolpe, David (16 February 2016).

"We Are Defining Love the Wrong Way" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2019 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 .

^ Dessler, Eliyahu. "Kuntres ha-Chesed".

Michtav me-Eliyahu (in Hebrew). Vol. 1.

^ a b Pope Benedict XVI.

"papal encyclical, Deus Caritas Est" .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2011 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 .

^ Augustine of Hippo , "Homily 7 on the First Epistle of John" , Homilies on First John , translated by Browne, H., New Advent, 8 ^ a b Augustine of Hippo .

Confessions .

^ Woo, B. Hoon (2013).

"Augustine's Hermeneutics and Homiletics in De doctrina christiana " .

Journal of Christian Philosophy .

17 : 97– 117.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 24 March 2014 .

^ " 'Give until it hurts': The Christian wisdom of Mother Teresa in 9 quotes" .

Christian Today . 5 September 2017 . Retrieved 2 July 2025 .

^ a b McLellan, Justin.

" 'Do you cry?' pope asks 800,000 young people at WYD; so does Jesus, he says" . Retrieved 9 August 2023 .

^ Brockhaus, Hannah (22 April 2020).

"Pope Francis: The entirety of God's love is found in the crucifix" . Retrieved 9 August 2023 .

^ Pope Francis (18 January 2015).

"Meeting with the young people in the sports field of Santo Tomas University" .

w2.vatican.va . Manila.

Archived from the original on 23 February 2018 . Retrieved 24 February 2018 .

^ Nidoy, Raul (13 February 2015).

"The key to love according to Pope Francis" .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2018 . Retrieved 24 February 2018 .

^ Tertulliam, Ad Scapulam , vol. I ^ Lewisohn, Leonard (2014).

Cambridge Companions to Religion . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

150– 180.

^ a b c d Danesh, Roshan (1 June 2014).

"Some Reflections on the Concept of Law in the Bahá'í Faith" .

The Journal of Bahá'í Studies .

24 ( 1– 2): 27– 46.

doi : 10.31581/jbs-24.1-2.3(2014) .

ISSN 2563-755X .

^ Piyapanyawong, Anchalee (29 March 2018).

"An Analysis of Love Development in Buddhism" .

วารสารวิทยบริการ มหาวิทยาลัยสงขลานครินทร์ | Academic Services Journal, Prince of Songkla University .

29 (1): 174– 187.

ISSN 2351-0420 .

^ Hallisey, Charles (August 1982).

"Love and Sympathy in Theravāda Buddhism. By Harvey B. Aronson. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1980. viii, 127 pp. Notes, Bibliography, Glossary, Indexes. Rs 45" .

The Journal of Asian Studies .

41 (4): 859– 860.

doi : 10.2307/2055485 .

ISSN 1752-0401 .

JSTOR 2055485 .

^ Noss, John B. (1952).

"Mutual Love in Mahayana Buddhism" .

Journal of Bible and Religion .

20 (2): 84– 89.

ISSN 0885-2758 .

JSTOR 1458923 .

^ Yogi, P. G. (著) (November 1998).

"An Analysis of Tantrayana (Vajrayana)" .

Bulletin of Tibetology .

34 (3): 16– 38.

^ Gour Govinda Swami.

"The Wonderful Characteristic of Krishna Prema" .

Facebook .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2012 . Retrieved 7 January 2012 .

^ A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami (29 November 1966).

"Perfectly in Krishna Love" .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2014 . Retrieved 7 January 2012 .

^ Hand-book of the Oneida Community . 1867. Archived from the original on 13 June 2010.

Claims to have coined the term around 1850, and laments that its use was appropriated by socialists to attack marriage, an institution that they felt protected women and children from abandonment.

[ page needed ] ^ McElroy, Wendy (1996). "The Free Love Movement and Radical Individualism".

Libertarian Enterprise .

19 : 1.

^ "Free love - Connexipedia article" .

www.connexions.org . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Spurlock, John C. (1988).

Free Love, Marriage, and Middle-Class Radicalism in America . New York: New York University Press.

^ Passet, Joanne E. (2003).

Sex Radicals and the Quest for Women's Equality . Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

^ Laurie, Timothy; Stark, Hannah (2017), "Love's Lessons: Intimacy, Pedagogy and Political Community" , Angelaki: Journal of the Theoretical Humanities , 22 (4): 69– 79, doi : 10.1080/0969725x.2017.1406048 , S2CID 149182610 , archived from the original on 21 February 2023 , retrieved 3 January 2018 Sources Chadwick, Henry (1998).

Saint Augustine Confessions . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-283372-3 .

Fisher, Helen (2004).

Why We Love: the Nature and Chemistry of Romantic Love . New York: H. Holt.

ISBN 978-0-8050-6913-6 .

Giles, James (1994). "A theory of love and sexual desire".

Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour .

24 (4): 339– 357.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-5914.1994.tb00259.x .

Kierkegaard, Søren (2009).

Works of Love . New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics.

ISBN 978-0-06-171327-9 .

Oord, Thomas Jay (2010).

Defining Love: A Philosophical, Scientific, and Theological Engagement . Grand Rapids, MI: Brazos.

ISBN 978-1-58743-257-6 .

Singer, Irving (1966).

The Nature of Love . Vol. (in three volumes) (v.1 reprinted and later volumes from The University of Chicago Press, 1984 ed.). Random House.

ISBN 978-0-226-76094-0 .

Sternberg, R.J. (1986). "A triangular theory of love".

Psychological Review .

93 (2): 119– 135.

doi : 10.1037/0033-295X.93.2.119 .

Sternberg, R.J. (1987). "Liking versus loving: A comparative evaluation of theories".

Psychological Bulletin .

102 (3): 331– 345.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.102.3.331 .

Tennov, Dorothy (1979).

Love and Limerence: the Experience of Being in Love . New York: Stein and Day.

ISBN 978-0-8128-6134-1 .

Wood Samuel E., Ellen Wood and Denise Boyd (2005).

The World of Psychology (5th ed.). Pearson Education. pp.

402–403 .

ISBN 978-0-205-35868-7 .

Further reading Bayer, A, ed. (2008).

Art and love in Renaissance Italy . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

External links Love at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata History of Love , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Emotions ( list ) Emotions Acceptance Admiration Adoration Aesthetic Affection Agitation Agony Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Antipathy Anxiety Apathy Arousal Attraction Awe Belongingness Boredom Calmness Comfort Compassion Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Cruelty Curiosity Defeat Depression Desire Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Embarrassment vicarious Emotion work Empathy Emptiness Enthrallment Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Excitement Faith Fear Flow Frustration Fun Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Joie de vivre Hatred self-hatred Hiraeth Homesickness Hope Horror Hostility Humiliation Hygge Hysteria Ikigai (sense of purpose) Indulgence Infatuation Insecurity Insignificance Inspiration Interest Irritation Isolation Jealousy Joy Kindness Loneliness Love at first sight limerence obsessive parental passionate and companionate Lust Mono no aware Neglect Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity self-pity Pleasure Pride grandiosity hubris insult vanity Rage Regret Rejection Relaxation Relief Remorse Resentment Revenge Sadness melancholy Saudade Schadenfreude Sehnsucht Sentimentality Shame Shock Shyness Solitude Social connection Sorrow Spite Stress chronic Suffering Surprise Suspense Suspicion Sympathy Trust Wonder sense of wonder Worry Zest Worldviews Cynicism Defeatism Fatalism Misanthropy Nihilism Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Related Affect consciousness in education measures in psychology Affective computing forecasting neuroscience science spectrum Affectivity positive negative Appeal to emotion Amygdala hijack Emotion and art and memory and music and sex and sleep classification circumplex EmojiGrid Lövheim PAD Plutchik evolution expressed functional accounts group homeostatic in animals perception recognition in conversation regulation interpersonal work Emotional aperture bias blackmail competence conflict contagion detachment dysregulation eating exhaustion expression and gender intelligence and bullying Empathy quotient intimacy isolation lability labor lateralization literacy prosody reasoning responsivity security symbiosis thought method well-being Emotionality bounded Emotions and culture history in decision-making in the workplace in virtual communication moral self-conscious social social sharing sociology Feeling Group affective tone Interactions between the emotional and executive brain systems Jealousy in art Mental state Meta-emotion Pathognomy Pathos Social emotional development Stoic passions Theory affect affect as information appraisal Cannon-Bard constructed emotion discrete emotion James-Lange somatic somatic marker two-factor Italics indicate emotion names in foreign languages Category v t e Interpersonal relationships Types Romantic Boyfriend Girlfriend Cohabitation Significant other Domestic partnership Same-sex relationship Monogamy Civil union Marriage Civil marriage Husband Wife Soulmate Widowhood Non-monogamy Open relationship Open marriage Polyamory Polyfidelity Polygamy Concubinage Mistress Sexual Casual sex Casual dating Friends with benefits Enjo kōsai Sexual partner One-night stand Courtesan Gigolo Queerplatonic relationship Sugar dating Non-romantic, Non-sexual Acquaintance Alliance Enemy Friendship Heterosociality Cross-sex Homosociality Bromance Female Male Womance Recession Kinship Family Siblings Platonic Stranger Familiar Consequential Rental Sycophancy Historical Cicisbeo Seraglio Plaçage Marriage à la façon du pays Royal mistress Royal favourite Maîtresse-en-titre Romantic friendship Events Initiation Flirting First date Matchmaking Meet market Singles event Bonding Courtship Dating Romance Mating Wedding Breakup Annulment Divorce Separation Legal Marital Emotions Affinity Attachment Compersion Fear of commitment Intimacy Jealousy Limerence Loneliness Love Passion Passionate and companionate love Unconditional love Practices Homogamy Hypergamy Bride price Mahr Dower Dowry Gold digging Infidelity Mésalliance Relationship anarchy Repression Sexual activity Transgression Abuse Child abuse Dating violence Domestic violence Elder abuse See also Agape Broken heart Free love Love addiction Lovesickness Obsessive love Single person Singleton (lifestyle) Unrequited love v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐njlx2
Cached time: 20250817165931
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.970 seconds
Real time usage: 2.332 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 17917/1000000
Revision size: 101911/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 477076/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16940/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 489235/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.242/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18638429/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1951.363      1 -total
 39.97%  779.947      2 Template:Reflist
 17.06%  332.961     40 Template:Cite_book
 12.15%  237.158      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.26%  219.702      1 Template:Love_sidebar
 10.61%  206.969     32 Template:Cite_journal
 10.17%  198.470     58 Template:Lang
  9.35%  182.477      4 Template:Multiref2
  6.18%  120.612      5 Template:Navbox
  5.63%  109.833     21 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:17547:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817165931 and revision id 1304617370. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Love&oldid=1304617370 " Category : Love Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2023 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL Articles containing French-language text CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2018 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Literary Chinese-language text Articles containing Yámana-language text Articles containing Pali-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles containing Japanese-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from August 2023 Articles to be expanded from May 2023 All articles to be expanded Articles with empty sections from May 2023 All articles with empty sections Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link CS1: long volume value Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing Welsh-language text Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 03:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Love 178 languages Add topic

