Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Birth 2 Early life 3 Reign 4 Marriage 5 Kindama's curse 6 Exile and Pandavas birth Toggle Exile and Pandavas birth subsection 6.1 Birth of Pandu's foster sons 7 Death 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Pandu 37 languages অসমীয়া বাংলা Беларуская Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français ગુજરાતી 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių മലയാളം मराठी ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Русский संस्कृतम् سنڌي Sunda Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Українська اردو Vèneto 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Kuru King and father of the Pandavas in epic Mahabharata For the Tamil actor, see Pandu (actor) . For the locality in Guwahati, see Pandu, Guwahati . For the 2021 film, see Pandu (film) .

Fictional character Pandu A late 17th-century painting of Pandu (right) and Kunti from Kashmir Personal Information Affiliation Kuru dynasty , Chandravamsha Weapon Bow and arrow Family Parents see Niyoga Vyasa (Biological Father) Ambalika (Mother) Vichitravirya (Father) Half-Brothers Vidura Dhritarashtra Spouses Kunti Madri Children Putative Sons from Kunti Yudhishthira by Yama Bhima by Vayu Arjuna by Indra Putative Sons from Madri Nakula by Ashvins Sahadeva by Ashvins Pandu ( Sanskrit : पाण्डु , romanized : Pāṇḍu , lit.

'pale') is a character in the ancient Hindu epic Mahabharata . He was the king of Kuru kingdom , with capital at Hastinapur . He was the acknowledged-father of the five Pandavas , who are the central characters of the epic.

[ 1 ] Pandu was born pale, to Vichitravirya 's second wife, Ambalika . Pandu married Kunti and Madri . Following sage Kindama 's curse, his sons were born through the boons bestowed upon his wife Kunti by a number of deities, owing to his inability to bear children.

[ 2 ] Birth [ edit ] When Vichitravirya died due to sickness, Bhishma was unable to ascend the throne because of his vow, and Bahlika 's line was unwilling to leave the Bahlika kingdom .

[ 3 ] There ensued a succession crisis in Hastinapura.

Satyavati then invited her son Vyasa to impregnate the queens Ambika and Ambalika under the Niyoga practice . When Vyasa approached Ambalika, she was frightened by his scary appearance, and she had become pale in disgust; hence, her son was born pale. Thus, Pandu's name means pale.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Early life [ edit ] Pandu along with his elder half-brother Dhritarashtra , was trained in the military arts by Bhishma and Kripacharya .

[ 6 ] Bhishma also taught Pandu in the fields of archery, politics, administration and religion. He was an excellent archer and Maharathi (warrior).

[ 7 ] Reign [ edit ] When it came time to nominate an heir, Vidura suggested that Pandu would be a better fit because he was not blind, unlike Dhritarashtra. Pandu became the successor to his kingdom and was crowned King of the Kuru kingdom , with capital at Hastinapura.

[ 8 ] Pandu conquered the territories of the Sindhu kingdom , Kashi , Anga , Trigarta kingdom , Kalinga , Magadha , etc., and thus re-established their supremacy over all the kings and increased the span of his empire.

[ 9 ] Marriage [ edit ] Pandu was married to Kunti , [ 10 ] the adoptive daughter of Kuntibhoja and the daughter of Shurasena (father of Vasudeva and grandfather of Krishna ). His second wife was the princess of the Madra kingdom Madri . The marriage was proposed by Bhishma.

[ 11 ] Kindama's curse [ edit ] Pandu shoots Kindama, who is disguised as a deer.

While hunting in a forest (looking from a distance, his vision partially obscured by plants and trees), Pandu saw a couple of deer in the process of coitus , and shot arrows at them; he later discovered that it was the sage Kindama and his wife who were making love in the form of deer. The dying sage placed a curse on Pandu, for not only had he killed them in the midst of lovemaking , but was not remorseful for his actions either. King Pandu argued with sage Kindama by misquoting sage Agastya's ruling on the right of Kshatriyas' on hunting. Sage Kindama then cursed Pandu that were he to approach his wives with the intent of making love, he would die.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Exile and Pandavas birth [ edit ] Upset and seeking to repent his deed, Pandu handed his kingdom to Dhritarashtra and left for exile in the forest. There, he started to lead the life of an ascetic with his wives.

[ 12 ] Birth of Pandu's foster sons [ edit ] As a consequence of Kindama's curse, Pandu became incapable of fathering any children. One day, Pandu was regaling the story of his birth and his wish of becoming a father to his first wife, Kunti . Kunti told him about the child-bearing mantra taught to her by the sage Durvasa . Pandu was overjoyed and told Kunti to use it to gain sons from suitable deities.

[ 14 ] He wanted his son to be righteous, and so he suggested Dharmaraja , the deity of death and righteousness. Kunti chanted her mantra and the deity granted her Yudhishthira . Later, Pandu expressed his desire for a powerful son. This time, Kunti invoked Vayu and Bhima was born. Pandu suggested Kunti to invoke Indra and a valiant son, Arjuna , was born. Pandu felt bad for Madri's childlessness, and thus requested Kunti to share her mantra with her. Heeding his request, Kunti revealed her mantra once to Pandu's younger wife. Madri invoked the Ashvin twins , and then gave birth to Nakula and Sahadeva .

[ 15 ] Death [ edit ] One day, Pandu forgot about the curse and was suddenly filled with lust for Madri. Despite her pleas, he proceeded to engage in sexual intercourse with her. After the act, his curse was fulfilled and he died. His body was cremated within the forest. Attributing her husband's death to herself and swept by remorse, Madri took her own life after handing her children over to Kunti.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Pandava The Pandeism of Godfrey Higgins Historicity of the Mahabharata References [ edit ] ^ www.wisdomlib.org (21 February 2020).

"Pandu, Pāṇḍu, Paṇḍu, Pandū, Pamdu, Pamde: 38 definitions" .

www.wisdomlib.org . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ "Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide", by Roshen Dalal, p. 230, publisher = Penguin Books India ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 1: Adi Parva: Sambhava Parva: Section CII" .

Sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 15 August 2012 .

^ www.wisdomlib.org (28 January 2019).

"Story of Ambālikā" .

www.wisdomlib.org . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ Bhanu, Sharada (1997).

Myths and Legends from India - Great Women . Chennai: Macmillan India Limited. pp.

35– 6.

ISBN 0-333-93076-2 .

^ "The Mahabharata, Book 1: Adi Parva: Sambhava Parva: Section CV" . Sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 15 August 2012 .

^ "The Mahabharata, Book 1: Adi Parva: Sambhava Parva: Section CVI" .

www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 31 August 2020 .

^ Witzel, Michael (1995).

"Early Sanskritization: Origin and Development of the Kuru state" (PDF) .

EJVS . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 June 2007.

^ Menon, [translated by] Ramesh (2006).

The Mahabharata : a modern rendering . New York: iUniverse, Inc.

ISBN 9780595401871 .

^ "The Mahabharata, Book 1: Adi Parva: Sambhava Parva: Section CXII" .

www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 31 August 2020 .

^ Debalina (20 December 2019).

Into the Myths: A Realistic Approach Towards Mythology and Epic . Partridge Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-5437-0576-8 .

^ a b Ramankutty, P.V. (1999).

Curse as a motif in the Mahābhārata (1. ed.). Delhi: Nag Publishers.

ISBN 9788170814320 .

^ Uberoi, Meera (1996).

The Mahabharata .

ISBN 9788170702313 .

^ "Pandava" .

Puranic Encyclopedia: a comprehensive dictionary with special reference to the epic and Puranic literature . Delhi, India: Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi. 1975. p. 562.

^ "The five pandavas and the story of their birth" .

aumamen.com . Retrieved 31 August 2020 .

^ Fang, Liaw Yock (2013).

A History of Classical Malay Literature . Institute of Southeast Asian.

ISBN 978-981-4459-88-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pandu .

v t e Hindu deities and texts Gods Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Agni Ashvins Chandra Dattatreya Ganesha Hanuman Indra Kama Kartikeya Krishna Kubera Rama Shasta Surya Varuna Vayu Vishvakarma Yama more Goddesses Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Aditi Bhumi Chhaya Durga Ganga Gayatri Indrani Kali Mahadevi Mahavidya Matrikas Radha Rati Rohini Rukmini Sanjna Sati Shakti Shashthi Sita more Deity groups Adityas Apsaras Asuras Daitya Danavas Devatas Dikpalas Gandharvas Ganas Gramadevatas Kuladevatas Kinnaras Kimpurushas Maruts Navagraha Pitṛs Rakshasas Rudras Ribhus Sadhyas Vahanas Vasus Vidyadharas Yakshas / Yakshini Texts ( list ) Vedas Rig Sama Yajur Atharva Upanishads Puranas Ramayana Mahabharata Bhagavad Gita Yoga Sutras of Patanjali more Hinduism Hindu mythology v t e Mahabharata Traditional author and narrators Vyasa Vaisampayana Ugrashrava Sauti Books ( parva s) Adi Sabha Vana Virata Udyoga Bhishma Bhagavad Gita Drona Karna Shalya Sauptika Stri Shanti Anushasana Ashvamedhika Ashramavasika Mausala Mahaprasthanika Svargarohana Kingdoms and Tribes Kuru Hastinapur Indraprastha Kurukshetra Panchala Kampilya Ahichchhatra Anarta Dvaraka Gandhara Matsya Upaplavya Madra Kunti Magadha Chedi Kashi Kosala Sindhu Shalva Avanti Anga Kekaya Kalinga Vidarbha Pandya Trigarta Bahlikas Kambojas Yadavas Vrishni Bhoja Nishadas more Major Events Sarpa Satra Lakshagriha Svayamvara Mayasabha Rajasuya Vanavasa Ghoshyatra Ajnatavasa Kurukshetra War Vishvarupa Chakravyūha Ashvamedha Characters Pandavas Yudhishthira Bhima Arjuna Nakula Sahadeva Pandava Alliance Krishna Role in the Mahabharata Dhrishtadyumna Drupada Virata Satyaki Abhimanyu Shikhandi Dhrishtaketu Ghatotkacha Uttamaujas and Yudhamanyu Draupadeyas Yuyutsu Iravan Uttara Sahadeva Jayatsena Kauravas Duryodhana Dushasana Vikarna 97 more Kaurava Alliance Bhishma Drona Karna Shalya Ashvatthama Shakuni Kripa Jayadratha Kritavarma Bahlika Bhurishravas Bhagadatta Vinda and Anuvinda Susharma Sudakshina Shrutayudha Lakshmana Uluka Vrishasena Remaining Kuru Family Shantanu Satyavati Chitrangada Vichitravirya Ambika Ambalika Dhritarashtra Gandhari Pandu Kunti Madri Vidura Draupadi Subhadra Hidimbi Ulupi Chitrāngadā Babruvahana Uttarā Parikshit Janamejaya Dushala Other important Amba Balarama Chitrasena Dhaumya Durvasa Ekalavya Ganga Hidimba Jarasandha Jatasura Kichaka Kindama Lomasha Parashurama Purochana Rukmi Sanjaya Shishupala Sudeshna Vyasa more Related Avatars Kingdoms Vedic era Epic-Puranic chronology Harivamsha Nala Upakhyana Rama Upakhyana Savitri Upakhyana Shakuntala Upakhyana Sarasvati River Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pandu&oldid=1296710358 " Categories : Characters in the Mahabharata Mythological kings of Kuru Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2016 Use Indian English from January 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 19:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pandu 37 languages Add topic

