Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Business model 2 Remuneration and credit 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Book packaging 4 languages العربية Deutsch Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Publishing activity involving outsourcing Book packaging (or book producing) is a publishing activity in which a publishing company outsources the myriad tasks involved in putting together a book—writing, researching, editing, illustrating, and even printing—to an outside company called a book-packaging company. Once the book-packaging company has produced the book, they then  sell it to the final publishing company .

In this arrangement, the book-packaging company acts as a liaison between a publishing company and the writers, researchers, editors, and printers that design and produce the book. Book packagers thus blend the roles of agent, editor, and publisher.

[ 1 ] Book-packaging is common in the genre fiction market, particularly for books aimed at preteens and teenagers, and in the illustrated non-fiction co-edition market.

Business model [ edit ] Publishing companies use the services of book-packaging companies in cases where the publishing company does not have the in-house resources to handle a project.

[ 1 ] There are two main reasons that publishing houses hire a book-packaging company: labor-intensive books (books with many illustrations or photographs, books which require coordinating the input of several authors, or 'novelty' books, such as gardening books that contain seed packages) and series books (e.g., Nancy Drew , Sweet Valley High , Goosebumps , and the For Dummies series).

[ 1 ] In many cases, the book is first conceived as a marketing concept, and a writer is then hired to write the book on a work for hire basis. In some cases, book packaging companies use a celebrity with a very marketable name as the credited author, while using a professional ghostwriter to do most of the writing, researching, and editing.

Book-packaging is a common strategy between smaller publishers in different territorial markets where the company that first buys the intellectual property rights, sells a package to other publishers and gains an immediate return on capital invested. The first publisher will often print sufficient copies for all territories and thereby obtain the maximum quantity discounts on the print run for all.

Remuneration and credit [ edit ] While the book-packaging sector is little-known outside the publishing world, it provides employment to many freelance authors and illustrators, particularly for those willing to work as ghostwriters , without credit in the book. Most book packaging companies pay a flat rate for manuscripts ranging from several thousand dollars to $1 per word. However, most book packaging companies do not pay royalties , which means that even if a ghostwriter's novel becomes a bestseller, the writer will not receive additional payment.

[ 1 ] Often, writers or creators working for book-packagers work anonymously as ghostwriters, under the book-packaging company name ("by our staff writers"), or under a pen name .  In some cases, a writer's work will be credited to someone else's name, such as a celebrity , who is paid to be listed as the credited author as a way of increasing sales.

See also [ edit ] Stratemeyer Syndicate Alloy Entertainment Comics packaging Movie packaging References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Glatzer, Jenna.

"Book Packaging: Under-explored Terrain For Freelancers" .

Absolute Write . Archived from the original on January 13, 2007 . Retrieved January 14, 2007 .

External links [ edit ] Rich, Motoko; Smith, Dinitia (April 27, 2006).

"Teen-lit 'packages': Forget the young writer in a garret" .

International Herald-Tribune . Archived from the original on 27 Jan 2007.

Barlow, John (April 26, 2006).

"I Coulda Been a Pretender: How I didn't end up like that Harvard sophomore accused of plagiarizing her novel" .

Slate . Archived from the original on 28 Jan 2012.

v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Book_packaging&oldid=1250931490 " Categories : Book publishing Writing Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 October 2024, at 11:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Book packaging 4 languages Add topic

