Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Roles 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Professional association 19 languages العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Professional society ) Typically nonprofit organization seeking to further a particular profession A professional association (also called  a professional body , professional organization , or professional society ) is a group that usually seeks to further a particular profession , the interests of individuals and organisations engaged in that profession, and the public interest . In the United States, such an association is typically a nonprofit business league for tax purposes.

[ 1 ] In the UK, they may take a variety of legal forms.

[ 2 ] Roles [ edit ] The roles of professional associations have been variously defined: "A group of people in a learned occupation who are entrusted with maintaining control or oversight of the legitimate practice of the occupation;" [ 3 ] also a body acting "to safeguard the public interest;" [ 4 ] organizations which "represent the interest of the professional practitioners," and so "act to maintain their own privileged and powerful position as a controlling body." [ 4 ] Professional associations are ill defined although often have commonality in purpose and activities.

[ 5 ] In the UK the Science Council defines a professional body as "an organisation with individual members practicing a profession or occupation in which the organisation maintains an oversight of the knowledge, skills, conduct and practice of that profession or occupation".

[ 6 ] The Quality Assurance Agency distinguishes between statutory bodies and regulators that "have powers mandated by Parliament to regulate a profession or group of professions and protect the use of professional titles" and professional bodies that "are independent membership organisations that oversee the activities of a particular profession and represent the interests of [their] members" and which "may offer registration or certification of unregulated occupations on a voluntary basis." [ 7 ] Many professional bodies are involved in accrediting degrees, defining and examining the skills and competencies necessary to practice, and granting professional certifications to indicate that a person is qualified in the subject area.

[ 8 ] Many professional bodies also act as learned societies for the academic disciplines underlying their professions, [ 1 ] [ 9 ] such as the American Statistical Association .

See also [ edit ] Advocacy Affinity group Bar association Guild Inter-professional association Licensure List of international professional associations List of professional associations in the United Kingdom Professional order Regulatory college Syndicate Trade association Trade union Working group References [ edit ] ^ a b Speight, James (2014-12-10).

Educating Scientists and Engineers for Academic and Non-Academic Career Success . CRC Press. p. 59.

ISBN 9781466553576 .

Archived from the original on 2020-01-26 . Retrieved 24 August 2018 .

^ Holmes, CS.

"The Nature, Form And Purpose Of Contemporary Professional Associations: An Extended Case Study Of The British Association For Counselling And Psychotherapy" .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2023 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

^ Harvey, L.

(2004).

"Professional body" .

Quality Research International . Analytic Quality Glossary.

Archived from the original on 2019-02-16 . Retrieved 2008-09-14 .

^ a b Harvey, L.

; Mason, S.; Ward, R. (1995).

Role of Professional Bodies in Higher Education Quality Monitoring . Birmingham: Quality in Higher Education Project.

ISBN 1-85920-108-3 .

^ Holmes, CS (2019).

The Nature, Form And Purpose Of Contemporary Professional Associations: An Extended Case Study Of The British Association For Counselling And Psychotherapy (Thesis). University of Leicester.

doi : 10.25392/leicester.data.11335652.v1 . Retrieved 13 October 2021 .

^ "Our definition of a Professional Body" .

Science Council .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2019 . Retrieved 23 February 2019 .

^ "UK Quality Code for Higher Education: Part A: Seeing and Maintaining Academic Standards" (PDF) . Quality Assurance Agency. 2018. pp.

5– 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 April 2019 . Retrieved 23 February 2019 .

^ "Professional bodies and professional qualification" . Target Jobs. Archived from the original on 24 February 2019 . Retrieved 23 February 2019 .

^ Sha, Mandy (2019-05-14).

"Professional Association and Pathways to Leadership in Our Profession" .

Survey Practice .

12 (1): 1– 6.

doi : 10.29115/SP-2018-0039 .

Archived from the original on Nov 24, 2023.

External links [ edit ] List of Professional bodies in the United Kingdom List of Professional bodies in Australia List of Professional bodies in Canada Anders Kjellberg Union density and specialist/professional unions in Sweden , Lund University: Studies in Social Policy, Industrial Relations, Working Life and Mobility. Research Reports 2013:2 Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic 2 Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Professional_association&oldid=1296689608 " Categories : Professional associations Types of organization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 16:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Professional association 19 languages Add topic

