Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Discovery and excavation 3 Ownership and legal controversies 4 National Register of Historic Places 5 In popular culture 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Queen Anne's Revenge 23 languages Afrikaans বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 34°41′44″N 76°41′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 34.69556°N 76.68889°W ﻿ / 34.69556; -76.68889 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pirate Blackbeard's ship Illustration published in 1736 France Name La Concorde Launched c. 1710 Captured Martinique , 28 November 1717 Pirates Name Queen Anne's Revenge Fate Ran aground on 10 June 1718 near Beaufort Inlet, North Carolina General characteristics Class & type Frigate Tons burthen 200 bm Length 103 ft (31.4 m) Beam 24.6 ft (7.5 m) Sail plan Full-rigged Complement up to 300 in Blackbeard's service Armament 40 cannons (alleged), 30 found [ 1 ] Queen Anne's Revenge U.S. National Register of Historic Places Show map of North Carolina Show map of the United States Nearest city Atlantic Beach, North Carolina Area less than one acre Built c. 1710 ; 315 years ago ( 1710 ) NRHP reference No.

04000148 [ 2 ] Added to NRHP 9 March 2004 Queen Anne's Revenge was an early-18th-century ship, most famously used as a flagship by Edward Teach, better known by his nickname Blackbeard . The date and place of the ship's construction are uncertain, [ 3 ] and there is no record of its actions prior to 1710 when it was operating as a French privateer as La Concorde .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Surviving features of the ship's construction strongly suggest it was built by French shipwrights, based on differences in fastening patterns in the late 17th and early 18th centuries.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] After several years of French service, both as a naval frigate and as a merchant vessel – much of that time as a slave ship – she was captured by Blackbeard in 1717. Blackbeard used the ship for less than a year, [ 8 ] but captured numerous prizes using her as his flagship.

In May 1718, Blackbeard ran the ship aground at Topsail Inlet, now known as Beaufort Inlet , North Carolina , United States, in present-day Carteret County .

[ 8 ] After the grounding, her crew and supplies were transferred to smaller ships. In 1996, Intersal Inc., a private firm, discovered the remains of a vessel that was later determined to be Queen Anne's Revenge , [ 9 ] which was added to the U.S.

National Register of Historic Places . The shipwreck was discovered off Beaufort Inlet, North Carolina .

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] The ship that would be known as Queen Anne's Revenge was a 200-ton vessel believed to have been built in 1710. She was handed over to René Duguay-Trouin and employed in his service for some time before being converted into a slave ship , then operated by the leading slave trader René Montaudin of Nantes , until sold in 1713 in Peru or Chile. She was briefly re-acquired by the French Navy in November 1716, but was sold by them for commerce five months later in France , again for use as a slaver.

[ 11 ] She was captured by Blackbeard and his pirates on 28 November 1717, near the island of Martinique in the West Indies .

[ 12 ] After selling her cargo of slaves at Martinique , Blackbeard made the vessel his flagship , added more heavy cannons and renamed her Queen Anne's Revenge . The name may come from the War of the Spanish Succession , known in the Americas as Queen Anne's War , in which Blackbeard may have served in the Royal Navy , or possibly from sympathy for the Jacobite cause ( Queen Anne being the last Stuart monarch).

[ 13 ] Blackbeard sailed this ship from the west coast of Africa to the Caribbean, attacking British, Dutch, and Portuguese merchant ships along the way.

[ 14 ] Shortly after blockading Charleston harbor in May 1718, and refusing to accept Governor Robert Johnson's offer of the King's Pardon , Blackbeard ran Queen Anne's Revenge aground while entering Beaufort Inlet , North Carolina , on 10 June 1718. A deposition given by David Herriot, the former captain of the sloop Adventure , states "Thatch's [Teach's] ship Queen Anne's Revenge run a-ground off of the Bar of Topsail-Inlet." He also states that Adventure "run a-ground likewise about Gun-shot from the said Thatch" in an attempt to kedge Queen Anne's Revenge off the bar.

[ 15 ] Blackbeard then disbanded his flotilla and escaped by transferring supplies onto the smaller Adventure . He stranded several crew members on a small island nearby, where they were later rescued by Captain Stede Bonnet . Some suggest Blackbeard deliberately grounded the ship as an excuse to disperse the crew.

[ 16 ] Shortly afterward, he surrendered and accepted the King's Pardon for himself and his remaining crewmen from Governor Charles Eden at Bath, North Carolina . However, Blackbeard returned to piracy later that year and was killed in combat in November 1718.

[ 15 ] Discovery and excavation [ edit ] Model of the Queen Anne's Revenge in the North Carolina Museum of History Intersal Inc., a private research firm, discovered the wreck believed to be Queen Anne's Revenge on 21 November 1996.

[ 17 ] It was located by Intersal's director of operations, Mike Daniel, who used historical research provided by the company's president, Phil Masters [ 18 ] [ 19 ] and maritime archaeologist David Moore.

[ 20 ] The shipwreck lies in 28 feet (8.5 m) of water about one mile (1.6 km) offshore of Fort Macon State Park (34°41′44″N 76°41′20″W), Atlantic Beach, North Carolina . On 3 March 1997, Jim Hunt , the governor of North Carolina, held a press conference in Raleigh, North Carolina. He stated: "The state of North Carolina is working to protect the site and will do everything we can to that end. We look forward to the day when all North Carolinians can see these exciting artifacts for themselves." [ 21 ] Thirty cannons have been identified to date and more than 300,000 artifacts have been recovered.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The cannons are of different origins including Sweden and England, and of different sizes as would be expected with a colonial pirate crew.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] For one week in 2000 and 2001, live underwater video of the project was webcast to the Internet as a part of the QAR DiveLive [ 25 ] educational program that reached thousands of children around the world.

[ 26 ] Created and co-produced by Nautilus Productions and Marine Grafics, this project enabled students to talk to scientists and learn about methods and technologies utilized by the underwater archaeology team.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] In November 2006 and 2007, more artifacts were discovered at the site and brought to the surface. The additional artifacts appear to support the claim that the wreck is that of Queen Anne's Revenge . Among evidence to support this theory is that the cannons were found loaded. In addition, there were more cannons than would be expected for a ship of this size, and the cannons were of different makes. Depth markings on the part of the stern that was recovered point to it having been made according to the French foot measurements.

[ 29 ] Markings found on a cannon and a bronze bell are engraved with dates prior to 1718, further supporting that the wreck is Queen Anne's Revenge .

[ 30 ] By the end of 2007, approximately one third of the wreck was fully excavated. Part of the hull of the ship, including much of the keel and part of the stern post, has survived. The 1,500-pound (680 kg) stern post was recovered in November 2007.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] The NCDNCR set up the website [ 33 ] Queen Anne's Revenge to build on intense public interest in the finds. Artifacts recovered in 2008 include loose ceramic and pewter fragments, lead strainer fragments, a nesting weight, cannon apron, ballast stones, a sword guard and a coin.

[ 34 ] Goals during the 2010 field season included staging of one of the ship's largest main deck cannons to the large artifact holding area on site, taking corrosion readings from anchors and cannons undergoing in situ corrosion treatment, attaching aluminum-alloy anodes to the remaining anchors and cannons so as to begin their in situ corrosion treatment and continuing site excavations.

[ 35 ] In 2011, the 0.9-tonne (2,000 lb) [ 36 ] anchor from the ship was brought to the surface, along with a range of makeshift weaponry including langrage or canister shot .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] On 29 August 2011, the National Geographic Society reported that the State of North Carolina had confirmed the shipwreck as Queen Anne's Revenge , reversing a conclusion previously maintained because of a lack of conclusive evidence.

[ 39 ] Specific artifacts that support this conclusion include a brass coin weight bearing the bust of Queen Anne of Great Britain, cast during her reign (1702–1714); the stem of a wine glass decorated with diamonds and tiny embossed crowns, made to commemorate the 1714 coronation of Queen Anne's successor, King George I ; the remains of a French hunting sword featuring a bust that closely resembles King Louis XV , who claimed the French throne in 1715; and a urethral syringe for treating venereal diseases with a control mark indicating manufacture between 1707 and 1715 in Paris, France.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] On 21 June 2013, the National Geographic Society reported recovery of two cannons from Queen Anne's Revenge .

[ 42 ] Several months later, on 28 October, archaeologists recovered five more cannons from the wreck.

[ 43 ] The 23rd of 30 cannons identified at the wreck site was recovered on 24 October 2014. The gun is approximately 56 inches (140 cm) long, weighs over 300 pounds (140 kg) and may be a sister to a Swedish gun that was previously recovered. Nine cannonballs, bar shot halves, an iron bolt and a grenado were also recovered during the 2014 field season.

[ 44 ] In January 2018, sixteen fragments of paper were identified after being recovered from sludge inside a cannon. The scraps were from a copy of the book A Voyage to the South Sea, and Round the World, Perform'd in the Years 1708, 1709, 1710 and 1711 by Captain Edward Cooke, in which Cooke travels under Woodes Rogers ; it is likely the pages were torn from the book and used as wadding in that cannon.

[ 45 ] A portion of the objects and artifacts found at the shipwreck have been given on long-term loan to the Smithsonian and are on display in the National Museum of American History . Additionally, some artifacts have been loaned to the Musée national de la Marine in Paris.

[ 46 ] In total, 24 of 30 known cannons have been excavated.

[ 47 ] Of these, six cast-iron cannons bear founder's marks or proof marks indicative of a specific nation of origin. One 1 ⁄ 2 -pounder carries an English proof mark, a 4-pounder carries an English proof mark and the founder's mark for Major John Fuller (1652–1722) of the Heathfield Furnace in East Sussex , and four 1-pounders carry founder's markings for Jesper Eliaeson Ehrencreutz at Ehrendals [ sv ] works in Södermanland , Sweden.

[ 48 ] Two of the Ehrendal cannons also carry legible date marks for 1713.

[ 49 ] Although there are thirty known cannons from the wreck, it is estimated that Blackbeard added around forty cannons, all in varying sizes.

[ 50 ] Ownership and legal controversies [ edit ] Recognizing the significance of Queen Anne's Revenge , the North Carolina Department of Natural and Cultural Resources (NCDNCR), Intersal, and Maritime Research Institute (MRI) entered into a memorandum of agreement in 1998.

[ 51 ] Intersal agreed to forgo entitlement to any coins and precious metals recovered from the wreck site in order that all artifacts remain as one intact collection, and in order for NCDNCR to determine the ultimate disposition of the artifacts. In return, Intersal was granted media, replica, and other rights related to an entity known as Blackbeard's Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Project; [ 52 ] MRI was granted joint artifact touring rights with NCDNCR, Intersal, and Rick Allen of Nautilus Productions signed a settlement agreement [ 53 ] on 24 October 2013, connected to commercial, replica, and promotional opportunities for the benefit of Queen Anne's Revenge . The State of North Carolina owns the wreck since it lies in state waters (within the three-mile limit).

Archaeological recovery ceased on the shipwreck after the 2015 season because of lawsuits filed against the State of North Carolina, the NCDNCR, and the Friends of the Queen Anne's Revenge nonprofit.

[ 54 ] Intersal, which discovered the Queen Anne's Revenge, filed suit in state court over contract violations.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] In a unanimous decision on 2 November 2019, the North Carolina Supreme Court affirmed Intersal's complaint and voted to send the lawsuit back to complex business court for reconsideration.

[ 57 ] On 23 February 2023 the judge in the case issued a ruling in favor of Intersal which granted them permission to proceed to a jury trial sometime in 2024.

[ 58 ] In 2013 and 2015, the state government of North Carolina uploaded videos of the wreck of the Queen Anne's Revenge to its website without permission. As a result, Nautilus Productions , the company documenting the recovery since 1998, filed suit in federal court over copyright violations and the passage of " Blackbeard's Law " by the North Carolina legislature.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Before posting the videos the North Carolina Legislature passed "Blackbeard's Law", N.C. General Statute §121-25(b), [ 62 ] which stated, "All photographs, video recordings, or other documentary materials of a derelict vessel or shipwreck or its contents, relics, artifacts, or historic materials in the custody of any agency of North Carolina government or its subdivisions shall be a public record pursuant to Chapter 132 of the General Statutes." On 5 November 2019, the U.S. Supreme Court heard oral arguments in Allen v. Cooper .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] On 23 March 2020, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of North Carolina and struck down the Copyright Remedy Clarification Act , which Congress passed in 1989 to attempt to curb such infringements of copyright by states.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] After the ruling, Nautilus filed a motion for reconsideration in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina.

[ 70 ] On 18 August 2021 Judge Terrence Boyle granted the motion for reconsideration which North Carolina promptly appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.

[ 71 ] The 4th Circuit denied the state's motion on 14 October 2022.

[ 72 ] Nautilus then filed their second amended complaint on 8 February 2023 alleging 5th and 14th Amendment violations of Nautilus' constitutional rights, additional copyright violations, and claiming that North Carolina's "Blackbeard's Law" represents a Bill of Attainder .

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Eight years after the passage of Blackbeard's Law, on 30 June 2023, North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper signed a bill repealing the law.

[ 75 ] Intersal, Inc.'s lawsuit continues in the North Carolina Business Court with a trial date set for 4 November 2024.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Possible damages in the case could run from $15.6 million to $259.3 million.

[ 78 ] National Register of Historic Places [ edit ] Queen Anne's Revenge was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2004. The reference number is 04000148. It is listed as owned by the State of North Carolina and located South of Beaufort Inlet, N.C.

[ 79 ] The wreck site is designated 31CR314 by the state of North Carolina.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] In popular culture [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "Queen Anne's Revenge" is the title of a song by American Celtic punk band Flogging Molly , from their 2004 album Within a Mile of Home .

"Queen Anne's Revenge" is a jazz song recorded by The Sean J. Kennedy Quartet featuring drummer Liberty DeVitto .

[ 82 ] Queen Anne's Revenge appears in the 2011 film Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides , portrayed by Sunset , a ship which previously portrayed the Black Pearl in the film's predecessors: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest and Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End .

[ 83 ] This incarnation of the ship was shown to shoot Greek fire from its prow.

Queen Anne's Revenge also appeared in the Pirates of the Caribbean Online video game .

[ 84 ] The ship returned in the 2017 film Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales where it served as the flagship of Hector Barbossa 's pirate fleet.

It appears in the video game Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag by Ubisoft . The ship is briefly playable during a mission to assist Blackbeard.

It appears in Rick Riordan 's 2006 novel The Sea of Monsters , in which Percy Jackson and Annabeth Chase find the ship docked on Circe 's island and steal it to sail through the Sea of Monsters , the ship's crew having been captured by Circe long before and transformed into hamsters. As the son of Poseidon , Percy proves to be able to sail the Queen Anne's Revenge through just his willpower alone. It is sunk near the end of the book by Polyphemus who hits it with giant boulders.

The ship appears in the 2018 DC's Legends of Tomorrow episode "The Curse of the Earth Totem".

The ship also appears in the 2004 remake of the video game Sid Meier's Pirates!

at first as an NPC ship captained by Blackbeard, but which can be captured and used as a player ship if the player defeats Blackbeard in battle.

Lego Pirates of the Caribbean also features Queen Anne's Revenge .

[ 85 ] The ship is used by Blackbeard in the third and fourth season of the TV series Black Sails (2014–2017).

"Месть королевы Анны" (Russian for Queen Anne's Revenge) is the title of a song by Russian Rock band Aquarium , from their album Tor .

Queen Anne's Revenge is featured in the mobile game Fate/Grand Order as Blackbeard's Noble Phantasm.

"Queen Anne's Revenge" is the title of a song by jazz bassist, Russell Hall, featured on his album "Black Caesar", [ 86 ] which features various pirate-themed jazz compositions. The titular song features jazz guitar legend Mark Whitfield.

See also [ edit ] Robert Lane (pirate) , whose ship was also named Queen Anne's Revenge References [ edit ] ^ "Pirate Arms and Armament | Queen Anne's Revenge Project" .

www.qaronline.org .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2017.

^ "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . 9 July 2010.

^ "The Pirate Ship's Journey - Queen Anne's Revenge Project" .

www.qaronline.org .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2018 . Retrieved 8 May 2018 .

^ Wilde-Ramsing, Mark (2009).

"Historical Background for the Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Site" .

Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Project Research Report and Bulletin Series . QAR-R-09-02: 1– 28 – via North Carolina Department of Natural and Cultural Resources.

^ Hunter, Natash'ja (4 July 2019).

"La Concorde and Queen Anne's Revenge: A History of One Ship with Two Names" .

Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Project .

^ Moore, David D. (October 2001).

"Blackbeard's Queen Anne's Revenge: Archaeological Interpretation and Research Focused on the Hull Remains and Ship-related Accoutrements Associated with Site 31-CR-314" .

Tributaries .

11 (October 2001): 49– 64 – via North Carolina Maritime History Council.

^ Wilde-Ramsing, Mark U.; Ewen, Charles R. (2012).

"Beyond Reasonable Doubt: A Case for Queen Anne's Revenge" .

Historical Archaeology .

46 (2): 110– 133.

doi : 10.1007/BF03377319 .

JSTOR 23264632 .

S2CID 160054234 .

^ a b Brian Handwerk (12 July 2005).

" 'Blackbeard's Ship' Yields New Clues to Pirate Mystery" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on 15 October 2011 . Retrieved 27 May 2011 .

^ "Intersal Discovers Blackbeard's Flagship!" .

Intersal, Inc . Retrieved 16 November 2019 .

^ Moore, David (1 March 2018). "A Brief History of the Pirate Blackbeard's Flagship Queen Anne's Revenge, ex-Concorde".

Nautical Research Journal .

63 (1).

^ Rif Winfield (2017), French Warships in the Age of Sail 1626–1786: Design, Construction, Careers and Fates , p. 234. Seaforth Publishing, Barnsley.

ISBN 978-1-4738-9351-1 .

^ "The Pirate Ship's Journey | Queen Anne's Revenge Project" .

www.qaronline.org .

Archived from the original on 23 October 2017 . Retrieved 1 December 2017 .

^ "Blackbeard (Edward Thatch) Biography – The Republic of Pirates" .

www.republicofpirates.net . Archived from the original on 21 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 May 2018 .

^ "Preliminary Observations on British and American Documents Concerning the Activities of the Pirate Blackbeard, March 1717 to June 1718" .

QARonline.org . Retrieved 14 July 2024 .

^ a b D. Moore. (1997) "A General History of Blackbeard the Pirate, the Queen Anne's Revenge and the Adventure". In Tributaries , Volume VII, 1997. pp. 31–35. (North Carolina Maritime History Council) ^ Cordingly, David (1996).

Life Among The Pirates . London: Abacus.

ISBN 978-0349113142 .

^ "QAR Discovered" .

lat3440.com . Intersal, Inc. Archived from the original on 17 July 2015 . Retrieved 30 August 2015 .

^ "In Shipwreck Linked to Pirate, State Sees a Tourism Treasure" .

The New York Times . 9 November 1997.

^ White, Fred A (1982).

East Carolina Dive and Historical Recovery Team, Beaufort Inlet and Oregon Inlet Surveys, 1982 Field Reports . East Carolina Dive and Historical Recovery Team . Retrieved 14 November 2019 .

^ Publika, Liz (July 2018).

"Resurrecting the Notorious Queen Anne's Revenge: David Moore on Blackbeard & maritime archaeology" .

ARTPublika . Retrieved 31 March 2023 .

^ Wilde-Ramsing, Mark U.; Ewen, Charles R. (2012).

"Beyond Reasonable Doubt: A Case for Queen Anne's Revenge" .

Historical Archaeology .

46 (2): 110– 133.

doi : 10.1007/bf03377319 .

ISSN 0440-9213 .

S2CID 160054234 .

^ "250,000 Pieces of Blackbeard from Shipwreck" . Archived from the original on 9 July 2015 . Retrieved 27 March 2015 .

^ a b Henry, Nathan; Farrell, Erik (2021).

"A preliminary analysis of armaments from shipwreck 31CR314: Queen Anne's Revenge" .

Journal of the Ordnance Society .

28 : 7.

^ Moore, D. (1997). "A General History of Blackbeard the Pirate, the Queen Anne's Revenge and the Adventure".

Tributaries .

VII : 31– 35.

^ "Live from Morehead City, it's Queen Anne's Revenge :: State Publications" .

digital.ncdcr.gov .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 May 2018 .

^ Southerly, C.; Gillman-Bryan, J. (2003).

"Diving on the Queen Anne's Revenge" . In Norton, S. F. (ed.).

Diving for Science . American Academy of Underwater Sciences 22nd Annual Scientific Diving Symposium. Archived from the original on 5 July 2008 . Retrieved 3 July 2008 .

^ "Apple, QuickTime help with underwater diving trip" .

Macworld .

Archived from the original on 3 April 2015.

^ "Blackbeard's Glowing Shipwreck" . P3 Update. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 10 April 2015 .

^ Secrets of the Dead: Blackbeard's Lost Ship . PBS. Archived from the original on 20 June 2010.

^ Wilder, Mike (29 March 2009).

"Knights of the black flag: New exhibit spotlights pirate history as it relates to North Carolina" . The Times News . Retrieved 5 May 2024 .

^ Malcom, Corey.

"The Iron Bilboes of the Henrietta Marie" (PDF) .

melfisher.org . The Navigator: Newsletter of the Mel Fisher Maritime Heritage Society. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 December 2015 . Retrieved 19 July 2015 .

^ Donovan, Chelsea (29 November 2007).

Queen Anne's Revenge Artifact Found . WITN.

Archived from the original on 6 November 2015 . Retrieved 24 February 2016 – via YouTube.

^ qaronline.org Archived 2016-03-12 at the Wayback Machine : The Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Project – Archaeological Investigations of Blackbeard's Flagship.

^ Welsh, Wendy.

"2008 Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Field Summary" (PDF) .

qaronline.org .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 September 2015 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 .

^ Southerly, Chris.

"Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Project – 2010 Field Expedition" (PDF) .

qaronline.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 September 2015.

^ Atkinson, Stephen (September 2017).

"Artifact of the Month: A Heavy Loss" .

Queen Anne's Revenge Project . North Carolina Department of Natural and Cultural Resources . Retrieved 21 January 2023 .

^ "Blackbeard's Queen Anne's Revenge wreck reveals secrets of the real Pirate of the Caribbean" .

The Daily Telegraph . 29 May 2011.

Archived from the original on 28 May 2011 . Retrieved 29 May 2011 .

^ " 'Blackbeard anchor' lifted in US" .

BBC News . 28 May 2011.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2015 . Retrieved 8 May 2018 .

^ Drye, Willie (29 August 2011).

"Blackbeard's Ship Confirmed off North Carolina" .

Daily News . National Geographic. Archived from the original on 25 September 2011 . Retrieved 29 August 2011 .

^ Zucchino, David (19 June 2011).

"Effort to tie North Carolina shipwreck to pirate Blackbeard advances" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 5 March 2024 .

^ "The Discovery and Identification of Site 31CR314" .

The Shipwreck Project . Carleton College . Retrieved 28 July 2024 .

^ "Archaeologists Recover Two More Cannons From Blackbeard's Ship" .

National Geographic . 21 June 2013. Archived from the original on 27 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ "Archaeologists recover 5 cannons from wreck of Blackbeard's ship" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2013 . Retrieved 30 October 2013 .

^ "Pirate Blackbeard's Newly Recovered Cannon to be Shared with Public" .

Popular Archaeology . 31 October 2014.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2014 . Retrieved 12 June 2015 .

^ "Rare Scraps of Paper Unearthed in the Sludge of Famed Pirate Ship" .

Smithsonian Magazine . 9 January 2018 . Retrieved 18 January 2018 .

^ Fontenoy, Paul E. (2020).

"Queen Anne's Revenge: A Very Lore-Ful Site" .

Journal of Maritime Archaeology .

15 (3): 307– 319.

Bibcode : 2020JMarA..15..307F .

doi : 10.1007/s11457-020-09270-0 .

ISSN 1557-2285 .

S2CID 166166559 .

^ "Cannon" .

Queen Anne's Revenge Project . North Carolina Department of Natural and Cultural Resources . Retrieved 21 January 2023 .

^ Henry, Nathan; Farrell, Erik (2021).

"A preliminary analysis of armaments from shipwreck 31CR314: Queen Anne's Revenge" .

Journal of the Ordnance Society .

28 : 7– 15.

^ "Kapten Svartskägg sköt svenskt" . NyTeknik. 4 November 2013.

Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 28 March 2015 .

^ Royster, Amy (23 July 2000).

"Queen Anne's rising History and Science Converge as Archaeologists Salvage the Flagship of Blackbeard, The World's Most Famous Pirate, Off the North Carolina Coast" .

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution . Retrieved 7 May 2024 .

^ "Queen Anne's Revenge Fact Sheet" (PDF) .

qaronline.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2014.

^ "Blackbeard's Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Project" .

Nautilus Productions .

^ "Mediated Settlement Agreement" .

Scribd.com .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2015.

^ Drye, Willie.

"Blackbeard's Ship Confirmed off North Carolina" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on 25 September 2011 . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

^ "Intersal, Inc. v Hamilton, et al" .

North Carolina Judicial Branch . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

^ Hand, Bill (15 May 2019).

"Lawsuit over Blackbeard's pirate ship goes before NC Supreme Court" . Fayetteville Observer . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

^ Waggoner, Martha (4 November 2019).

"Treasure hunter vows legal showdown over Blackbeard shipwreck" . Associated Press . Retrieved 16 November 2019 .

^ "NC court rules in favor of company that discovered Blackbeard's flagship" . WRAL. 1 March 2023 . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .

^ "Allen v Cooper, et al" .

Supreme Court of the United States . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

^ Gresko, Jessica (3 June 2019).

"High court will hear copyright dispute involving pirate ship" . Associated Press . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

^ Wolverton, Paul (2 November 2019).

"Pirate ship lawsuit from Fayetteville goes to Supreme Court on Tuesday" . Fayetteville Observer . Retrieved 2 November 2019 .

^ "§ 121-25. License to conduct exploration, recovery or salvage operations" (PDF) .

ncleg.gov . North Carolina . Retrieved 25 May 2023 .

^ Murphy, Brian (5 November 2019).

"How Blackbeard's ship and a diver with an 'iron hand' ended up at the Supreme Court" . Charlotte Observer . Retrieved 16 November 2019 .

^ Wolf, Richard (5 November 2019).

"Aarrr, matey! Supreme Court justices frown on state's public display of pirate ship's salvage operation" .

USA Today . Retrieved 27 December 2019 .

^ Livni, Ephrat (5 November 2019).

"A Supreme Court piracy case involving Blackbeard proves truth is stranger than fiction" . Quartz . Retrieved 27 December 2019 .

^ Woolverton, Paul (5 November 2019).

"Supreme Court justices skeptical in Blackbeard pirate ship case from Fayetteville" . Fayetteville Observer . Retrieved 27 December 2019 .

^ "N.C. Gen Stat §121-25" (PDF) .

NCleg.gov . North Carolina . Retrieved 19 June 2020 .

^ Adler, Adam (29 March 2020).

"Blackbeard Just Broke Copyright Law, and Now States Are the Pirates" . The Escapist . Retrieved 19 June 2020 .

^ Allen v. Cooper , Text .

^ McKlveen, Gina (28 October 2022).

"A North Carolina Filmmaker Continues to Challenge State Sovereign Immunity" . Institute of Art & Law . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .

^ "Reconsideration Granted" (PDF) .

Nautilus Productions . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ "4th Circuit Recon" (PDF) .

Nautilus Productions . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ "PLAINTIFFS' SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT" (PDF) .

IPWatchdog . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .

^ Barnes, Greg (14 February 2023).

"Fayetteville's Blackbeard shipwreck filmmaker fires back in new court case" . CityView . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .

^ "An Act to Make Various Changes to the Statutes Governing the Department of Natural and Cultural Resources, as Recommended by the Department" (PDF) .

ncleg.gov . North Carolina . Retrieved 21 July 2023 .

^ Waggoner, Martha (4 November 2019).

"Stolen treasure? Blackbeard's ship case returns to court over photos" .

wpde.com . WPDE . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ "NC court rules in favor of company that discovered Blackbeard's flagship" .

wral.com . WRAL. March 2023 . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ Risinger, Bradley.

"A Pirate's Story, it Turns Out, is Worth its Weight in Gold" .

JD Supra . Retrieved 18 March 2024 .

^ Bernstein, David; Wilde-Ramsing, Mark; Christopher W., Freeman; Benjamin W., Sumners (March 2015).

"Shallow Water Hydrographic Surveys in Support of Archaeological Site Preservation: Queen Anne's Revenge Wreck Site, North Carolina" . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "National Register of Historical Places - NORTH CAROLINA (NC), Carteret County" .

National Register of Historic Places . National Park Service. 7 February 2007.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2016.

^ "The Shipwreck" .

qaronline.org .

Archived from the original on 7 September 2015.

^ "Queen Anne's Revenge" .

Allaboutjazz.com . 8 June 2007.

Archived from the original on 11 November 2012.

^ "Pirates of the Caribbean" .

Cinemareview.com .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2011.

^ "The Queen Anne's Revenge Sets Sail!" .

Piratesonline.go.com .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2013.

^ Com, Gamerguides (2015).

Assassin's Creed: Rogue – Strategy Guide . Gamer Guides.

ISBN 9781631021893 .

The Queen Anne's Revenge is featured in the 2015 movie Pan as the  flagship of the fleet of flying pirate ships used by Blackbeard and the pirates of Neverland .

^ Johnson, Kevin (13 January 2023).

"Russell Hall Releases "Black Caesar" " .

NoTreble.com .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Queen Anne's Revenge (ship, 1710) .

Allen v. Cooper: Back with a (Queen Anne's) Vengeance , IPWatchdog Filmmaker files amended lawsuit alleging copyright infringement related to Queen Anne's Revenge shipwreck , News-Times NC court rules in favor of company that discovered Blackbeard's flagship , WRAL More to explore: After 25 years, discoveries continue at Blackbeard shipwreck , Reflector N.C Supreme Court revives lawsuit over Blackbeard's ship and lost Spanish treasure ship , Fayetteville Observer Queen Anne's Revenge : Archaeological Site , North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources Blackbeard's Ship Confirmed off North Carolina National Geographic News Piracy worries in pirate pursuit Blackbeard , Baltimore Sun Philip Masters, True Amateur of History, Dies at 70 , New York Times Episode 955: Pirate Videos , Planet Money, NPR National Register of Historic Places , National Park Service Scientists Show Relics From Ship Fit For Pirate, Possibly Blackbeard , Chicago Tribune Resurrecting the Notorious Queen Anne's Revenge: David Moore on Blackbeard & maritime archaeology , ARTpublika Magazine v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places in North Carolina Topics Contributing property Keeper of the Register Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places National Park Service Property types Lists by county Alamance Alexander Alleghany Anson Ashe Avery Beaufort Bertie Bladen Brunswick Buncombe Burke Cabarrus Caldwell Camden Carteret Caswell Catawba Chatham Cherokee Chowan Clay Cleveland Columbus Craven Cumberland Currituck Dare Davidson Davie Duplin Durham Edgecombe Forsyth Franklin Gaston Gates Graham Granville Greene Guilford Halifax Harnett Haywood Henderson Hertford Hoke Hyde Iredell Jackson Johnston Jones Lee Lenoir Lincoln Macon Madison Martin McDowell Mecklenburg Mitchell Montgomery Moore Nash New Hanover Northampton Onslow Orange Pamlico Pasquotank Pender Perquimans Person Pitt Polk Randolph Richmond Robeson Rockingham Rowan Rutherford Sampson Scotland Stanly Stokes Surry Swain Transylvania Tyrrell Union Vance Wake Warren Washington Watauga Wayne Wilkes Wilson Yadkin Yancey Other lists Bridges National Historic Landmarks v t e Piracy Periods Ancient Mediterranean Golden Age 21st century 2022 2023 2024 Types of pirate Albanian piracy Anglo-Turkish piracy Baltic Slavic pirates Barbary pirates (corsairs) Algiers Brethren of the Coast Buccaneers Cilician pirates Child pirate Cossack pirates Filibusters French corsairs Jewish pirates Moro pirates Narentines Privateers Confederate River pirate Sea Beggars Sea Dogs Sindhi corsairs Timber pirate Ushkuyniks Uskoks Vikings Victual Brothers Wokou Women in piracy Areas Atlantic World Caribbean British Virgin Islands Spanish Main Lake Nicaragua Venezuela Gulf of Guinea Indian Ocean Horn of Africa Somali Coast Indonesia Persian Gulf Strait of Malacca Nosy Boraha Other waters Baltic Slavic piracy Barbary Coast Falcon Lake South China Coast Sulu Sea Pirate havens and bases Barataria Bay Île Sainte-Marie Libertatia Lundy Mamora Port Royal Republic of Pirates Republic of Salé Saint Augustin Saint-Malo Tortuga Major figures Pirates Abduwali Muse Abshir Boyah Adam Baldridge Abraham Samuel Alfhild Albert W. Hicks Anne Bonny Anne Dieu-le-Veut António de Faria Alexandre Exquemelin Artemisia I of Caria Bartolomeu Português Bartholomew Roberts Benito de Soto Benjamin Hornigold Black Caesar Blackbeard Bully Hayes Cai Qian John Rackham Charles Gibbs Charlotte Badger Charlotte de Berry Cheung Po Tsai Christina Anna Skytte Chui A-poo Dan Seavey Diabolito Dido Dirk Chivers Dominique You Edward England Edward Low Eli Boggs Elise Eskilsdotter Eustace the Monk Flora Burn Flying Gang Fūma Kotarō Francis Drake François Le Clerc François l'Olonnais Gan Ning Grace O'Malley Hayreddin Barbarossa Hendrick Lucifer Henri Caesar Henry Every Henry Morgan Henry Strangways Hippolyte Bouchard Huang Bamei Israel Hands Jacquotte Delahaye Jan Janszoon Jean Lafitte Jeanne de Clisson Johanna Hård John Hawkins John Hoar John Newland Maffitt John Pro Jørgen Jørgensen José Joaquim Almeida Joseph Baker Joseph Barss Klaus Störtebeker Lai Choi San Laurens de Graaf Lawrence Prince Liang Daoming Limahong Lo Hon-cho Louis-Michel Aury Mansel Alcantra Manuel Ribeiro Pardal Martin Frobisher Mary Critchett Mary Lindsey Mary Read Mary Wolverston Michel de Grammont Moses Cohen Henriques Nathaniel Gordon Nicholas van Hoorn Ng Akew Olivier Levasseur Pedro Gilbert Peter Easton Pierre Lafitte Piet Pieterszoon Hein Princess Sela Rahmah ibn Jabir al-Jalhami Rachel Wall Redbeard Richard Glover Robert Culliford Robert Surcouf Roberto Cofresí Roche Braziliano Rusla Sadie Farrell Samuel Bellamy Samuel Hall Lord Samuel Mason Samuel Pallache Sayyida al Hurra Sister Ping Shap-ng-tsai Shirahama Kenki Simon Mascarino Stede Bonnet Teuta Thomas Cavendish Thomas Tew Veborg Victual Brothers Vincenzo Gambi Wang Zhi William Dampier William Kidd Zheng Jing Zheng Qi Zheng Yi Zheng Zhilong Zheng Yi Sao Pirate hunters Angelo Emo Chaloner Ogle David Porter Duarte Pacheco Pereira James Brooke Julius Caesar Jose Campuzano-Polanco Luis Fajardo Miguel Enríquez Pedro Menéndez de Avilés Pompey Richard Avery Hornsby Robert Maynard Thomas Warren Woodes Rogers Pirate ships Adventure Galley Ambrose Light Fancy Flying Dutchman Ganj-i-Sawai Queen Anne's Revenge Quedagh Merchant Marquis of Havana My Revenge Royal Fortune Saladin Whydah Gally York Pirate battles and incidents 1582 Cagayan battles 1985 Lahad Datu ambush Action of 9 November 1822 Action of 28 October 2007 Action of 11 November 2008 Action of 9 April 2009 Action of 23 March 2010 Action of 1 April 2010 Action of 5 April 2010 Anti-piracy in the Aegean Antelope incident Anti-piracy in the West Indies Attack on Veracruz Balanguingui Expedition Battle of Boca Teacapan Battle of Cape Fear River Battle of Cape Lopez Battle of Doro Passage Battle of Mandab Strait Battle of Manila Battle off Minicoy Island Battle off Mukah Battle of Nam Quan Battle of New Orleans Battle of Ocracoke Inlet Battle of Pianosa Battle of the Leotung Battle of the Tiger's Mouth Battle of Tonkin River Battle of Ty-ho Bay Battle of Tysami Beluga Nomination incident Blockade of Charleston (Vane) Chepo Expedition Capture of the Ambrose Light Capture of John Rackham Capture of the schooner Bravo Capture of the schooner Fancy Capture of the sloop Anne Carré d'As IV incident Dai Hong Dan incident Falklands Expedition Great Lakes Patrol Irene incident Jiajing wokou raids Maersk Alabama hijacking MT Zafirah hijacking MT Orkim Harmony hijacking MV Moscow University hijacking North Star affair Operation Enduring Freedom – HOA Operation Atalanta Operation Dawn of Gulf of Aden Operation Dawn 8: Gulf of Aden Operation Ocean Shield Persian Gulf Campaign Pirate attacks in Borneo Quest incident Raid on Cartagena Sack of Baltimore Sack of Campeche Salvador Pirates Slave raid of Suðuroy Turkish Abductions Piracy law Acts of grace ( 1717–1718 Acts of Grace ) International piracy law Letter of marque Paris Declaration Respecting Maritime Law Piracy Act ( 1536 , 1698 , 1717 , 1721 , 1837 , 1850 ) Piracy Law of 1820 Slave trade African slave trade African Slave Trade Patrol Amistad Incident Atlantic slave trade Baltic slave trade Barbary slave trade Blockade of Africa Capture of the Veloz Passagera Capture of the brig Brillante Indian Ocean slave trade Trans-Saharan slave trade Pirates in popular culture Fictional pirates Askeladd Tom Ayrton Barbe Rouge Brook Captain Birdseye Captain Blood Captain Crook Captain Flint Captain Hook Captain Nemo Captain Pugwash Captain Sabertooth Captain Stingaree Charlotte de Berry Davy Jones Edward Kenway Elaine Marley Elizabeth Swann Franky Guybrush Threepwood Hector Barbossa Jack Sparrow Jacquotte Delahaye Jimbei José Gaspar Joshamee Gibbs Long John Silver Monkey D. Luffy Vaas Montenegro Mr. Smee Nami Nico Robin Roronoa Zoro Sandokan Sanji Tony Tony Chopper Usopp Will Turner Yellowbeard Zanzibar Novels The Pirate The Pilot: A Tale of the Sea Treasure Island Facing the Flag On Stranger Tides Jim Hawkins and the Curse of Treasure Island Castaways of the Flying Dutchman The Angel's Command Voyage of Slaves Long John Silver Pirate Latitudes Mistress of the Seas Silver: Return to Treasure Island Tropes Buried treasure Davy Jones's locker Eyepatch Jolly Roger skull and crossbones Keelhauling Marooning No purchase, no pay Pegleg Pet parrot Pirate code Pirate utopia Treasure map Walking the plank Miscellaneous Air pirate Space pirate International Talk Like a Pirate Day Pirates versus Ninjas Miscellaneous A General History of the Pyrates Captain Charles Johnson Truce of Ratisbon Pirate Round Mutiny Matelotage Piracy kidnappings Lists Pirates Pirate films and TV series Privateers List of ships attacked by Somali pirates Timeline of piracy Women in piracy Piracy portal Category v t e Pirates of the Caribbean Theme park attractions Pirates of the Caribbean Battle for the Sunken Treasure The Legend of Captain Jack Sparrow Pirate's Lair on Tom Sawyer Island Mickey's Pirate and Princess Party Western River Expedition (cancelled) Restaurants Blue Bayou Captain Jack's Films The Curse of the Black Pearl Dead Man's Chest At World's End On Stranger Tides Dead Men Tell No Tales‎ Related Cast Accolades Universe Black Pearl Locations Characters Jack Sparrow Hector Barbossa Joshamee Gibbs Will Turner Elizabeth Swann Tia Dalma Davy Jones Music Albums 1966 soundtrack The Curse of the Black Pearl Dead Man's Chest Swashbuckling Sea Songs Soundtrack Treasures Collection At World's End At World's End Remixes On Stranger Tides Dead Men Tell No Tales Songs " Yo Ho (A Pirate's Life for Me) " " He's a Pirate " Video games The Curse of the Black Pearl Pirates of the Caribbean Multiplayer Mobile Dead Man's Chest The Legend of Jack Sparrow At World's End Pirates of the Caribbean Online Armada of the Damned (cancelled) Lego Pirates of the Caribbean: The Video Game Related Adventures in the Magic Kingdom Kingdom Hearts II III Disney Universe Kinect: Disneyland Adventures Disney Infinity Disney Magic Kingdoms Sea of Thieves: A Pirate's Life Disney Mirrorverse Disney Speedstorm Books Jack Sparrow Legends of the Brethren Court The Price of Freedom Related Lego Pirates of the Caribbean " Jack Sparrow " (song) Category v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International VIAF National United States France BnF data Other SNAC Yale LUX 34°41′44″N 76°41′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 34.69556°N 76.68889°W ﻿ / 34.69556; -76.68889 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Queen_Anne%27s_Revenge&oldid=1301657694 " Categories : Maritime incidents in 1718 1710s ships 1996 archaeological discoveries Age of Sail ships of England Carteret County, North Carolina Privateer ships of France Archaeological sites on the National Register of Historic Places in North Carolina Shipwrecks of the Carolina coast Shipwrecks on the National Register of Historic Places in North Carolina Maritime folklore National Register of Historic Places in Carteret County, North Carolina Underwater archaeological sites Underwater archaeology Slave ships of France Shipwrecks Shipwrecks in the Atlantic Ocean Ships attacked and captured by pirates Anne, Queen of Great Britain Captured ships Blackbeard Pirate ships Piracy in the Atlantic Ocean Piracy in the Caribbean Hidden categories: Articles using NRISref without a reference number CS1: long volume value CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles needing additional references from April 2017 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 01:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Queen Anne's Revenge 23 languages Add topic

