Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Finances 1.2 Neil deGrasse Tyson 1.3 Roy Moore 1.4 "Black crime" tag 1.5 Andrew McCabe 1.6 COVID-19 pandemic misinformation 1.7 Allegations of labor law violation 1.8 Google Ads 1.9 Falsehoods during the 2020 election 2 Reception 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Federalist (website) 3 languages Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American conservative online magazine and podcast This article is about American conservative online magazine and podcast. For the series of 85 essays arguing in favor of the ratification of the US Constitution, see The Federalist Papers . For other uses, see Federalist (disambiguation) .

The Federalist Type of site Online magazine Available in English Headquarters United States Founder(s) Ben Domenech Sean Davis Editors David Harsanyi Mollie Hemingway URL thefederalist .com Commercial Yes Registration Optional Launched September 1, 2013 ; 11 years ago ( 2013-09-01 ) Current status Active This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Federalist is an American conservative online magazine and podcast that covers politics, policy, culture, and religion, and publishes a newsletter.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The site was co-founded by Ben Domenech and Sean Davis and launched in September 2013.

[ 4 ] During the COVID-19 pandemic , The Federalist published many pieces that contained false information , pseudoscience , and contradictions or misrepresentations of the recommendations of public health authorities.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Federalist made false claims that there had been large-scale election fraud during the counting of ballots in the 2020 United States presidential election .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] History [ edit ] The Federalist was co-founded by Ben Domenech and Sean Davis; senior editors include David Harsanyi and Mollie Hemingway .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Domenech wrote that The Federalist was inspired by the mission and worldview of the original Time magazine's editor, Henry Luce , which he described as, "[leaning] to the political right, with a small-c conservatism equipped with a populist respect for the middle class reader outside of New York and Washington, and an abiding love for America at a time when snark and cynicism were not considered substitutes for smart analysis." [ 12 ] Quoted in The Washington Post in 2018, Domenech described The Federalist as having no office and a staff that was "majority female, half millennial, and a quarter minority." [ 13 ] Finances [ edit ] The Federalist has not disclosed its funding sources and critics have asked who is funding the site, since ad revenue alone would not be enough for the publication to sustain its staff of 14.

[ 14 ] Two sources with knowledge of the publication's finances said that one of the major backers of The Federalist is Dick Uihlein , a packing supply magnate and Trump donor who has a history of supporting far-right political candidates.

[ 14 ] According to BuzzFeed News , the website's funding prompted "a considerable amount of speculation in the political media world, with the phrase 'Who funds the Federalist?' becoming a recurring meme ." In response, the website once sold an "I Fund the Federalist" T-shirt to supporters.

[ 15 ] In 2020, The Federalist received at least $200,000 in COVID-19 relief funds from the Paycheck Protection Program .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The site's parent company receives underwriting from the Conservative Partnership Institute , a "nerve center" of the American right-wing that serves as an incubator for Donald Trump loyalists to develop strategies.

[ 18 ] Neil deGrasse Tyson [ edit ] In late 2014, The Federalist published an article alleging that Neil deGrasse Tyson had used "misstated" quotes in his public presentations, including one attributed to George W. Bush .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Tyson later cited the Bush quote to a speech given after the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster , and apologized to Bush for misremembering the date and context.

[ 22 ] Roy Moore [ edit ] In November 2017, The Federalist came under criticism from both conservatives and liberals for publishing an opinion piece by Tully Borland, Ouachita Baptist University philosopher, defending Roy Moore for allegedly dating teenagers while he was in his 30s , and arguing that such behavior was "not without some merit if one wants to raise a large family".

[ 14 ] [ 23 ] Noah Rothman of the conservative Commentary magazine stated that the op-ed was "rationalizing away child molestation ".

[ 23 ] Molly Roberts of The Washington Post wrote that the op-ed was "uniquely awful".

[ 24 ] Domenech defended The Federalist for publishing Borland's op-ed, saying the magazine "remains avowedly committed to offering alternative views. For those that have a problem with this, the question is simple: what are you afraid of?" [ 25 ] "Black crime" tag [ edit ] Until October 2017, The Federalist had a "black crime" tag, which aggregated articles related to criminal activity by African Americans .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Dan McLaughlin of National Review , a former Federalist contributor, said that the phrasing of the "black crime" tag was "unfortunate." Adding that when he had written for The Federalist, he had "never even noticed that there were tags at the bottom of my essays," and that The Federalist "had deleted the tag as soon as it attracted any notice—over a couple of years the tag appeared on only five or six posts." [ 28 ] Andrew McCabe [ edit ] In May 2018, The Federalist published an article which suggested that former FBI deputy director Andrew McCabe had leaked a story to the news channel CNN .

[ 29 ] The article presented no evidence that this was the case, only that McCabe was aware that CNN would publish a story four days prior to its eventual publication.

[ 29 ] According to Matt Ford in The New Republic , the more likely explanation was that CNN contacted the FBI Press Office, consistent with journalistic practices, for comment on a forthcoming story.

[ 29 ] George W. Bush 's former press secretary Ari Fleischer agreed that CNN was likely contacting the FBI for comment on a forthcoming story, and said that "Whoever told CNN about the briefing is the problem." [ 29 ] The Federalist story was widely disseminated, including a tweet from Donald Trump Jr.

[ 29 ] COVID-19 pandemic misinformation [ edit ] During the COVID-19 pandemic , The Federalist published numerous pieces that contained false information or information that was contrary to the recommendations of public health experts and authorities.

[ 5 ] [ 30 ] The Federalist published articles denouncing social distancing , [ 31 ] as well as articles claiming that fears over the pandemic had been overhyped by the Democratic Party and the media.

[ 32 ] The Federalist co-founder Sean Davis said that Democrats were intentionally trying to "destroy the economy" as a "last-ditch 2020 play", and that "All they care about is power. And if they have to destroy your life and business to get power back, they will." [ 32 ] According to Media Matters for America , The Federalist published articles calling on the government to quickly end social distancing directions, and to open businesses again.

[ 30 ] Co-founder Domenech attacked a prominent analysis from Imperial College London which estimated the loss of life due to the pandemic. Domenech attacked the analysis for revising its figures downward, but the reason that the analysis did so was that the analysis incorporated the social distancing and shutdown strategies that had increasingly been implemented.

[ 33 ] Robert Tracinski, a former contributor, wrote in The Bulwark that The Federalist had devolved over time into a "conspiracy-mongering partisan rag that has now become a menace to public health".

[ 33 ] It published a piece by a Medical Doctor in Oregon who recommended that people hold chickenpox-style parties for the coronavirus to build herd immunity , but the recommendations were contrary to those of public health experts, and the author in question did not have an active medical license and had worked as a businessman for decades.

[ 30 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] At the time, experts warned that the number of new infections should be kept down so as to not overburden the health care system.

[ 36 ] The Federalist was subsequently temporarily suspended from Twitter for promoting fringe ideas that contradicted public health experts and were harmful to public health.

[ 35 ] Reddit also removed links to The Federalist article on its platform.

[ 37 ] The Federalist has published articles opposing COVID-19 vaccine mandates and articles suggesting that pregnant women should not receive COVID-19 vaccines .

[ 38 ] Allegations of labor law violation [ edit ] In 2019, following staff of other American media companies unionizing, co-founder Domenech tweeted "first one of you tries to unionize I swear I'll send you back to the salt mine ".

[ 39 ] In 2020, an NLRB judge ruled that Domenech had threatened staff illegally and required the company to post notices in its offices and email employees to inform them about their legal rights.

[ 40 ] Domenech argued unsuccessfully that the tweet was a joke.

[ 40 ] The New Civil Liberties Alliance , a nonprofit dedicated to fighting what it says is an excessive administrative state, and which had been representing The Federalist pro bono , announced that they would appeal.

Reason and National Review published articles questioning the judge's decision.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] In November 2020 a NLRB panel endorsed the ruling and additionally ordered the company to instruct Domenech to delete the tweet.

[ 43 ] A U.S. court of appeals found the NLRB's action "unlawful", and vacated the NLRB's orders because the tweet was not an unlawful labor practice and because the tweet was protected First Amendment speech.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Google Ads [ edit ] In June 2020, Google Ads warned The Federalist that it was considering demonetizing the website because of racism in its comment section.

The Federalist removed the comment section entirely, and Google announced that "no action will be taken".

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] In response, Domenech said: "We are really learning the degree to which Big Tech can be weaponized by woke mobs, or woke journalists in this case, to try to shut down places who disagree with their leftist agenda." [ 49 ] Tech journalist Mike Masnick called these accusations baseless, pointing out that many different websites were routinely receiving such notices from Google (quoting nine recent examples from his own news site, Techdirt ): "It's not anti-conservative bias, but just yet another example of how difficult it is to do any form of content moderation at scale".

[ 50 ] Falsehoods during the 2020 election [ edit ] While ballots were being counted in the 2020 election, The Federalist made false claims of large-scale fraud .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] One of The Federalist 's tweets said, "Yes, Democrats Are Trying To Steal The Election In Michigan, Wisconsin, And Pennsylvania." [ 8 ] The website falsely insinuated that fraud was occurring in Michigan.

[ 51 ] While other news outlets quickly showed that the purported fraud was a clerical error that was quickly corrected; The Federalist did not delete the story, which had gone viral .

[ 52 ] Co-founder Sean Davis shared the misleading story, leading Twitter to tag his post as containing disputed information.

[ 53 ] Republican congressman Cliff Bentz of Oregon referenced Federalist articles as the source of his allegation during a town hall in La Grande that Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg "bought" the 2020 election for Joe Biden by financing a 503(c)(3) non-profit to expand poll worker training and security.

[ 54 ] Reception [ edit ] According to The New York Times , The Federalist "leans hard into the culture wars", with pieces that question the Me Too movement and characterize recognition of transgender identity as a "war on women".

[ 14 ] Writing for Politico in 2014, Reid Cherlin wrote about The Federalist in an article about the rise in right-wing media online, describing the site as "seek[ing] to go deep on the issues and sway the conversation in Washington." [ 55 ] Matt K. Lewis wrote in The Week that conservative online media was divided between "staid, august publications" and "a new generation of irreverent sites," and that "sites like The Federalist try to bridge the gap by providing serious commentary that is typically written by young, pop culture–savvy writers." [ 56 ] In May 2018, Damon Linker of The Week described The Federalist as "a leading disseminator of pro-Trump conspiracies and up-is-down, funhouse-mirror distortions of Special Counsel Robert Mueller's investigation into Russian election meddling and potential Trump involvement." [ 57 ] David Weigel from Bloomberg Politics stated that The Federalist frequently criticizes left-leaning publications, but was founded with the intention of being "a source of original interviews and real-time arguments between conservatives and libertarians." [ 11 ] During the 2016 US presidential election , conservative pundit and Trump-critic Matt K. Lewis , writing for The Daily Beast , believed there had been a shift in The Federalist ' s coverage of Donald Trump , first criticizing the presidential candidate, and then, after Trump won the presidency, criticizing Trump's liberal critics in the mainstream establishment media and casting Trump as a victim.

[ 58 ] In 2020, former employee Robert Tracinski particularly blamed the publication's reputation for inaccuracy on co-founder Davis, who he said had a destructive "always be trolling " mindset.

[ 59 ] References [ edit ] ^ Polskin, Howard (August 19, 2019).

"How conservative media has grown under Trump" .

Columbia Journalism Review . New York City: Columbia University . Retrieved October 2, 2019 .

^ Greenberg, Jon (October 1, 2019).

"Donald Trump's false claim about a change in whistleblower rules" .

PolitiFact . Retrieved October 2, 2019 .

^ Kanu, Hassan (September 27, 2019).

"The Federalist Hit With Labor Complaint Over Founder's Tweets" .

Bloomberg Law . Retrieved October 2, 2019 .

^ a b Domenech, Ben (September 18, 2013).

"Introducing The Federalist" .

The Federalist . Retrieved September 26, 2014 .

^ a b Bethea, Charles.

"The Federalist as "Medical Journal" in the Time of the Coronavirus" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved April 24, 2020 .

^ Lee, Ella.

"Fact check: Article wrongly states Biden COVID-19 adviser's view on vaccine, age" .

USA Today . Retrieved October 30, 2021 .

^ Scales, David; Gorman, Jack; Jamieson, Kathleen H. (August 19, 2021).

"The Covid-19 Infodemic — Applying the Epidemiologic Model to Counter Misinformation" .

New England Journal of Medicine .

385 (8): 678– 681.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMp2103798 .

ISSN 0028-4793 .

PMID 33979506 .

S2CID 234485796 .

^ a b c Tani, Maxwell (November 4, 2020).

"Twitter Flags Pro-Trump Outlet The Federalist's 'Misleading' Election Fraud Claim" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ a b "Fact check: Biden vote spikes and county recount do not prove Democrats are trying to steal the election in Michigan and Wisconsin" .

Reuters . November 5, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ "Contributors" .

The Federalist . Retrieved October 1, 2014 .

^ a b Weigel, David (December 2014).

"The Torch Is Being Passed to A New Generation of Right-Wing Media" .

Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on December 17, 2014 . Retrieved December 17, 2014 .

^ "Introducing The Federalist" .

The Federalist . September 18, 2013 . Retrieved December 26, 2016 .

^ "Why conservative magazines are more important than ever" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved October 20, 2018 .

^ a b c d Peters, Jeremy W. (August 3, 2020).

"These Conservatives Have a Laser Focus: 'Owning the Libs' " .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved August 3, 2020 .

^ Gray, Rosie (August 28, 2019).

"The Weekly Standard's Corporate Owner Considered Buying The Federalist" .

BuzzFeed News . Retrieved March 26, 2020 .

^ Dickson, Caitlin (January 5, 2021).

"Exclusive: Pandemic relief aid went to media that promoted COVID misinformation" .

Yahoo! News . Retrieved March 3, 2023 .

^ Willis, Moiz Syed, Derek (July 7, 2020).

"THE FEDERALIST, LLC - Coronavirus Bailouts" .

ProPublica . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Draper, Robert (February 20, 2024).

"A Nerve Center for the Right Wing Rises in Washington" .

The New York Times .

^ Hemingway, Mollie (September 27, 2014).

"Neil DeGrasse Tyson: Just Trust Me On Those Things I Said, OK?" .

The Federalist . Retrieved June 15, 2018 .

^ Finocchario, Peter (October 3, 2014).

"Politico's dopey climate denial: Global warming might be fake because Neil deGrasse Tyson did something dumb" .

Salon . Retrieved April 21, 2015 .

^ Mak, Tim (September 19, 2014).

"The Right's War on Neil deGrasse Tyson" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved April 19, 2015 .

^ Tyson, Neil deGrasse (September 29, 2014).

"Partial Anatomy of My Public Talks" .

Facebook . Retrieved June 15, 2018 .

^ a b Sommer, Will (November 30, 2017).

"Conservative site gets major blowback after defending Moore dating teens 'to raise a large family' " .

The Hill . Retrieved December 1, 2017 .

^ Roberts, Molly (November 30, 2017).

"Opinion | The worst Roy Moore take ever has arrived" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 1, 2017 .

^ Domenech, Ben (December 1, 2017).

"A Note On What We Do Here" .

The Federalist . Retrieved December 1, 2017 .

^ Ecarma, Caleb (September 28, 2017).

"The Federalist Claims NFL Protests Are 'Especially' Offensive to White Americans" .

Mediaite . Retrieved September 28, 2017 .

^ Sheffield, Matthew (December 1, 2017).

"Roy Moore, the Federalist, and the Decay of the Conservative Mind" .

Salon . Retrieved December 4, 2017 .

^ McLaughlin, Dan (October 16, 2017).

"How Not to Marginalize the Alt-Right" .

National Review . Retrieved November 3, 2017 .

^ a b c d e Ford, Matt (May 22, 2018).

"Anatomy of a Pro-Trump Conspiracy Theory" .

The New Republic . Retrieved May 23, 2018 .

^ a b c Hagle, Courtney (March 26, 2020).

"The Federalist suggests "controlled voluntary infection" in the latest example of its reckless coronavirus coverage" .

Media Matters for America . Retrieved March 31, 2020 .

^ Bethea, Charles (April 12, 2020).

"The Federalist as "Medical Journal" in the Time of the Coronavirus" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved April 17, 2024 .

^ a b Hagle, Courtney (March 26, 2020).

"The Federalist suggests "controlled voluntary infection" in the latest example of its reckless coronavirus coverage" .

Media Matters for America . Retrieved April 18, 2024 .

^ a b Drezner, Daniel W. (March 31, 2020).

"The state of the conservative intelligentsia is weird" .

The Washington Post .

^ Wagner, Laura (March 25, 2020).

"Unlicensed Dermatologist Suggests People Throw Coronavirus Parties" .

Vice . Retrieved March 31, 2020 .

^ a b Levenson, Michael (March 25, 2020).

"Twitter Blocks The Federalist for Promoting Coronavirus Parties" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved March 31, 2020 .

^ Robertson, Adi (March 25, 2020).

"Twitter locks account encouraging coronavirus 'chickenpox parties' " .

The Verge . Retrieved March 31, 2020 .

^ Cook, Jesselyn (March 28, 2020).

"Facebook Says Post Proposing COVID-19 Infection Parties Doesn't Violate Its Policies" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved March 31, 2020 .

^ Merlan, Anna (October 26, 2021).

"Anti-Vaxxers Are Making a Play for the Hearts, Minds, and Wombs of Young Women" .

Vice . Retrieved January 19, 2022 .

^ @bdomenech (June 7, 2019).

"FYI @fdrlst first one of you tries to unionize I swear I'll send you back to the salt mine" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ a b Kanu, Hassan A. (April 23, 2020).

"The Federalist Publisher's Tweet Was Unlawful: NLRB Judge (2)" .

Bloomberg Law . Retrieved April 24, 2020 .

^ "The National Labor Relations Board Wants to Punish a Conservative Publisher for a Joke About Unions" .

Reason . April 29, 2020.

^ "Send the NLRB Back to the Salt Mine" .

National Review . April 27, 2020.

^ Iafolla, Robert.

"The Federalist Publisher's Tweet Violated Labor Law, NLRB Rules" .

Bloomberg Law . Retrieved November 25, 2020 .

^ "NCLA Clinches 1st Amend. Victory in NLRB Lawsuit over Ben Domenech Satirical Tweet, No Veiled Threat, Says Court" (Press release). New Civil Liberties Alliance. May 20, 2022.

^ Pierson, Brendan (May 20, 2022).

"Federalist publisher's 'salt mine' tweet did not violate labor law -3rd Circ" .

Reuters .

^ "The Federalist Bends the Knee to Big Tech, Deletes Its Awful Comments Section" .

Gizmodo . June 17, 2020.

^ Iyengar, Rishi (June 16, 2020).

"Google kicked ZeroHedge off its ad platform and warned the Federalist" .

CNN .

^ Robertson, Adi (June 16, 2020).

"Google Ads bans Zero Hedge for racist content, but reverses decision on The Federalist" .

The Verge .

^ Kaplan, Talia (June 17, 2020).

"Federalist's Ben Domenech: We're seeing how 'Big Tech can be weaponized by woke mobs" .

Fox News .

^ Masnick, Mike (June 29, 2020).

"GOOGLE THREATENS TO DEFUND TECHDIRT? Where Are All The Politicians Complaining?" .

Techdirt . Retrieved July 1, 2020 .

^ Kessler, Glenn; Rizzo, Salvador (November 5, 2020).

"President Trump's false claims of vote fraud: A chronology" .

The Washington Post .

^ Alberta, Tim (November 6, 2020).

"The Election That Broke the Republican Party" .

Politico . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Stanglin, Doug (November 4, 2020).

"Fact check: Typo led to false post about Michigan votes showing up 'magically' for Biden" .

USA Today . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Mason, Dick (January 12, 2022).

"Bentz: 'The election was not stolen, it was bought' " .

Baker City Herald . Retrieved January 14, 2022 .

^ Cherlin, Reid (January 7, 2014).

"The HuffPo-ization of the Right" .

Politico.com . Archived from the original on November 22, 2018 . Retrieved October 3, 2014 .

^ "The state of conservative media" .

The Week . May 19, 2014 . Retrieved November 27, 2016 .

^ Linker, Damon (May 18, 2018).

"The irredeemable irresponsibility of The Federalist" .

The Week . Retrieved May 19, 2018 .

^ Lewis, Matt (June 21, 2017).

"The Federalist Embraces Anti-Anti Trumpism, Loses Its Way" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved August 13, 2017 .

^ Tracinski, Robert (March 30, 2020).

"The Federalist's Dangerous Coronavirus Trutherism" .

The Bulwark . Retrieved November 26, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Federalist_(website)&oldid=1297125117 " Categories : 2013 establishments in the United States Conservative magazines published in the United States Online magazines published in the United States American political websites Magazines established in 2013 American conservative websites Conspiracist websites Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2020 Use American English from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 08:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Federalist (website) 3 languages Add topic

