Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Work Toggle Work subsection 1.1 Human rights 2 Tobacco lobby 3 Books 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Frank Van Dun 3 languages Español Français Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Frank van Dun ) Belgian law philosopher (born 1947) Frank Van Dun Born ( 1947-02-22 ) 22 February 1947 (age 78) Antwerp , Belgium Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Classical liberalism Institutions University of Ghent Mises Institute Rothbard Institute [ nl ] Main interests Philosophy of law Philosophy of human rights Website users .ugent .be /~frvandun Frank Van Dun ( Flemish: [vɑn ˈdʏn] ; born February 22, 1947) is a Belgian philosopher of law and classical liberal natural law theorist. He is associated with the law faculty of the University of Ghent . In 2013 he was awarded the Prize for Liberty by the Flemish classical-liberal think tank Libera!

.

Work [ edit ] Van Dun published his book Het Fundamenteel Rechtsbeginsel (Dutch for The Fundamental Principle of Law ) in 1983, in which he argued that a rationally convincing answer to the question "What is law?" can only be found by respecting dialogue and argumentation. He is thus an adherent of argumentation ethics . Based on this premise, Van Dun argues that every natural person (individual) has a lawful claim on his life, freedom and property. This claim is absolute, insofar as it does not prohibit the equivalent claims of other natural persons, i.e. insofar as argumentation is respected.

Van Dun clearly distinguishes the lawful (ius) and the legal (lex). In his view, Western positive law systems reduce people to human resources, artificial persons with merely legal status. Positive law defines the legal but can only be lawful insofar as individuals have full secession rights from the institutional framework that is making said positive law. It logically follows that no judge can be forced upon a person who is willing to search a lawful solution for any conflict.

Van Dun claims that the correct interpretation of the non-aggression principle (NAP) is praxeological rather than physical, because property is a "means of action". He thus claims freedom before property instead of freedom as property .

[ citation needed ] This implies that it's not necessarily only the last action in the chain of social causations that is unlawful. Consider the following examples: With regard to land encirclement, a praxeological NAP could imply a "freedom proviso" when the encircling land owner refuses to discuss a reasonable solution.

With regard to copyrights, a praxeological NAP implies that the use of one's signature (as an expression of one's body as "means of action") could reasonably be considered more important than the physical freedom of exactly copying another person's signature with one's paper and ink.

With regard to freedom of speech, a praxeological NAP could imply that it is unlawful for an individual to order an unlawful act, e.g. a general ordering a murder of someone willing to seek lawful solutions.

The freedom before property interpretation of the NAP is not widely accepted within the libertarian community. For example, Walter Block adheres to the freedom as property interpretation.

[ 1 ] Human rights [ edit ] Van Dun sees human rights as fundamentally different from the "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". According to him when you have a right you have a right. Therefore, human rights are, e.g., the right of self-determination for one's own life, liberty and the products of one's liberty (property) and he call these rights fundamental rights. This is not the case in the "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". He sees the "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" equivalent to "Animal Rights", since the rights enumerated in the "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" are sometimes conflicting with each other and many of these rights are only valid insofar as legislation of the government is not contradicting it. Therefore, he sees rulers which are acting as masters of the "human" animals (i.e. "slaves") in the "Universal Declaration of Human Rights".

[ 2 ] Tobacco lobby [ edit ] The Belgian newspaper Le Soir reported on 8 June 2012, that between 1988 and 2000, Belgian scientists Van Dun and Marcel Javeau were paid by the tobacco lobby , through the group 'Associates for Research in the Science of Enjoyment' (ARISE).

[ 3 ] Van Dun responded in the Belgian Eos-magazine [ 4 ] that while indeed he gave two presentations for ARISE in which he presented his visions, he wasn't paid to do so and he never was a member of ARISE. However, the Legacy Tobacco Documents Library contains a document [ 5 ] that lists Van Dun as an "associate".

Books [ edit ] Het fundamenteel rechtsbeginsel (‘ The Fundamental Principle of Law ’) (1983) ( Dutch 2008 PDF version [ permanent dead link ] ) Crash en Depressie (1988) (‘ Crash and Depression ’) ISBN 90-72435-01-X De utopische verleiding (‘ The Utopian Enticement ’), with Hans Crombag, 1997, ISBN 90-254-2466-X Mens, burger, fiscus (‘ Man, Citizen, Taxes ’, 2000) ISBN 90-423-0125-2 References [ edit ] ^ "Reply to Frank van Dun's "Natural Law and the Jurisprudence of Freedom" | Mises Institute" .

mises.org . 2014-07-30 . Retrieved 2024-04-25 .

^ "Human Dignity: Reason or Desire? Natural Rights versus Human Rights" (PDF) . 30 July 2014.

^ Le lobby du tabac recrutait des prof d'unif Le soir, 8 June 2010.

^ Twee Belgische wetenschappers bewezen diensten aan tabakslobby .

Archived June 13, 2010, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "ARISE" . Legacy.library.ucsf.edu . Retrieved 2014-04-28 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Frank Van Dun .

Murray Rothbard Institute, Belgium The Logic of Law Argumentation Ethics and the Philosophy of Freedom Against Libertarian Legalism (Frank van Dun in debate with Walter Block and Stephan Kinsella) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Netherlands Belgium Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frank_Van_Dun&oldid=1271885659 " Categories : 1947 births 20th-century Belgian philosophers 21st-century Belgian philosophers Belgian libertarians Philosophers of law Anarcho-capitalists Academic staff of Ghent University Mises Institute people Living people Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with Flemish IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 26 January 2025, at 05:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frank Van Dun 3 languages Add topic

