Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concepts and study Toggle Concepts and study subsection 1.1 In philosophy 1.2 In social sciences 1.3 In the media 1.4 In law enforcement 2 Origin of the expression Toggle Origin of the expression subsection 2.1 "Anti-white racism" 2.2 "Reverse racism against whites" 3 By country Toggle By country subsection 3.1 France 3.1.1 Legal cases 3.1.2 Public opinion 3.2 Haiti 3.3 South Africa 3.3.1 Public opinion 3.4 United Kingdom 3.4.1 Racially motivated violence 3.4.2 Public opinion 3.5 United States 3.5.1 Racially motivated violence 3.5.2 Public opinion 3.6 Zimbabwe 4 Anti-white ethnic slurs 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Anti-white racism 6 languages Deutsch Français Hausa Italiano 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Discrimination and hostility towards white people Not to be confused with Reverse racism .

A request that this article title be changed to Anti-White racism Anti-White racism is under discussion . Please do not move this article until the discussion is closed.

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-white racism is discriminatory sentiments and acts of hostility of a racist nature toward people racialized as White (especially those from Europe and its diasporas ). It can manifest in various forms, including but not limited to ethnic hatred , stereotyping , exclusion, or violence , and can occur in both overt and subtle ways.

Philosophical , social science , and media perspectives on racism debate the relevance and existence of anti-white racism, highlighting tensions between individual and systemic definitions, the roles of power and history , and controversies over media representation and political discourse.

The subject is contentious, with differing perspectives on its prevalence, impact, and comparison to other forms of racial discrimination . Examples of anti-white racism include attacks targeting white individuals and anti-white sentiments in post- apartheid South Africa and Zimbabwe, as well as in some parts of Europe and North America. Various officials have acknowledged its possible existence. Most legal systems do not formally categorize racist acts by victim ethnicity , though courts have occasionally ruled on cases involving racist insults or violence against white individuals.

The terms "anti-white racism" and "reverse racism against whites" originated in the 1960s and early 2000s respectively, with the former describing racist acts against white people recognized historically and politically (notably in France and by figures like Pierre Paraf ), and the latter referring specifically to anti-white violence and ideology in Zimbabwe, while the concept of " reverse racism " in the U.S. context is often used by opponents of affirmative action to claim discrimination against whites. In France, claims of anti-white racism have been raised mainly by far-right and some other political groups since the 1980s, and have become more common since the 2010s.

Concepts and study In philosophy According to Magali Bessone, professor of political philosophy at the Panthéon-Sorbonne University in Paris, if the phenomenon of racism is considered in a structural manner, then the notion of anti-white racism is not relevant "in societies where whites are in a position of domination . [Which] does not prevent the existence of individual behaviors that can be designated in this case as falling within the scope of racial hatred . And the definition of racism must probably be both individual and institutional." [ 1 ] According to Jorge L. A. Garcia, philosophy professor at Boston College , "the claim that Black racism is more dangerous than White in urban areas 'where blacks control power' may have little application in our nation", yet black racism is an "ugly phenomenon" and "damaging to the cause of racial justice." [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In social sciences Sociology studies racism by taking into account specific socio-historical contexts and the prior existence, in Western societies, of ideologies and policies that have historically given whites the role of the dominant race.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Researchers distinguish between what is racist behavior—rejection, anger, insults, aggression, etc.—of an individual nature, and the existence of systemic racism , i.e. racism that is embedded in the social organization .

[ 7 ] Pooja Sawrikar, a psychologist, and Ilan Katz, a social work researcher at the University of New South Wales , challenge the definition of racism which they summarize as " Racism = Prejudice + Power ". Finding this approach reductionist , they refute definitions of racism based on social power , which they believe reduce racism to white supremacy in white-majority societies. Thus, the idea that only white people can be racist would be flawed and itself racist. Furthermore, they assert that this approach, which places white people at the center of any discourse on race, leads to impotence in the fight against racism. This helplessness would manifest itself in a feeling of guilt among white people , due to the fact that they cannot do anything individually against racism since they are oppressors by virtue of their skin color , and a feeling of helplessness among ethnic minorities , who would be forced to admit that racism is a condition that they cannot change. This approach would also encourage passivity, both among white people not participating in the anti-racist struggle, who would be content with their assigned role as the dominant group, and among racial minorities, who would reject any responsibility because of their minority status.

[ 8 ] French political scientist, sociologist and historian Pierre-André Taguieff considers that the notions of institutional racism, structural racism or systemic racism derive from the anti-racist definition of racism produced by revolutionary African-American activists at the end of the 1960s. According to him, these terms are not the expression of a conceptualization of racism, but "a symbolic weapon which consists of reducing racism to white racism supposed to be inherent to 'white society' or to 'white domination', the latter being the only form of racial domination recognized and denounced by neo-antiracists." With white society being conceptualized as intrinsically racist, "it follows that anti-white racism cannot exist. This is a fundamental article of faith of the new 'anti-racist' catechism ." [ 9 ] French political scientist Laurent Bouvet argues that "so-called anti-racist activists who claim that 'anti-white' racism does not exist do so from a purely political perspective", writing that "racism is an anthropological phenomenon, both cultural and social, which affects all human societies." "Racism exists everywhere, in all social groups, and is expressed, practically or theoretically, against the ' Other ' on the basis of an identity linked to skin color or ethno-cultural origin." [ 10 ] For Daniel Sabbagh, research director at the Center for International Research (CERI) in Paris, racism can be understood from three points of view. The first is ideological racism, based on the hierarchy of races defined by a racialization of humanity. The second is attitudinal racism, the subject of studies in social psychology in particular, which conceives racism as a set of negative attitudes towards the racialized other. The third is systemic racism.

[ 11 ] The researcher believes that the use of the expression "anti-White racism" is not abusive to characterize, for example, the ideological or attitudinal racism inevitably produced in reaction to the racism suffered, without common measure, by non-Whites. He cites as examples the ideological speech of Elijah Muhammad , leader of the Nation of Islam (NOI), likening whites to demons, and the video of the French rapper Nick Conrad , entitled "Pendez les Blancs" (Hang the Whites).

[ 11 ] Daniel Sabbagh agrees that if we only consider systemic racism, as a conception of racism, then the expression "anti-white racism" is irrelevant. He believes, however, that racism must be studied in all its dimensions.

[ 11 ] In the media BBC News editor Mark Easton cites the Ross Parker murder case to argue that society has been forced to redefine racism and discard the definition of "prejudice plus power"—a definition which, in Easton's view, tends to only allow ethnic minorities to be victims and whites to be perpetrators. He states, "Describing an incident as racist may say as much about a victim's mindset as the offender. How else can one explain the British Crime Survey finding that 3,100 car thefts from Asians were deemed to be racially motivated?" [ 12 ] Journalist Yasmin Alibhai-Brown argues that the case highlights double standards of racial equality campaigners, suggesting black activists should "march and remember victims like Ross Parker ... our values are worthless unless all victims of these senseless deaths matter equally".

[ 13 ] She writes, "to treat some victims as more worthy of condemnation than others is unforgivable and a betrayal of anti-racism itself".

[ 14 ] In 2006, a Sunday Times investigation by Brendan Montague examined British newspaper archives for coverage of racist crimes, finding "an almost total boycott of stories involving the white victims of attacks" whereas "cases involving black and minority ethnic victims are widely reported".

[ 15 ] The BBC Editorial Standards Committee in 2007 found that "there was no evidence to suggest that the BBC had shown a specific and systemic bias in favour of cases where the victim had been black or Asian", but accepted it had "underplayed its coverage of the Ross Parker case" and repeated the failings in its coverage of the murder of Kriss Donald .

[ 16 ] Following violent acts during French high school demonstrations on March 8, 2005, and their media coverage, journalist Luc Bronner's article in the newspaper Le Monde , entitled "High school student demonstrations: the specter of anti-white violence" [ 17 ] caused a media-political controversy in France over the labeling of this violence as "anti-white".

[ a ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Following Luc Bronner's article, a number of personalities including Ghaleb Bencheikh , Alain Finkielkraut , Bernard Kouchner and Jacques Julliard , launched on March 25, 2005, an "Appeal against 'anti-White racial attacks'", initiated by the left-wing Zionist movement Hashomer Hatzair and the Jewish community radio station Radio Shalom .

[ 18 ] [ 20 ] A signatory of the appeal, Pierre-André Taguieff believes that the violence reveals the existence of anti-White racism in France, a reflection of a "racialization of social conflict" and that racism is not solely the work of Whites.

[ 20 ] Despite the International League Against Racism and Anti-Semitism (LICRA) considering the racist nature of the attacks to be proven, [ 21 ] several anti-racist organizations, such as SOS Racisme , the MRAP and the Human Rights League (LDH), denounced the appeal as "irresponsible".

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In law enforcement Peter Fahy , the former spokesman on race issues for the British Association of Chief Police Officers said: "A lot of police officers and other professionals feel almost the best thing to do is to try and avoid [discussing such attacks] for fear of being criticised. This is not healthy". He added that "it was a fact that it was harder to get the media interested where murder victims were young white men".

[ 22 ] Montague suggests the lack of police appeals in cases involving white victims may be a cause of the lack of media coverage.

[ 15 ] Evidence of this was seen in the Parker case, with the police initially appearing keen to dismiss the possible racist aspect of the murder, stating "there was no reason to believe that the attack was racially motivated".

[ 23 ] Origin of the expression "Anti-white racism" According to Emmanuel Debono, doctor of contemporary history at the Paris Institute of Political Studies , the first major controversies surrounding "anti-white racism" around the world took place in the 1960s in response to the Congo Crisis , particularly in France.

[ 24 ] Pierre-André Taguieff notes that the expression "anti-white racism" appears in the book Racism in the World (1964) by Pierre Paraf , president of the MRAP, at the time a " Third World organization of communist obedience", according to the political scientist. In his book, Paraf asserted, with regard to certain behaviors among African and Asian peoples formerly colonized by Europeans, that "the very nature of racism implies that it is no more foreign to 'men of color' than to whites." The president of the MRAP then emphasized his point: "Anti-Jewish racism, anti-black racism , anti-white racism... whether collective or individual, racism remains one of the great evils from which mankind suffers today." [ 25 ] Taguieff notes that the National Front has effectively instrumentalized the denunciation of "anti-white racism" in France by making it "one of its propaganda themes, and some far-right publicists have seized on the theme in order to criminalize immigration of non-European origin." However, the political scientist stresses that the expression should not be considered "contaminated by its Le Penist use" in order to deny or minimize "the reality of the phenomenon", or to intimidate those who evoke anti-white racism.

[ 26 ] "Reverse racism against whites" The expression "reverse racism against whites" has been used in Zimbabwe to refer to anti-white violence and the ideology of the Zimbabwe African National Union –Patriotic Front ( ZANU–PF ) in the early 2000s, which portrayed whites as enemies of the state, who had to be crushed, and who had to prove their loyalty to it by denouncing their supposed countries of origin, even if they had fought against colonization.

[ 27 ] As such, it should not be confused with so-called " reverse racism ", a term used by opponents of affirmative action and similar color-conscious programs for redressing racial inequality , in the United States and abroad.

[ b ] By country France Further information: Racism in France § Racism against white people Anti-white graffito on a door in France. The text reads: "Here we are racists toward whites and not solidary".

Claims of racism against whites in France have been brought forward by various far-right parties , [ 29 ] and other groups beginning in the 1980s, [ 30 ] including from the right and left . In September 2012, Jean-François Copé , the leader of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), and then incumbent for his reelection , denounced the development of an anti-white prejudice by people living in France, some of them French citizens, against the " Gauls ", a name among immigrants for the native French, according to him, on the basis of these having a different religion, color skin, and ethnic background.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] The former Minister of the Interior , Claude Guéant , went on record stating that this kind of racism is a reality in France and that there is nothing worse than the political elite hiding from the truth.

[ 31 ] When questioned on the subject, Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault , a Socialist , acknowledged that such racism "can exist"; however, he indicated that one must be "very careful when using words of this nature", warning against "a kind of chase behind the ideas of the National Front ".

[ 35 ] His government's Minister of Women's Rights, Najat Vallaud-Belkacem , echoed this view when, in her book Raison de plus!

(2012), she called on everyone to recognize the reality of such racism and to condemn it like all others.

[ 19 ] In December 2023, when questioned about the Crépol attack that led to the death of Thomas Perotto , former Prime Minister Édouard Philippe considered that it is "quite possible that there is a new form of anti-white racism" in France.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] This opinion was shared by Minister of the Interior Gérald Darmanin , who added that "Not saying [that this racism] exists is not telling the truth." [ 38 ] [ 39 ] In March 2025, Government spokesperson Sophie Primas said she has "no shame" in evoking the existence of "anti-white racism." [ 40 ] Later that month, Fabien Roussel , national secretary of the French Communist Party (PCF), declared: "Of course [anti-white racism] exists", for which he was criticized.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Legal cases French law does not categorize racist offenses according to the victim's ethnic origin; the judicial treatment of such offenses never includes the term "anti-white" in the qualification of the incriminating facts. However, the press sometimes uses the term when reporting on court cases involving racism against a white victim.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] For example, in December 2012, the Criminal Court of Versailles sentenced an individual who had called his neighbor a "dirty white woman". Found guilty of "public insults of a racist nature", he was sentenced to a two-month suspended prison sentence with a two-year probation period.

[ 45 ] [ 44 ] In January 2014, a case of assault on a public road, during which insults such as "dirty white" or "dirty French" were uttered, went on trial. At the end of the trial, the Court of Appeal of Paris upheld the aggravating circumstance of "racism".

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] In March 2016, the Court of Appeal of Lyon increased the first instance sentence of an individual convicted of racial insults by three months in prison. The defendant had called a train passenger a "dirty white man, dirty Frenchman.".

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Following the appeal judgment, Alain Jakubowicz , the president of the anti-racist association LICRA, declared that "all forms of racism are condemnable, wherever they come from and regardless of the victim's skin color, origin or religion. While anti-white racism is a relatively marginal phenomenon compared to other forms of racism or antisemitism , it must be subject to the same rigor and reprobation." [ 51 ] [ 49 ] In September 2018, French rapper Nick Conrad broadcast on the web a song and video called "Pendez les Blancs" (Hang the Whites), for which he was later prosecuted.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] In particular, the judges found that "the terms of the song, accompanied by violent and brutal images, directly incite the Internet user to commit attacks on the lives of white people".

[ 55 ] Public opinion In a sociological survey conducted in 2008 by the French Institute for Demographic Studies (INED), which never uses the expression "anti-white racism", it appears that 16% of the majority population of France, i.e. the white population, say they have been the victim of a "racist situation", compared to 32% for immigrants and 36% for descendants of immigrants. 23% of the majority population say they "have not experienced a racist situation but feel exposed to it", compared to 29% for immigrants and 25% for descendants of immigrants. In addition, 10% of people of European origin say they have suffered racist discrimination in the last five years, compared to 26% for immigrants, 31% for descendants of two immigrant parents and 17% for descendants of one immigrant parent. The most reported grounds for discrimination by the majority population are 18% related to origin, compared to 70% for immigrants and 65% for descendants of immigrants.

[ 56 ] In 2012, INED published a new survey conducted between September 2008 and February 2009 on people born between 1948 and 1990, which showed that 18% of people belonging to the "majority population" said they had been "the target of racist insults, remarks or attitudes" compared to 30% for immigrants and 37% for descendants of immigrants.

[ 57 ] However, a study by the same institute concluded in 2016 that the phenomenon was "not a mass experience": "Racism by minorities against majorities can be verbally offensive, or even physically aggressive, but it is not systematic and does not produce social inequalities." [ 58 ] The same year, Jean-Luc Primon, a sociologist at the University of Nice and researcher at the Migrations and Society Research Unit (URMIS), participating in the TEO survey, the first INED database on origins, declared that a little more than one person in ten of those classified in the so-called "majority" population (neither immigrants, nor from immigration, nor from overseas) declared having experienced racism.

[ 59 ] A 2022 survey found that 80% of French people believe that anti-white racism is present in some French communities.

[ 60 ] Haiti Further information: 1804 Haitian massacre "Burning of the Plaine du Cap – Massacre of whites by the blacks." On August 22, 1791, slaves set fire to plantations, torched cities and massacred the white population.

The massacres of almost the entire white population in Haiti in 1804, also referred to as the Haitian genocide , [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] which marked the end of the Haitian Revolution , [ 64 ] [ 65 ] have been partially explained in the context of anti-white racism.

[ 66 ] On February 22, 1804, revolutionary leader Jean-Jacques Dessalines signed a decree ordering that all French people still residing in the country should be put to death.

[ 67 ] Dessalines' secretary Louis Boisrond-Tonnerre complained that the declaration of independence was not aggressive enough, saying that "...we should have the skin of a white man for parchment , his skull for an inkwell , his blood for ink, and a bayonet for a pen!".

[ 68 ] The people chosen to be killed were targeted primarily based on three criteria: "skin color, citizenship and vocation." While some whites, such as Poles and Germans who were granted citizenship and "a few non-French veterans and American merchants, along with some useful professionals such as priests and doctors" were spared, political affiliation was not considered.

[ 68 ] The white victims were almost entirely French, commensurate with their share in the white population of Haiti. About his targets of the massacre, Dessalines' slogan exemplified his mission to eradicate the white population with the saying "Break the eggs, take out the [sic] yoke [a pun on the word 'yellow' which means both yoke and mulatto ] and eat the white." [ 68 ] Upper class whites were not the only target; any white of any socioeconomic status was also to be killed, including the urban poor known as petits blancs (little whites).

[ 69 ] During the massacre, stabbing, beheading , and disemboweling were common.

[ 70 ] Historian Philippe R. Girard also states that if, after 1804 and throughout the 19th century, the presence of whites in the country was negligible, they were perceived, in particular by Haitian nationalists , with an antipathy that amounted to racism, excluding alliances with countries with generally white populations such as the United States and European countries, or considered too light-skinned, such as the Dominican Republic. The black population, a large majority (90% at the beginning of the 19th century), tended to consider themselves the only true Haitian population, calling themselves "authentic", with the exception of the mulattos , who were viewed with great suspicion because of their French fathers as well as their frequent possession of slaves before independence. The word blan , meaning "white man", came to designate the foreigner, and carried a negative connotation that that of neg , literally " negro ", did not have.

[ 71 ] South Africa Further information: Racism in South Africa § Racism against white Africans , and Shoot the Boer On September 12, 2011, Julius Malema , the youth leader of South Africa's ruling ANC , was found guilty of hate speech for singing " Shoot the Boer " at a number of public events.

[ 72 ] Democratic Alliance MP Gwen Ngwenya states that racism aimed at white people in South Africa is often overlooked compared to racism aimed at black people , noting that racism aimed at white people elicits little reaction from the populace.

[ 73 ] According to a comparative study by the trade union Solidarity , South African media give more attention to white-on-black racism, and the South African Human Rights Commission is much more likely to self-initiate investigations into white-on-black racism and is more lenient in cases of black-on-white racism.

[ 74 ] Milton Shain, professor emeritus of the Department of Historical Studies at the University of Cape Town , noted that Indian , Coloureds , and white minorities are increasingly being scapegoated by South Africa's ruling African National Congress (ANC).

[ 75 ] In 2001, former South African president Nelson Mandela criticized the growing racial intolerance of black South Africans in their attitudes toward South Africans of other racial groups.

[ 76 ] After a black person was allegedly killed by two white people, businesses and properties owned by white people and other minorities in Coligny were targeted for destruction by members of the black community.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] According to Sharlene Swartz, a research specialist of the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC), discourses expressing violent resentment towards white populations in South Africa are widespread, citing as an example student protests during which the inscription "Fuck White People" appeared on t-shirts and walls.

[ 79 ] Other reporting noted that on September 12, 2011, Julius Malema , the youth leader of South Africa's ruling ANC , was found guilty of hate speech for singing " Shoot the Boer " at a number of public events.

[ 72 ] Public opinion In a 2018 survey by the South African Institute of Race Relations , white people were the ethnic group that most often reports having been the victim of racism, with 53% of respondents, compared to 47% of Coloureds, 23% of blacks and 20% of Indians. Anti-white tendencies were also reported in the workplace, with 31% of the population favoring hiring preference for blacks over whites, with only 16% of Indians, 13% of Coloureds, and 9% of whites agreeing, compared to 38% of blacks.

[ 80 ] United Kingdom Further information: Racism in the United Kingdom § White Racially motivated violence There have been incidents of violence in the United Kingdom where individuals have attacked white people due to hatred or as a form of racial retaliation. In 1994, Richard Norman Everitt , a 15-year-old white English teenager, was stabbed to death in London. Following ethnic tensions in his neighbourhood, Somers Town , Everitt was murdered by a gang of British Bangladeshis who were seeking revenge against another white boy. A judge described the killing as "an unprovoked racial attack".

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] In 2001, Ross Parker , a 17-year-old white English teenager was murdered in Peterborough , in what has been described as an unprovoked racially motivated crime . He bled to death after being stabbed, beaten with a hammer and repeatedly kicked by a gang of British Pakistani men.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] The 2002 trial judge concluded that they had planned to find "a white male to attack simply because he was white" in the context of "hostility on the part of some of the younger white residents of the city against the Asian community ".

[ 86 ] In 2004, Kriss Donald , a 15-year-old white Scottish teenager was kidnapped , abused and murdered in Glasgow on the grounds of ethnicity. Four British Pakistani men were sentenced to life in prison for the crime, and admitted to choosing him because he was white.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] In 2018, Ella Hill, a survivor of the Rotherham child sexual exploitation scandal , said she faced serious racial abuse by her attackers. Race was suggested as one of the factors involved in the failure to address the abuse.

[ 90 ] Public opinion In 2019, a British government inquiry by the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) into racism in universities found that 9% of white British students reported experiencing racial harassment, including anti-English, anti-Welsh and anti-Scottish sentiments (compared to 29% of black students, 27% of Asian students and 22% of other non-white or mixed race students). Academics of color have criticized the Commission for including harassment against white students in the statistics, which they say shows a worrying misunderstanding of racism as it "minimises the racism by including groups who do not experience racial prejudice".

[ 91 ] Prominent academics and student leaders have criticized the Commission for "drawing a false equivalence between what it described as racial harassment against white British students and staff and the racism suffered by their black and minority ethnic peers". The EHRC did not respond to requests to remove anti-white harassment from the report, explaining that "its report made clear that racial harassment predominantly affects black and Asian students".

[ 92 ] United States Further information: Racism in the United States § European Americans , and Black supremacy The speeches of Elijah Muhammad (pictured left) and Louis Farrakhan (right), both leaders of the Nation of Islam (NOI), often emphasized hatred of whites.

There are black supremacists in the United States who advocate the superiority of the "black race", including organized groups such as the Nation of Islam (NOI) and the New Black Panther Party (NBPP). These groups have repeatedly been accused of stirring up racial hatred against whites.

[ 93 ] The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) classifies the NBPP as a black separatist hate group [ 94 ] and says that its leaders "have advocated the killing of Jews and white people", [ 95 ] [ 96 ] while it describes the NOI as having a "theology of innate black superiority over whites".

[ 97 ] The NOI was notably represented by Malcolm X and Khalid Abdul Muhammad , who made anti-white speeches and called for the murder of white Americans and white South Africans.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] According to the NOI, whites were created 6,600 years ago as a "race of devils " by an evil scientist named Yakub , [ 101 ] a story which originated with the founder of the NOI, Wallace D. Fard .

[ 97 ] The speeches of Elijah Muhammad and Louis Farrakhan , both leaders of the NOI, also often emphasized hatred of whites.

[ 99 ] [ 101 ] For example, at an event in Milwaukee in August 2015, Farrakhan said: "White people deserve to die, and they know, so they think it's us coming to do it".

[ 102 ] The United Nuwaubian Nation of Moors , a black supremacist group, founded and led by Dwight York , [ 103 ] [ 104 ] has been described by the SPLC as advocating the belief that black people are superior to white people. The SPLC reported that York's teachings included the belief that "whites are 'devils', devoid of both heart and soul, their color the result of leprosy and genetic inferiority".

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Another black supremacist group, the Nation of Yahweh , founded by Hulon Mitchell Jr.

, also known as Yahweh ben Yahweh, has been described by the SPLC as racist, stating that the group believes that Black people are the true Israelites and whites hold "wicked powers". The SPLC also claims that the group believes that Yahweh ben Yahweh had a Messianic mission to vanquish whites and that it held views similar to those of the Christian Identity movement, which believes that " Aryans " are the true Israelites and non-whites are devils. By 2007, the Nation of Yahweh had eliminated calls for violence and toned down its anti-white rhetoric, but remained black supremacist and antisemitic in its ideology.

[ 107 ] Proponents of the pseudoscientific " melanin theory " argue that whites suffer from a melanin deficiency that makes them inferior to blacks in athletic, intellectual and spiritual terms.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] According to Bernard Ortiz de Montellano, anthropology professor at Wayne State University in Detroit , this theory, which has been popular with some proponents of Afrocentrism and black supremacists, including professor of black studies Leonard Jeffries [ 110 ] [ 111 ] and psychologist Frances Cress Welsing , [ 112 ] [ 113 ] "reactivates biological racism." [ 108 ] In 2024, Donald Trump stated "anti-white feeling" was a problem in the United States. Trump labeled African Americans prosecutors investigating him as "racist" and called the Black Lives Matter movement a "symbol of hate". However, anti-black hate crime was the most common hate crime in the FBI register of reported hate crime in 2022 and higher than anti-white hate crime.

[ 114 ] Racially motivated violence In 2016, former soldier Micah Xavier Johnson perpetrated a shooting in Dallas during a peaceful march of blacks, with the aim of killing police officers as revenge following the recent shootings of black men by law enforcement . Among the motivations was the hatred that Johnson felt for whites.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] An investigation into his online activities uncovered his interest in Black nationalist groups.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Dallas Observer noted several similarities between Johnson and Mark Essex , a discharged U.S. Navy sailor and Black Panther who committed two attacks against White civilians and police officers on December 31, 1972, and January 7, 1973, in New Orleans . The attacks left nine people dead, including five police officers.

[ 120 ] In 2017, a black gunman named Kori Ali Muhammad shot and killed three white men in Fresno, California during the 2017 Fresno shootings . He went on a shooting spree due to his hatred for whites.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] The same year, four African American assailants in Chicago were charged with hate crimes for beating a mentally disabled white man and broadcasting it on Facebook live . The white man was taunted with racial profanities against white people and Donald Trump.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] In 2022, a black woman from New York was charged for assaulting a white woman and stating "I hate White people".

[ 125 ] In 2024, a black man named Joshua Cobb from Trenton, New Jersey was charged for threatening to kill white people.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Public opinion A 2017 poll found that 55% of white Americans believe that white people face discrimination.

[ 128 ] A 2022 poll found that 64% of Republicans polled said white people experience a fair amount of hate or discrimination in society.

[ 129 ] A 2023 YouGov poll found that of Trump 2020 voters , 73% say that racism against white Americans is a problem.

[ 130 ] Zimbabwe Further information: Racism in Zimbabwe § Racism in Zimbabwe (post–1980) , and Land reform in Zimbabwe Under Robert Mugabe 's regime (pictured in 1979), discrimination and violence were perpetrated against the country's white community, with the participation and encouragement of the state.

Following the dissolution of Rhodesia and Zimbabwe's independence from British rule in 1980, the Zimbabwe African National Union –Patriotic Front ( ZANU–PF ) party came to power. A racist ideology developed, with ZANU and ZAPU emphasizing the "sons and daughters of the soil" as genuine citizens as opposed to white aliens by nature ( amabhunu , a term imported from South Africa which refers to the Boers ).

[ 131 ] At the time, most agricultural land was owned by white Zimbabweans .

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] The party, led by Robert Mugabe , implemented racist policies through land reform , confiscating land from whites and evicting them from their farms. Under President Robert Mugabe's regime, discrimination and violence were perpetrated against the country's white community, with the participation and encouragement of the state.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] Most white farmers were dispossessed and several were murdered.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] Mugabe was regularly accused of stoking hostility towards Zimbabwe's white farmers and blaming them for the failure of his land reform to save his power.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] [ 143 ] On several occasions, Mugabe also made statements deemed racist towards whites, [ 137 ] [ 144 ] referring to white Rhodesians as "blood-sucking exploiters", "sadistic killers", and "hard-core racists".

[ 145 ] He called on supporters "to strike fear in the hearts of the white man, our real enemy", [ 146 ] and accused his black opponents of being dupes of the whites.

[ 147 ] In one typical example, taken from a 1978 radio address, Mugabe declared: "Let us hammer [the white man] to defeat. Let us blow up his citadel. Let us give him no time to rest. Let us chase him in every corner. Let us rid our home of this settler vermin".

[ 148 ] Since then, Zimbabwe's white population has steadily declined, from 260,000 in 1975 to around 30,000 in 2014. While whites accounted for 80% of the national income, this agrarian policy has fostered famine in the former corn basket of Africa. From an exporter, the country became an importer.

[ 143 ] In December 2008, the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Tribunal, in the case of Mike Campbell (Pvt) Ltd v Zimbabwe , accused Mugabe and his government of waging a racist political campaign in which land confiscations were carried out in a discriminatory manner.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] The government and the Supreme Court of Zimbabwe contested the tribunal's decision.

[ 151 ] [ 150 ] [ 152 ] However, in 2016, noting the harmful impact of his measures on agricultural production, Mugabe called for the return to the country of white farmers forced into exile.

[ 153 ] In 2017, new President Emmerson Mnangagwa 's inaugural speech promised to pay compensation to the white farmers whose land was seized during the land reform program.

[ 154 ] Rob Smart became the first white farmer whose land was returned after President Mnangagwa was sworn in to office; he returned to his farm in Manicaland province by military escort.

[ 155 ] During the World Economic Forum 2018 in Davos , Mnangagwa also stated that his new government believes thinking about racial lines in farming and land ownership is "outdated", and should be a "philosophy of the past." [ 156 ] Anti-white ethnic slurs Further information: List of ethnic slurs Buckra Cracker Hillbilly Honky Peckerwood Redneck White trash Whitey See also Anti-Americanism Anti-black racism Anti-Europeanism Anti-Western sentiment AfriForum Equal opportunity HC 929002 – anti-white racism case in Brazil (2024) In-group favoritism Jeremy Carl Outgroup favoritism Racial color blindness Substantive equality Notes ^ This article mentioned the comments of young people from housing estates who claimed to have participated in the violence: "In the discourse of these young people, there were economic explanations ("making easy money"), playful explanations ("the pleasure of hitting") and a mixture of racism and social jealousy ("taking revenge on Whites")." [ 17 ] ^ According to Ansell, "Reverse racism is a concept commonly associated with conservative opposition to affirmative action and other color-conscious victories of the civil rights movement in the United States and anti-racist movements abroad. While traditional forms of racism involve prejudice and discrimination on the part of whites against blacks, reverse racism is alleged to be a new form of anti-white racism practiced by blacks and/or the so-called civil rights establishment (alternately referred to as the anti-racism industry)." [ 28 ] References ^ Kodjo-Grandvaux, Séverine (October 13, 2019).

"Racisme : « La couleur demeure un marqueur de privilèges »" [Racism: "Color remains a marker of privilege"].

Le Monde (in French) . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ Garcia 1999 , p. 1–32.

^ Lentin 2018 , p. 400–414.

^ Desmond, M. & Emirbayer, M. 2009 , p. 335–355.

^ Ansell 2013 , p. 75, 127, 129, 136.

^ Cashmore et al. 1996 , p. 322.

^ Feagin 2006 .

^ Sawrikar & Katz 2010 .

^ Boucaud-Victoire, Kévin (October 25, 2020).

"Pierre-André Taguieff : "Ce pseudo-antiracisme rend la pensée raciale acceptable" " [Pierre-André Taguieff: "This pseudo-anti-racism makes racial thinking acceptable"].

www.marianne.net (in French) . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ "Laurent Bouvet: «En parlant de "culture blanche", Lilian Thuram diffuse un discours essentialiste»" .

Le Figaro (in French). September 6, 2019 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ a b c Sabbagh, Daniel (November 16, 2020).

"Le « racisme anti-Blancs » existe-t-il ?" [Does "anti-White racism" exist?].

Cogito (in French) . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ Easton, Mark (November 8, 2006).

"Racism and race crime redefined" .

BBC News . London, UK: BBC . Retrieved July 29, 2011 .

^ Alibhai-Brown, Yasmin (February 3, 2003).

"Brown/Black racism is every bit as bad as white racism" .

The Independent . London, UK: Independent Print Limited. Archived from the original on January 31, 2010 . Retrieved July 28, 2011 .

^ Alibhai Brown, Yasmin (October 26, 2006). "When the victim is white, does anyone care?".

London Evening Standard .

ISSN 2041-4404 .

^ a b Montague, Brendan (November 12, 2006).

"The hidden white victims of racism" .

The Sunday Times . London, UK: News UK. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011 . Retrieved July 29, 2011 .

^ "Editorial Standards Findings: Appeals to the Trust and other editorial standards matters considered by the Editorial Standards Committee" (PDF) . The BBC Trust. October 30, 2007. p. 3 . Retrieved May 2, 2014 .

^ a b "Manifestations de lycéens : le spectre des violences anti-"Blancs" " [High school demonstrations: the spectre of anti-"White" violence].

Le Monde (in French). March 15, 2005 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ a b c "Un appel controversé contre le racisme "anti-blancs" " [A controversial appeal against "anti-white" racism].

Le Nouvel Obs (in French). March 31, 2005 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ a b c "Une association réveille le débat sur le « racisme anti-Blanc »" [An association revives the debate on "anti-white racism"].

Le Point (in French). February 2, 2018 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ a b "Un appel est lancé contre les "ratonnades anti-Blancs" " [An appeal is launched against "anti-white racial attacks"].

Le Monde (in French). March 25, 2005 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ Licra, Appel contre "ratonnades anti-blancs" : polémique surprenante [Appeal against "anti-white racial attacks": surprising controversy] (in French), in AFP , 30 March 2005 ^ Barnett, Antony (October 22, 2006).

"Racial murders: nearly half the victims are white" .

The Guardian . London.

^ "Teenager beaten to death" .

BBC News . London: BBC. September 21, 2001 . Retrieved April 25, 2014 .

^ Debono 2020 .

^ Taguieff 2015 , p. 160–161.

^ Taguieff 2015 , p. 168–169.

^ Alois S. Mlambo (October 30, 2012).

"Becoming Zimbabwe or Becoming Zimbabwean: identity, nationalism and state building in the historical context of Southern Africa [Inaugural Lecture presented at the University of Pretoria, South Africa on 30 October 2012]" (PDF) .

repository.up.ac.za .

University of Pretoria . p. 15 . Retrieved March 15, 2025 .

^ Ansell 2013 , p. 135.

^ Mestre, Abel; Monnot, Caroline (September 26, 2012).

"Comment l'extrême droite a fait du "racisme anti-blanc" une arme politique" [How the far right turned "anti-white racism" into a political weapon].

Le Monde (in French) . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Möschel 2014 , p. 119.

^ a b "«Racisme anti-blanc» : Copé persiste et signe" ["Anti-white racism": Copé is sticking to his guns].

Libération (in French). September 27, 2012 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Copé, Jean-François (September 26, 2012).

"Copé dénonce l'existence d'un «racisme anti-Blanc»" [Copé denounces the existence of "anti-White racism"].

Le Figaro (in French) . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ "Les modérés de l'UMP avalent difficilement le pain au chocolat de Copé" [UMP moderates find Copé's pain au chocolat hard to swallow].

L'Express (in French). October 8, 2012 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Bruno Roger-Petit, "Racisme anti-blanc" : comment Jean-François Copé nous a tendu un piège redoutable ["Anti-white racism": how Jean-François Copé set a terrible trap for us], Le Nouvel Obs (in French), 26 September 2012 ^ "Racisme anti-blanc: "ça peut exister", mais "je suis contre les communautarismes", indique Ayrault" [Anti-white racism: "it can exist", but "I'm against communitarianism", says Ayrault].

Le Point (in French). September 27, 2012 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ "Edouard Philippe juge "bien possible qu'il y ait une forme nouvelle de racisme anti-Blancs" en France" [Edouard Philippe considers it "quite possible that there is a new form of anti-white racism" in France].

Franceinfo (in French). December 10, 2023 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ "Crépol : «Il est bien possible qu'il y ait une forme nouvelle de racisme anti-Blancs», dit Édouard Philippe" [Crépol: "It is quite possible that there is a new form of anti-white racism," says Édouard Philippe].

Le Figaro (in French). December 10, 2023 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ Desmonceaux, Juliette (December 11, 2023).

"Gérald Darmanin partage l'avis d'Édouard Philippe sur l'existence d'un "racisme contre les blancs" " [Gérald Darmanin shares Édouard Philippe's opinion on the existence of "racism against whites"].

BFMTV (in French) . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ Darras, Yanis (December 11, 2023).

"Racisme anti-blanc : «Ne pas dire qu'il existe, c'est ne pas dire la vérité», juge Gérald Darmanin" [Anti-white racism: "Not saying it exists is not telling the truth," says Gérald Darmanin].

europe1.fr (in French) . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ "La porte-parole du gouvernement, Sophie Primas, dit n'avoir "pas de pudeur" à évoquer l'existence du concept contesté de "racisme anti-blanc" " [Government spokesperson Sophie Primas says she has "no shame" in evoking the existence of the contested concept of "anti-white racism."].

Franceinfo (in French). March 23, 2025 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ "Fabien Roussel évoque un «racisme anti-blanc», LFI condamne" [Fabien Roussel evokes "anti-white racism", LFI condemns].

Libération (in French) . Retrieved March 28, 2025 .

^ "Fabien Roussel évoque le « racisme anti-Blancs », et s'attire les critiques de LFI" [Fabien Roussel evokes "anti-white racism" and attracts criticism from LFI] (in French). March 26, 2025 . Retrieved March 28, 2025 .

^ "Racisme anti-blanc: Une «affaire symbolique» jugée à Paris" [Anti-white racism: A "symbolic case" goes to trial in Paris].

20 Minutes (in French). October 26, 2012 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ a b "Le racisme anti-Blanc en procès" [Anti-white racism on trial].

Le Point (in French). October 26, 2012 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ "Deux mois avec sursis pour avoir traité sa voisine de «sale blanche»" [Two-month suspended sentence for calling his neighbor a "dirty white woman".].

Libération (in French). December 17, 2012 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ "Première condamnation pour racisme « anti-Blanc »" [First conviction for "anti-white" racism].

Le Monde (in French). January 22, 2014 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ "Le racisme anti-blanc, circonstance aggravante d'une agression à Paris" [Anti-white racism, an aggravating circumstance in a Paris assault].

leparisien.fr (in French). January 22, 2014 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ Mag, Lyon (July 9, 2015).

"Rhône : un jeune condamné à Villefranche pour du racisme "anti-blanc" " [Rhône: young man sentenced in Villefranche for "anti-white" racism].

Lyon Mag (in French) . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ a b "Trois mois ferme pour du racisme anti-blanc" [Three months in jail for anti-white racism].

Le Figaro (in French). April 1, 2016 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ "Lyon - racisme anti-blanc. Condamnation alourdie par rapport à celle du tribunal de Villefranche" .

www.leprogres.fr (in French). April 2, 2016 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ Mathiot, Cédric (September 27, 2018).

"Y a-t-il déjà eu des condamnations en France pour «racisme anti-blanc»?" [Have there ever been convictions in France for "anti-white racism"?].

Libération (in French) . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ McAuley, James (September 27, 2018).

"A black French rapper sang about hanging 'the whites.' He may now be prosecuted" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Nick Conrad fait à nouveau polémique avec «Doux pays», la justice est saisie" [Nick Conrad creates a new controversy with "Doux pays", courts are called].

Le Parisien (in French). May 19, 2019 . Retrieved December 14, 2021 .

^ Laurent, Samuel (September 26, 2018).

"« Pendez les Blancs », itinéraire d'une indignation" ["Hang the Whites", diary of an uproar].

Le Monde (in French) . Retrieved December 14, 2021 .

^ "Avec son nouveau clip, le rappeur Nick Conrad provoque des réactions indignées" [With his new video, rapper Nick Conrad provokes outraged reactions].

L'Express (in French). May 19, 2019 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ Christelle Hamel, Expérience et perception des discriminations et du racisme (in French) , in Trajectoires et Origines , Ined - Insee , 2008 ^ Patrick Simon and Vincent Tiberj, Les immigrés et leurs descendants face à l'identité nationale (in French) , in Les registres de l'identité , Work documents no. 176, Ined, 2012 ^ "Trajectoires et origines" .

Ined - Institut national d'études démographiques (in French) . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ Interview of Jean-Luc Primon by Sylvia Zappi (September 27, 2012).

" "Il y a une ethnicisation des rapports sociaux en France" " ["There is an ethnicization of social relations in France"].

Le Monde (in French) . Retrieved January 27, 2025 .

^ "D'après un sondage exclusif de l'institut CSA pour CNEWS, publié ce mercredi 5 octobre, 80% des Français interrogés pensent qu'un racisme anti-blanc existe en France, dans certaines communautés" ["According to an exclusive survey by the CSA institute for CNEWS, published this Wednesday, October 5, 80% of French people questioned think that anti-white racism exists in France, in certain communities."].

CNEWS . October 5, 2022.

^ Girard 2005a , p. 158–159.

^ Moses & Stone 2013 , p. 63.

^ Forde 2020 , p. 40.

^ Rogers 2010 , p. 353.

^ Orizio 2001 , p. 149, 157–159.

^ Girard 2005a , p. 138–161.

^ Blancpain 2003 , p. 7.

^ a b c Girard 2005a .

^ Girard 2005a , p. 139.

^ Pezzullo 2006 , p. 53.

^ Girard 2005b , p. 55–75.

^ a b Staff reporters (11 September 2011).

"ANC's youth leader found guilty of hate speech for Shoot the Boer song" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 September 2011.

^ Ngwenya, Gwen (January 7, 2016).

" 'Racist' black South Africans who kept their jobs?" .

The Mail & Guardian . Retrieved April 12, 2017 .

^ Brink, Eugene; Mulder, Connie (April 5, 2017).

"How the response to black and white racism differs – Solidarity" .

Politicsweb . Retrieved April 12, 2017 .

^ Shain, Milton (August 2017).

"Racial and Populist Nationalism in South Africa: the Global Nexus" (PDF) .

The Journal of the Helen Suzman Foundation .

80 .

^ "Mandela accuses ANC of racism and corruption" .

The Telegraph . March 3, 2001 . Retrieved March 15, 2025 .

^ Chabalala, Jeanette.

" 'I don't own anything of my own' - Coligny woman who lost home in protests" .

News24 . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

^ Malan, Rian.

"Coligny: The shape of things to come?" .

News24 . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

^ Swartz, Sharlene; Nyamnjoh, Anye-Nkwenti; Roberts, Benjamin; Gordon, Steven (April 2, 2020).

"The 'Fuck White People' Phenomenon in South Africa: A Discursive and Statistical Analysis" .

Politikon .

47 (2): 136– 158.

doi : 10.1080/02589346.2020.1715159 .

ISSN 0258-9346 .

^ Jeffery, Anthea.

"Race rhetoric undermining race relations in SA - Institute of Race Relations" .

www.politicsweb.co.za . Retrieved March 15, 2025 .

^ "At last, a fitting memorial for 15-year-old Richard Everitt" .

Camden New Journal . Retrieved January 7, 2025 .

^ "Gang leader gets life for killing boy" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on November 26, 2024 . Retrieved January 7, 2025 .

^ Topping, Alexandra (September 30, 2024).

" 'I need to own my narrative': man cleared of racist murder in 1995 on years of abuse" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved January 7, 2025 .

^ Morris, Steven (December 20, 2002).

"Three get life in jail for racist killing" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ "Three guilty of teenager's murder" .

BBC News . December 19, 2002 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ "R. v. Ahmed Ali Awan, [2008] EWHC 119 (QB)" . Her Majesty's Court Service. January 30, 2008. Archived from the original on February 18, 2011 . Retrieved December 27, 2011 .

^ Carrell, Severin (November 9, 2006).

"Three jailed for life for race murder of schoolboy" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ "Kriss attacked 'for being white' " .

BBC News . October 5, 2006 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ "Abducted, stabbed and set on fire for being white" .

The Scotsman . November 19, 2004 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ Hill, Ella (2018).

"Voices. As a Rotherham grooming gang survivor" .

The Independent .

^ Batty, David (October 23, 2019).

"Universities failing to address thousands of racist incidents" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ Batty, David (October 23, 2019).

"University racism study criticised for including anti-white harassment" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ Barrett 2001 , p. 253.

^ "New Black Panther Party" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ Evans, Erica (July 24, 2016).

"Who are the New Black Panthers? '60s radicals say new group doesn't embody their ideals" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ Desmond-Harris, Jenée (November 16, 2014).

"The New Black Panther Party, explained" .

Vox . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ a b "Nation of Islam" .

Southern Poverty Law Center .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2019 . Retrieved October 16, 2019 .

^ Gardell 1996 , p. 264.

^ a b Anti-Defamation League , Adl Alerts Nation's Academic Leadership about Virus of Bigotry Being Spread by Khalid Abdul Muhammad , 1 July 1997 ^ "Khalid Muhammad Dies at 53" .

The Washington Post . February 18, 2001 . Retrieved November 12, 2017 .

^ a b "Louis Farrakhan" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved February 20, 2025 .

^ "Farrakhan Promotes Million Man March with Anti-Semitism & Bigotry" .

Anti-Defamation League . August 31, 2015. Archived from the original on March 25, 2019 . Retrieved May 3, 2019 .

^ Palmer 2021a , p. 343–353.

^ Palmer 2021b , p. 694–723.

^ Bob Moser (September 20, 2002).

"United Nuwaubian Nation of Moors Meets Its Match in Georgia" .

Intelligence Report . Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ "Nuwaubian Nation of Moors" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved March 5, 2019 .

^ "Miami-Based Nation of Yahweh Leader Appeals Parole" . Southern Poverty Law Center. January 16, 2007 . Retrieved September 12, 2018 .

^ a b De Montellano 1993 , p. 33–58.

^ Ferguson 2015 , p. 67.

^ Morrow 2001 , p. 19.

^ Ferguson 2015 , p. 56.

^ Walker 2001 , p. 80.

^ Newkirk 2002 , p. 3.

^ Popli/Washington, Nik; Fla, Eric Cortellessa/Palm Beach (April 30, 2024).

"Exclusive: Trump Says 'Anti-White Feeling' Is a Problem in the U.S." TIME . Retrieved August 11, 2025 .

^ "Dallas Police shed light on gunman's possible motives" .

ABC News . July 8, 2016 . Retrieved July 10, 2016 .

The suspect said he was upset about Black Lives Matter. He said he was upset about the recent police shootings.The suspect said he was upset with white people. The suspect stated he wanted to kill racist white people, especially white officers.

^ Bruton, F. Brinley; Smith, Alexander; Chuck, Elizabeth; Helsel, Phil (July 7, 2016).

"Dallas Police 'Ambush': 12 Officers Shot, 5 Killed During Protest" .

NBC News . Retrieved July 7, 2016 .

^ Shapiro, Emily; Jacobo, Julia; Wash, Stephanie (July 9, 2016).

"Dallas Shooting Suspect Micah Xavier Johnson Had Rifles, Bomb-Making Materials in His Home, Police Say" .

ABC News . Retrieved July 9, 2016 .

^ Mahler, Jonathan; Turkewitz, Julie (July 8, 2016).

"Suspect in Dallas Attack Had Interest in Black Power Groups" .

The New York Times . Retrieved July 8, 2016 .

^ Beirich, Heidi; Lenz, Ryan (July 8, 2016).

"Dallas Sniper Connected to Black Separatist Hate Groups on Facebook" . Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved July 11, 2016 .

^ Stone, Erin (August 22, 2016).

"A Mass Murder Of Police Officers 43 Years Ago Is Strikingly Similar To Downtown Dallas Shooting" .

Dallas Observer . Retrieved September 7, 2016 .

^ Helsel, Phil (April 23, 2020).

"California man convicted of murder in racist rampage that killed 3" .

NBC News . Retrieved May 22, 2025 .

^ "California gunman kills three 'in race attack' in Fresno" .

BBC News . April 18, 2017 . Retrieved May 22, 2025 .

^ Almasy, Holly Yan,Sheena Jones,Steve (January 5, 2017).

"Chicago torture video: 4 charged with hate crimes, kidnapping" .

CNN . Retrieved August 11, 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Levin, Sam (January 5, 2017).

"Four arrested over Facebook Live video of man tortured amid anti-Trump taunts" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved August 11, 2025 .

^ Sylla, Amir Vera,Zenebou (August 19, 2022).

"A third Black woman has been charged with a hate crime for allegedly making 'anti-White' statements and assaulting a woman" .

CNN . Retrieved August 11, 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Shanahan, Ed (May 13, 2024).

"Black Man Charged With Threatening to Kill White People in Mass Shooting" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved May 22, 2025 .

^ Helsel, Phil (May 14, 2024).

"New Jersey Marine accused of threats to kill white people, commit mass shooting" .

NBC News . Retrieved May 22, 2025 .

^ Gonyea, Don (October 24, 2017).

"Majority Of White Americans Say They Believe Whites Face Discrimination" .

NPR . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ "Poll: Most Republicans believe discrimination against whites is 'as big a problem' as anti-Black racism" .

Yahoo News . May 30, 2022 . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ Francis, Marquise; Romano, Andrew (July 21, 2023).

"Poll: Trump voters say racism against white Americans is a bigger problem than racism against Black Americans" .

Yahoo News . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2009a , p. 61–78; Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2009b , pp. 1151.

^ Meredith 2002b , p. 120.

^ Mlambo 2014 , p. 222–224, 254–256.

^ Blair 2002 , p. 73; Meredith 2002b , p. 169.

^ "Fast Track Land Reform In Zimbabwe" .

Human Rights Watch . March 8, 2002 . Retrieved February 22, 2025 .

^ Heffer, Simon (August 12, 2001).

"We will not tolerate racism, except in Zimbabwe" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ a b Boisselet, Pierre.

"Zimbabwe : Robert Mugabe, l'homme qui n'aimait pas les Blancs (et inversement)" [Zimbabwe: Robert Mugabe, the man who didn't like Whites (and vice versa)].

JeuneAfrique.com (in French) . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ David McDermott Hughes (April 12, 2010).

Whiteness in Zimbabwe: Race, Landscape, and the Problem of Belonging . Springer. p. xiv.

ISBN 978-0-230-10633-8 .

In 2000, paramilitaries killed their first white farmer in Virginia, Dave Stevens. More typically, armed groups surrounded farmhouses and harassed their occupants (meanwhile assaulting and often killing black farm workers).

^ Meredith 2007 , p. 171–175; Meredith 2002b , p. 167; Howard-Hassmann 2010 , p. 899.

^ Gyldén, Axel (May 1, 2007).

"Le saigneur du Zimbabwe" [The blood lord of Zimbabwe].

L'Express (in French) . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ Blair 2002 , p. 42; Meredith 2002b , pp. 17, 128.

^ "Robert Mugabe refuses to give up" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ a b Jean-Louis Tremblais, Zimbabwe, le naufrage d'Ubu roi [Zimbabwe, the sinking of King Ubu], in Le Figaro Magazine (in French), 24 November 2017, p. 26 ^ Ram, Etwareea (August 16, 2001).

"Le président Robert Mugabe rallume le racisme anti-Blancs au Zimbabwe" [President Robert Mugabe reignites anti-White racism in Zimbabwe].

Le Temps (in French).

ISSN 1423-3967 . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ Blair 2002 , p. 24.

^ Meredith 2002b , p. 17.

^ Meredith 2002b , p. 18.

^ Blair 2002 , p. 11.

^ "Mike Campbell (Pvt) Ltd and Others v Republic of Zimbabwe (2/2007) [2008] SADCT 2 (28 November 2008)" .

www.saflii.org . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ a b Fleming, Lucy (September 18, 2008).

"What's the lie of Zimbabwe's land?" .

BBC News . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ "Zimbabwe vows to defy land ruling" .

BBC News . December 1, 2008 . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ Mike Campbell (Private) Limited v. The Minister of National Security Responsible for Land, Land Reform and Resettlement, Supreme Court of Zimbabwe, 22 January 2008 ^ "Au Zimbabwe, les fermiers blancs prennent leur revanche sur Mugabe" [In Zimbabwe, white farmers take revenge on Mugabe].

Slate Afrique (in French). February 15, 2016 . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

.

^ Oliphant, Roland; Thornycroft, Peta (November 24, 2017).

"President Emmerson Mnangagwa promises to pay compensation for land grabs and clean up Zimbabwe's 'poisoned politics' as he is sworn in" .

The Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ Mutsaka, Farai (January 28, 2018).

"First white farmer gets land back under Zimbabwe's new leader" .

The Independent . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

^ Mnangagwa on land: 'We don't think along racial lines... it's outdated' News24. 26 January 2018 Bibliography Ansell, Amy Elizabeth (2013). " "Hierarchy", "Racialisation", "racism" "Reverse Racism" ".

Race and Ethnicity: The Key Concepts . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-33794-6 .

Barrett, David V. (2001).

The New Believers: A Survey of Sects, Cults and Alternative Religions . London: Cassell and Co.

ISBN 978-0-304-35592-1 .

Blair, David (2002).

Degrees in Violence: Robert Mugabe and the Struggle for Power in Zimbabwe . London and New York: Continuum.

ISBN 978-0-8264-5974-9 .

Blancpain, François (2003).

Un siècle de relations financières entre Haïti et le France : 1825-1922 (in French). L'Harmattan.

ISBN 978-2-7475-0852-0 .

Cashmore, Ernest; Cashmore, Ellis; Van Den Berghe, Pierre L.; Banton, Michael; Jennings, James; Troyna, Barry (1996).

Dictionary of Race and Ethnic Relations . USA: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-15167-2 .

Debono, Emmanuel (2020). "Premières polémiques autour du racisme anti-blanc en France (1960)".

La modernité disputée: textes offerts à Pierre-André Taguieff (in French). CNRS éditions.

ISBN 978-2-271-12952-9 .

De Montellano, Bernard R. Ortiz (January 1, 1993).

"Melanin, afrocentricity, and pseudoscience" .

American Journal of Physical Anthropology .

36 (S17): 33– 58.

Bibcode : 1993AJPA...36S..33D .

doi : 10.1002/ajpa.1330360604 .

ISSN 1096-8644 . Retrieved January 11, 2025 .

Desmond, M.; Emirbayer, M. (2009). "What is Racial Domination?".

Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race .

6 (2): 335– 355.

doi : 10.1017/S1742058X09990166 .

Feagin, Joe R. (2006).

Systemic Racism: A Theory of Oppression . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 0-415-95278-6 .

Ferguson, Stephen C. (2015).

Philosophy of African American Studies: Nothing Left of Blackness . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

56, 66–68 .

ISBN 9781137549976 .

Forde, James (2020).

The Early Haitian State and the Question of Political Legitimacy: American and British Representations of Haiti, 1804—1824 .

Springer Nature .

ISBN 978-3-030-52608-5 .

Garcia, J. L. A. (September 1, 1999). "Philosophical analysis and the moral concept of racism".

Philosophy & Social Criticism .

25 (5): 1– 32.

doi : 10.1177/0191453799025005001 .

Gardell, Matthias (1996).

In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and The Nation of Islam . Durham: Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8223-1845-3 .

Girard, Philippe (2005a). "Caribbean genocide: racial war in Haiti, 1802–4".

Patterns of Prejudice .

39 (2: Colonial Genocide): 138– 161.

doi : 10.1080/00313220500106196 .

ISSN 0031-322X .

S2CID 145204936 .

Girard, Philippe R. (2005b). "Missed Opportunities: Haiti after Independence (1804–1915)".

Paradise Lost: Haiti's Tumultuous Journey from Pearl of the Caribbean to Third World Hot Spot .

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

55– 75.

doi : 10.1057/9781403980311_4 .

ISBN 978-1-4039-8031-1 .

Howard-Hassmann, Rhoda E.

(2010). "Mugabe's Zimbabwe, 2000–2009: Massive Human Rights Violations and the Failure to Protect".

Human Rights Quarterly .

32 (4): 898– 920.

doi : 10.1353/hrq.2010.0030 .

S2CID 143046672 .

Lentin, Alana (July 4, 2018). "Beyond denial: 'not racism' as racist violence".

Continuum .

32 (4): 400– 414.

doi : 10.1080/10304312.2018.1480309 .

Meredith, Martin (September 2007) [2002a].

Mugabe: Power, Plunder and the Struggle for Zimbabwe . New York: PublicAffairs . pp.

171–175 .

ISBN 978-1-58648-558-0 .

Meredith, Martin (2002b).

Our Votes, Our Guns: Robert Mugabe and the Tragedy of Zimbabwe . New York: PublicAffairs.

ISBN 978-1-58648-186-5 .

Mlambo, Alois S. (2014).

A History of Zimbabwe . Cambridge University Press. pp.

222– 224, 254– 256.

ISBN 978-1-139-86752-8 .

Morrow, Lance (June 24, 2001).

"Controversies: The Provocative Professor" .

Time . Vol. 138, no. 8.

Möschel, Mathias (2014).

Law, Lawyers and Race: Critical Race Theory from the US to Europe . Abingdon, UK: Routledge. p. 119.

ISBN 978-0-41-573930-6 .

Moses, Dirk A.; Stone, Dan (2013).

Colonialism and Genocide .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-317-99753-5 .

Ndlovu-Gatsheni, Sabelo J. (2009a).

"Africa for Africans or Africa for "Natives" Only? "New Nationalism" and Nativism in Zimbabwe and South Africa" .

Africa Spectrum .

44 (1): 61– 78.

doi : 10.1177/000203970904400105 .

ISSN 0002-0397 .

Ndlovu-Gatsheni, Sabelo J. (2009b). "Making Sense of Mugabeism in Local and Global Politics: 'So Blair, keep your England and let me keep my Zimbabwe' ".

Third World Quarterly .

30 (6): 1139– 1158.

doi : 10.1080/01436590903037424 .

S2CID 143775424 .

Newkirk, Pamela (2002).

Within the Veil: Black Journalists, White Media . New York University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-5800-7 .

Orizio, Riccardo (2001).

Lost White Tribes: The End of Privilege and the Last Colonials in Sri Lanka, Jamaica, Brazil, Haiti, Namibia, and Guadeloupe .

Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 978-0-7432-1197-0 .

Palmer, Susan J.

(2021a).

"The United Nuwaubian Nation" . In Zeller, Ben (ed.).

Handbook of UFO Religions . Brill Handbooks on Contemporary Religion. Vol. 20.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

343– 353.

doi : 10.1163/9789004435537_017 .

ISBN 978-90-04-43437-0 .

ISSN 1874-6691 .

S2CID 236767801 .

Palmer, Susan J. (2021b). "The Ansaaru Allah Community". In Cusack, Carole M.

; Upal, M. Afzal (eds.).

Handbook of Islamic Sects and Movements . Brill Handbooks on Contemporary Religion. Vol. 21.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

694– 723.

doi : 10.1163/9789004435544_037 .

ISBN 978-90-04-43554-4 .

ISSN 1874-6691 .

Sawrikar, Pooja; Katz, Ilan (2010).

"Only White People can be Racist: What does Power have to do with Prejudice ?" (PDF) .

Cosmopolitan Civil Societies Journal .

2 (1).

Pezzullo, Ralph (2006).

Plunging Into Haiti: Clinton, Aristide, and the Defeat of Diplomacy . Univ. Press of Mississippi.

ISBN 978-1-60473-534-5 .

Rogers, J. A.

(July 6, 2010).

World's Great Men of Color . Vol. II.

Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 978-1-4516-0307-1 .

Taguieff, Pierre-André (2015).

Une France antijuive ? Regards sur la nouvelle configuration judéophobe : antisionisme, propalestinisme, islamisme (in French). Paris: CNRS Éditions.

ISBN 978-2-271-08700-3 .

Walker, Clarence E. (June 14, 2001).

We Can't Go Home Again: An Argument About Afrocentrism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-535730-1 .

v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-white_racism&oldid=1306079021 " Categories : Anti-white racism Prejudice and discrimination by type White (human racial classification) Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from May 2025 Articles with excerpts Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 20:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-white racism 6 languages Add topic

