Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Modifications to the scale 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ballantine scale Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marine biology measurement scale This article is about the scale for measuring shoreline exposure. For other uses of Ballantine, see Ballantine (disambiguation) .

Semibalanus balanoides , a species of acorn barnacle , Ballantine's main indicator of a medium exposure in the mid- littoral zone.

The Ballantine scale is a biologically defined scale for measuring the degree of exposure level of wave action on a rocky shore . Devised in 1961 by W. J. Ballantine, then at the zoology department of Queen Mary College , London , the scale is based on the observation that where shoreline species are concerned "Different species growing on rocky shores require different degrees of protection from certain aspects of the physical environment, of which wave action is often the most important." The species present in the littoral zone therefore indicate the degree of the shore's exposure.

[ 1 ] Summary [ edit ] An abbreviated summary of the scale is given below. The scale runs from 1) an "extremely exposed" shore, to 8) an "extremely sheltered" shore. The littoral zone generally is the zone between low and high tides. The supra-littoral is above the barnacle line.

Scale unit Name Environment Species 1 Extremely exposed Continuous heavy surf Infra-littoral: Alaria dominant.

Mid-littoral: Himanthalia , Gigartina , Chthamalus dominant.

Supra-littoral: dense Porphyra , lichens abundant.

2 Very exposed "Workable only on calm days" Infra-littoral: Alaria less frequent to common, Laminaria digitata dominant.

Mid-littoral: scattered Himanthalia , Gigartina ; Chthamalus abundant and dominant; Balanus balanoides frequent to common.

Supra-littoral: scattered Porphyra.

3 Exposed Occasional full Atlantic storm-waves Infra-littoral: Laminaria dominant.

Mid-littoral: B. balanoides dominant on lower half; Chthamalus on upper with Patella aspera ; Patella vulgata abundant over whole.

Supra-littoral: top shells absent.

Nucella on upper rock, Mytilus in crevices.

4 Semi-exposed Obvious "reduction in wave action" Infra-littoral: Laminaria abundant.

Mid-littoral: Chthamalus , B. balanoides, Fucus serratus , P. vulgata common.

Supra-littoral: occasional Gibbula umbiliacus , Nucella on open rock.

5 Fairly sheltered 6 Sheltered 7 Very sheltered 8 Extremely sheltered Modifications to the scale [ edit ] A modified exposure scale of five stages applying to the shores of the British Isles is given by Lewis (1964): [ 2 ] "Very exposed shores" have a wide Verrucaria zone entirely above the upper tide level, a Porphyra zone above the barnacle level and Lichina pygmaea is locally abundant. The eu-littoral zone is dominated by barnacles and limpets with a coralline belt in the very low littoral along with other Rhodophyta and Alaria in the upper sub-littoral.

"Exposed shores" show a Verrucaria belt mainly above the high tide, with Porphyra and L. pygmaea . The mid shore is dominated by barnacles, limpets and some Fucus . Some Rhodophyta .

Himanthalia and some Rhodophyta such as Mastocarpus and Corallina are found in the low littoral, with Himanthalia , Alaria and L. digitata dominant in the upper sub-littoral.

"Semi-exposed shores" show a Verrucaria belt just above high tide with clear Pelvetia in the upper-littoral and F. serratus in the lower-littoral. Limpets, barnacles and short F. vesiculosus mid-shore.

F. serratus with Rhodophyta, ( Laurencia , Mastocarpus stellatus , Rhodymenia and Lomentaria ).

Laminaria , Saccorhiza polyschides and small algae are common in the sub-littoral.

"Sheltered shores" show a narrow Verrucaria zone at high water and a full sequence of fucoids: Pelvetia , F. serratus , F. spiralis , F. vesiculosus , Ascophyllum nodosum .

L. digitata is dominant in the upper sublittoral.

"Very sheltered shores" show a very narrow zone of Verrucaria, the dominance of the littoral by a full sequence of the fucoids and Ascophyllum covering the rocks.

Laminaria saccharina , Halidrys , Chondrus and / or Furcellaria .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Ballantine (1961), p. 1.

^ Lewis, J R (1964).

The Ecology of Rocky Shores . London: The English Universities Press.

ISBN 0-340-21360-4 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) References [ edit ] Ballantine, W.J. (1961).

"A Biologically-defined Exposure Scale for the Comparative Description of Rocky Shores" (pdf) .

Field Studies Journal .

1 (3) . Retrieved 2013-05-22 .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ballantine_scale&oldid=1057759819 " Categories : Biological literature Marine biology Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 November 2021, at 14:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ballantine scale Add languages Add topic

