Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Global 2 Regional 3 National 4 See also 5 Notes Toggle the table of contents List of zoo associations Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This is a partial list of zoo and aquaria associations : Global [ edit ] Alliance of Marine Mammal Parks and Aquariums (AMMPA) International Marine Animal Trainers Association (IMATA) Species 360 (formerly International Species Information System) (ZIMS database) International Zoo Educators Association (IZE) World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (WAZA) [ 1 ] ZooLex Zoo Design Organization (ZooLex) Regional [ edit ] Pan African Association of Zoos and Aquaria (PAAZAB) Asociación Latinoamericana de Parques Zoológicos y Acuarios (ALPZA) [ 2 ] Asociación Mesoamericana y del Caribe de Zoológico i Acuarios (AMACZOOA) (American) Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) [ 3 ] Eurasian Regional Association of Zoos and Aquariums (EARAZA) [ 4 ] European Association of Zoos and Aquaria (EAZA) [ 5 ] South Asian Zoo Association for Regional Cooperation (SAZARC) South East Asian Zoos Association (SEAZA) Zoo and Aquarium Association (ZAA) (formerly ARAZPA) [ 6 ] Verband der Zoologischen Gärten (VdZ) (Formerly national German association; Includes zoos from Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Spain) National [ edit ] American Association of Zoo Keepers (AAZK) Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) Asociación Colombiana de Parques Zoológicos y Acuarios (ACOPAZOA) Association Nationale des Parcs Zoologiques de France (ANPZ) Austrian Zoo Association (OZO) Board of Directors of Polish Zoological Gardens and Aquaria (RDPOZiA) British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums (BIAZA) [ 7 ] Canada's Accredited Zoos and Aquariums (CAZA) [ 8 ] Central Zoo Authority of India (CZA), Governing Authority of all Zoos in India [ 9 ] Chinese Association of Zoological Gardens & Aquaria (CAZG) [ 10 ] Danish Association of Zoological Gardens and Aquaria (DAZA) Dutch Dier en Park (D&P) 1997.

Dutch Zoo Federation (NVD) [ 11 ] German Animal Park Society (DTG) Iberian Association of Zoos and Aquaria (AIZA) [ 12 ] Indonesian Zoological Parks Association (Persatuan Kebun Binatang Se-Indonesia) (PKBSI) Israeli Zoo Association (IZA) Italian Union of Zoos & Aquaria (UIZA) Japanese Association of Zoos and Aquariums (JAZA) [ 13 ] Malaysian Association of Zoological Parks and Aquaria (MAZPA) Mexican Zoo and Aquaria Association (AZCARM) National Foundation of Zoological Parks and Aquaria (FUNPZA) Society of Brazilian Zoos (Sociedade de Zoológicos do Brasil) (SZB) [ 14 ] The Swedish Association of Zoos and Aquaria (SAZA or SDF) Swiss Association of Scientific Zoos (ZOOSchweiz) Syndicat National des Directeurs de Parcs Zoologiques Français (SNDPZ) Union of Czech and Slovak Zoological Gardens (UCSZ) Zoo Outreach Organisation (ZOO), India is an NGO Zoological Association of America (ZAA) [ 15 ] Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) See also [ edit ] Zoological society (disambiguation) Notes [ edit ] ^ "World Association of Zoos and Aquaria" .

waza.org .

WAZA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "ALPZA" .

alpza.com .

ALPZA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "Association of Zoos and Aquariums" .

aza.org .

AZA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "Eurasian Regional Association of Zoos and Aquariums" .

earaza.ru .

EARAZA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "European Association of Zoos and Aquaria" .

eaza.net .

EAZA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "Zoo and Aquarium Association" .

zooaquarium.org.au .

ZAA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums" .

biaza.org.uk .

BIAZA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "Canadian Association of Zoos and Aquariums" .

waza.org .

CAZA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "Central Zoo Authority" .

cza.nic.in .

CZA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "中国动物园协会" .

cazg.org.cn . 2018-04-11. Archived from the original on 2018-04-11 . Retrieved 2022-12-02 .

^ "Dutch Zoo Federation" .

nvdzoos.nl .

NVD . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "Iberian Association of Zoos and Aquaria" .

eaza.net .

AIZA . Retrieved 27 January 2012 .

^ "Japanese Association of Zoos and Aquariums" .

jazga.or.jp .

JAZA . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "Society of Brazilian Zoos" .

szb.org.br .

SZB . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

^ "Zoological Association of America" .

zaa.org . Retrieved 29 October 2011 .

This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( August 2008 ) v t e Zoos , aquariums , and aviaries Types of zoos Animal sanctuary Animal theme park Aquarium Aviary Bear pit Butterfly house Dolphinarium Herpetarium Insectarium Nature center Marine mammal park Menagerie Oceanarium Penguinarium Pheasantry Petting zoo Reptile centre Safari park Virtual zoo Vivarium Zoo Conservation Biodiversity Captive breeding Conservation biology Endangered species Ex situ conservation In situ conservation Species reintroduction Lists Zoos Aquariums largest Animal sanctuaries Butterfly houses Dolphinariums Conservation topics Former zoos and aquariums Nature centers Zoo associations WAZA members Related Animal rights Animal cruelty Animals in captivity Animal training Behavioral enrichment Frozen zoo Immersion exhibit Nocturnal house Wildlife conservation Zookeeper Zoo emergency response team Zoo key Zoological society Zoology Animals portal Category: Zoos Category: Aquariums Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_zoo_associations&oldid=1222186752 " Categories : Lists of environmental organizations Zoo associations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Incomplete lists from August 2008 This page was last edited on 4 May 2024, at 12:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of zoo associations Add languages Add topic

