Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Diatonic xenharmonic music 2 Tunings, instruments, and composers 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Xenharmonic music 1 language 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Music that uses a tuning system outside of 12-TET Xenharmonicity includes intervals larger than those in 12-tet (<12-tet) and microtonality includes intervals smaller than those in 12-tet (>12-tet).

Play ⓘ Xenharmonic music is music that uses a tuning system that is unlike the 12-tone equal temperament scale. It was named by Ivor Darreg , from the Greek xenos ( Greek ξένος ) meaning both foreign and hospitable . He stated that it was "intended to include just intonation and such temperaments as the 5-, 7-, and 11-tone, along with the higher-numbered really- microtonal systems as far as one wishes to go." [ 1 ] John Chalmers, author of Divisions of the Tetrachord , wrote, "The converse of this definition is that music which can be performed in 12-tone equal temperament without significant loss of its identity is not truly microtonal ." [ 2 ] Thus xenharmonic music may be distinguished from twelve-tone equal temperament, as well as use of intonation and equal temperaments, by the use of unfamiliar intervals, harmonies, and timbres .

Theorists other than Chalmers consider xenharmonic and non-xenharmonic to be subjective. Edward Foote, in his program notes for 6 degrees of tonality , refers to the differences in his response to the tunings he uses, such as Kirnberger and DeMorgan, from "shocking," to "too subtle to immediately notice," saying that "[t]emperaments are new territory for 20th-century ears. The first-time listener may find it shocking to hear the harmony change 'color' during modulations or too subtle to immediately notice." [ 3 ] Diatonic xenharmonic music [ edit ] Music also can share much of the familiar territory of twelve-tone music yet also contain xenharmonic features. For example, Easley Blackwood , author of The Structure of Recognizable Diatonic Tunings (1985), wrote many etudes in equal temperament systems ranging from 12 to 24 tones. These etudes bring out connections and resemblances to twelve-tone music as well as various xenharmonic characteristics, reflected in Twelve Microtonal Etudes for Electronic Music Media .

About his 16-tone etude, Blackwood wrote: [ 4 ] This tuning is best thought of as a combination of four intertwined diminished seventh chords. Since 12-note tuning can be regarded as a combination of three diminished seventh chords, it is plain that the two tunings have elements in common. The most obvious difference in the way the two tunings sound and work is that triads in 16-note tuning, although recognizable, are too discordant to serve as the final harmony in cadences. Keys can still be established by successions of altered subdominant and dominant harmonies, however, and the Etude is based mainly upon this property. The fundamental consonant harmony employed is a minor triad with an added minor seventh.

Darreg explains: "I devised the term 'xenharmonic' to refer to everything that does not sound like 12-tone equal temperament." [ 5 ] Tunings, instruments, and composers [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Music using scales or tuning other than 12-tone equal temperament can be classified as xenharmonic music. This includes other equal divisions of the octave and scales based on extended just intonation .

Tunings derived from the partials or overtones of physical objects with an inharmonic spectrum or overtone series such as rods, prongs, plates, discs, spheroids and rocks occasionally are the basis of xenharmonic exploration.

William Colvig , who worked with the composer Lou Harrison created the tubulong , a set of xenharmonic tubes.

[ 6 ] Electronic music composed with arbitrarily chosen xenharmonic scales was explored on the album Radionics Radio: An Album of Musical Radionic Thought Frequencies (2016) by British composer Daniel Wilson , who composed with frequency-runs submitted by users of a web application that replicated radionics-based electronic soundmaking equipment used by Oxford's De La Warr Laboratories in the late 1940s.

[ 7 ] Elaine Walker (composer) is an electronic musician who writes xenharmonic music by building new types of music keyboards.

[ 8 ] The Non-Pythagorean scale utilized by Robert Schneider of The Apples in Stereo , based on a sequence of logarithms , may be considered xenharmonic, as well as Annie Gosfield 's purposefully "out of tune" sampler-based music using non systematic tunings and the work of other composers including Elodie Lauten , Wendy Carlos , Ivor Darreg , and Paul Erlich .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Bohlen–Pierce scale Regular temperament References [ edit ] ^ Darreg, Ivor (May 1974).

"Xenharmonic Bulletin No. 2" . Archived from the original on February 5, 2012 . Retrieved January 13, 2007 .

^ Chalmers, John H. (1993).

Divisions of the tetrachord: a prolegomenon to the construction of musical scales , p.1. Frog Peak Music.

ISBN 9780945996040 .

^ Foote, Edward (2001).

"Six Degrees Of Tonality The Well Tempered Piano - CD notes" .

UK piano page .

^ Blackwood, Easley.

"Blackwood: Microtonal Compositions" .

^ Robert Smith, Robert Wilhite.

Sound: An Exhibition of Sound Sculpture, Instrument Building and Acoustically Tuned Spaces : Los Angeles Institute of Contemporary Art, July 14-August 31, 1979, Project Studios 1, New York, September 30-November 18, 1979.

^ Haluška, Ján (2003).

The Mathematical Theory of Tone Systems , p.284 . Marcel Dekker.

ISBN 9788088683285 .

^ Wilson, Daniel (2016).

"Radionics in Relation to Acoustics (CD notes in Radionics Radio: An Album of Musical Radionic Thought Frequencies )" .

Sub Rosa .

^ Walker, Elaine (2017-08-03).

"What is Xenharmonic Music?" .

New Music USA . Retrieved 2022-08-11 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sethares, William (2004) Tuning, Timbre, Spectrum, Scale .

ISBN 3-540-76173-X .

External links [ edit ] Microtonality - Web (in Spanish) Microtonal music on CD Homepage for William Sethares The Xenharmonic Wiki , formerly at Wikispaces Xenharmonic Alliance Barbieri, Patrizio.

Enharmonic instruments and music, 1470-1900 Archived 2009-02-15 at the Wayback Machine . (2008) Latina, Il Levante Libreria Editrice Blackwood Microtonal Compositions Easley Blackwood & Jeffrey Kust, on iTunes Includes Fanfare in 19-EDO . Also includes the 16 notes Andantino as the first of the twelve etudes in that collection.

microtonal piano work of Noah Jordan v t e Microtonal music Composers Richard Barrett Béla Bartók Easley Blackwood Jr.

Heinz Bohlen Julián Carrillo Franklin Cox Mildred Couper John Eaton Brian Ferneyhough Michael Finnissy Bjørn Fongaard Alois Hába Christiaan Huygens Charles Ives Ben Johnston György Ligeti Stu Mackenzie Claus-Steffen Mahnkopf Joel Mandelbaum Joe Maneri Roger Redgate John Schneider Sevish Ezra Sims Nicola Vicentino Claude Vivier Elaine Walker Ivan Wyschnegradsky La Monte Young Inventors Glenn Branca Wendy Carlos Ivor Darreg Adriaan Fokker Lou Harrison Yuri Landman Harry Partch Tui St. George Tucker Nicola Vicentino Tunings and scales Non-octave- repeating scales Alpha scale Beta scale Gamma scale Delta scale Lambda scale (Bohlen–Pierce scale) Equal temperament 15 17 19 22 23 24 31 34 41 53 58 72 96 Just intonation Harry Partch's 43-tone scale Double diatonic Concepts and techniques Limit Otonality and Utonality Semitone Sonido 13 Xenharmonicity Tonality diamond Groups and publications Boston Microtonal Society Genesis of a Music Huygens-Fokker Foundation Compositions Beauty in the Beast quarter tone pieces just pieces Mother Sonata for Microtonal Piano Suite for Microtonal Piano Twelve Microtonal Etudes for Electronic Music Media Flying Microtonal Banana K.G.

L.W.

Other topics Enharmonic keyboard Generalized keyboard Modernism (music) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xenharmonic_music&oldid=1304642363 " Category : Microtonality Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2015 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 08:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Xenharmonic music 1 language Add topic

