Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Angles and their impact Toggle Angles and their impact subsection 1.1 Point-of-view (POV) 1.2 Bird's-eye view 1.3 Worm's-eye view 1.4 Dutch angle 2 Types of shots 3 Production techniques 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Camera angle 17 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी עברית Nederlands 日本語 Русский ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Element of cinematography The camera angle marks the specific location at which the movie camera or video camera is placed to take a shot .  A scene may be shot from several camera angles simultaneously.

[ 1 ] This will give a different experience and sometimes emotion. The different camera angles will have different effects on the viewer and how they perceive the scene that is shot. There are a few different routes that a camera operator could take to achieve this effect.

Angles and their impact [ edit ] Types of angles include the following: Extreme wide shot Very wide shot Wide shot Medium shot Two shot Medium close-up Close-up Extreme close-up Where the camera is placed in relation to the subject can affect the way the viewer perceives the subject. Some of these many camera angles are the high-angle shot , low-angle shot , bird's-eye view , and worm's-eye view . A viewpoint is the apparent distance and angle from which the camera views and records the subject.

[ 2 ] They also include the eye-level shot, over-the-shoulder shot , and point-of-view shot . A high-angle (HA) shot is a shot in which the camera is physically higher than the subject and is looking down upon the subject.  The high angle shot can make the subject look small or weak or vulnerable while a low-angle (LA) shot is taken from below the subject and has the power to make the subject look powerful or threatening. A neutral shot or eye-level (EL) shot has little to no psychological effect on the viewer. This shot is when the camera is level or looking straight on with the subject.

Low point of view camera angle employing a forced perspective technique Point-of-view (POV) [ edit ] A Point-of-view (POV) shot shows the viewer the image through the subject's eye. Some POV shots use hand-held cameras to create the illusion that the viewer is seeing through the subject's eyes.

Bird's-eye view [ edit ] A bird’s-eye view [ 3 ] shot is taken directly above the scene to establish the landscape and the actors relationship to it.

Worm's-eye view [ edit ] A worm's-eye view shot looks up from the ground, and is meant to give the viewer the feeling that they are looking up at the character from way below and it is meant to show the view that a child or a pet would have. When considering the camera angle, one must remember that each shot is its own individual shot, and the camera angle should be taken in context of the scene and film.

Dutch angle [ edit ] A dutch angle , also called a canted angle or even simply the tilted angle, is an angle in which the camera itself is tilted to the left or right. The unnatural angle evokes a feeling that the world is out of balance or psychological unrest in the viewer.

Types of shots [ edit ] There are many different types of shots that can be used from these angles. There are extreme long shots which are extremely far away from the subject and might not even show a person at all.

Extreme long shots are usually done in a high angle so the viewer can look down upon a setting or scene. Extreme longs shots are used mainly to open the scene or narrative and show the viewer the setting. The rest of the shots are most typically done in an eye level or point of view shot although it is possible to do any shot with any angle. There is the long shot which shows the subject even though the setting still dominates the picture frame.

Then, there is the medium long shot which makes the subject and the setting have equal importance and has the two about 50/50 in the frame. Then is the medium shot which emphasizes the character and is about a knees to waist up type shot.  Then the medium close up is a shot that has the waist to the chest and up. The next closest shot is the close up which has the shoulders and up or maybe a little tighter on the head.

Finally, there is the extreme close up shot which has one body part usually. This can be an eye, a hand or anything else. These shots can be used with any of the aforementioned camera angles.

[ 2 ] Production techniques [ edit ] During production and post-production , it is necessary to give a unique alphanumeric identity to each camera angle, labeled as "scenes." [ 1 ] For example: "Scene 24C." Camera angle letters are often pronounced on the set using either the NATO phonetic alphabet or the older police-style radio alphabet . For example:  "Scene 24C" would be pronounced as "Scene 24, Charlie." Some letters are avoided because they look like letters or numbers when written (for example an "S" can look like a "5").

See also [ edit ] Anamorphosis Curvilinear perspective Cutaway drawing Desargues's theorem Filmmaking Optical illusion Perspective control Perspective (graphical) Perspective transform Projective geometry Reverse perspective Trompe-l'œil Video production Zograscope References [ edit ] ^ a b Ascher, Steven; Pincus, Edward (1999).

The Filmmaker's Handbook: A Comprehensive Guide for the Digital Age . New York: Plume. p.

214 .

ISBN 9781573221320 .

^ a b Chandler, Daniel .

"Grammar of Television and Film" .

Visual-memory.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 2017-08-23 . Retrieved 2015-12-10 .

^ "All About Camera Angles" . Videomaker.com. November 2002.

Archived from the original on 2018-06-17 . Retrieved 2015-05-04 .

v t e Cinematic techniques Lighting Background Cameo Fill Flood High-key Key Lens flare Low-key Mood Rembrandt Stage Soft Sound Diegetic Non-diegetic Narration Film score Sound effects Shooting Field size Wide / Long / Full American Medium Close-up Italian Two shot Camera placement Perspective Over-the-shoulder Point-of-view (POV) Reverse Trunk Single / multiple-camera setup Camera angle Tilt Aerial High-angle Bird's-eye Crane shot Jib shot Low-angle Worm's-eye view Dutch angle Camera movement Unchained camera technique Tilting Panning Whip pan Hand-held Shaky Tracking Dolly Steadicam SnorriCam Walk and talk Follow Dolly zoom Lens effects Focus Racking Depth of field Shallow Deep Zooming Other techniques Establishing shot Master shot B-roll Freeze-frame shot Long take One-shot Insert v t e Special effects Practical Aerial rigging ( wire-flying ) Air bladder effect Animatronics Bullet hit squib Costumed character Creature suit Dead-character costume Kitbashing Miniature effect ( hanging ) Prosthetic makeup Puppetry Pyrotechnics Rubber mask Matte painting Sugar glass Theatrical blood In-camera Bipacks Bullet time Dolly zoom Forced perspective Front projection Infrared photography Lens flares Lighting effects Multiple exposure Filtration Rear projection Reverse motion Schüfftan process Shutter effects Slit-scan Tilted plane focus Time-lapse Fast motion Slow motion Speed ramping Stop motion Visual Bullet time Chroma key Compositing ( digital ) Computer-generated imagery Go motion Introvision Match moving Optical printing Smallgantics Split screen Stop motion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Camera_angle&oldid=1304121449 " Category : Cinematic techniques Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 03:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Camera angle 17 languages Add topic

