Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description of operation 2 History 3 Applications 4 Design Toggle Design subsection 4.1 Single- and multi-stage 4.2 Recirculation of ring-liquid 4.3 Liquid selection 5 References Toggle the table of contents Liquid-ring pump 9 languages Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano עברית Latviešu Nederlands Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Liquid ring pump ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liquid-ring pump" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Type of rotating positive-displacement pump.

The input port of this liquid-ring pump can be seen at the right side, while the output port is partially obscured at the left. The liquid seal is depicted in blue.

A liquid-ring pump is a rotating positive-displacement gas pump , with liquid under centrifugal  force acting as a seal .

Description of operation [ edit ] Liquid-ring pumps are typically used as vacuum pumps , but can also be used as gas compressors . The function of a liquid-ring pump is similar to a rotary vane pump , with the difference being that the vanes are a rigid part of the rotor and churn a rotating ring of liquid to form the compression-chamber seal. They are an inherently low-friction design, with the rotor being the only moving part. Sliding friction is limited to the shaft seals.

[ 1 ] Liquid-ring pumps are typically powered by an induction motor .

The liquid-ring pump compresses gas by rotating a vaned impeller located eccentrically within a cylindrical casing.  Liquid (often water) is fed into the pump, and by centrifugal acceleration forms a moving cylindrical ring against the inside of the casing.  This liquid ring creates a series of seals in the spaces between the impeller vanes, which form compression chambers.  The eccentricity between the impeller's axis of rotation and the casing geometric axis results in a cyclic variation of the volume enclosed by the vanes and the ring.

A gas (often air) is drawn into the pump through an inlet port in the side of the casing. The gas is trapped in the compression chambers formed by the impeller vanes and the liquid ring. The reduction in volume caused by the impeller rotation compresses the gas, which exits through the discharge port in the side of the casing.

The compressed gas at the discharge of pump contains a small amount of the working fluid, which is usually removed in a vapor–liquid separator .

History [ edit ] The earliest liquid-ring pumps date from 1903, when a patent was granted in Germany to Siemens-Schuckert . US Patent 1,091,529, for liquid-ring vacuum pumps and compressors, was granted to Lewis H. Nash in 1914.

[ 2 ] They were manufactured by the Nash Engineering Company in Norwalk, Connecticut, US. Around the same time in Austria, Patent 69274 was granted to Siemens-Schuckertwerke for a similar liquid-ring vacuum pump.

Applications [ edit ] These simple, but highly reliable pumps have a variety of industrial applications. They are used to maintain condenser vacuum on large steam-turbine generator sets by removing incondensable gasses, where vacuum levels are typically 30–50 mbar. They are used on paper machines to dewater the pulp slurry and to extract water from press felts. Another application is the vacuum forming of molded paper-pulp products ( egg cartons and other packaging). Other applications include soil remediation, where contaminated ground water is drawn from wells by vacuum. In petroleum refining, vacuum distillation also makes use of liquid-ring vacuum pumps to provide the process vacuum. In the plastic extrusion industry they are used  for degassing . Liquid-ring compressors are often used in vapor recovery systems.

Design [ edit ] Single- and multi-stage [ edit ] Single-stage vacuum pump Liquid-ring systems can be single- or multistage. Typically a multistage pump will have up to two cascaded compression stages on a common shaft. In vacuum service, the attainable pressure reduction is limited by the vapor pressure of the ring-liquid. As the generated vacuum approaches the vapor pressure of the ring-liquid, the increasing volume of vapor released from the ring-liquid diminishes the remaining vacuum capacity. The efficiency of the system declines as the limit is approached.

Single-stage vacuum pumps typically produce vacuum to 35 torr (mm Hg) or 47 millibars (4.7 kPa), and two-stage pumps can produce vacuum to 25 torr, assuming air is being pumped and the ring-liquid is water at 15 °C (59 °F)  or less. Dry air and 15 °C sealant-water temperature is the standard performance basis, which most manufacturers use for their performance curves.

Recirculation of ring-liquid [ edit ] Some ring-liquid is also entrained with the gaseous discharge stream. This liquid is separated from the gas stream by other equipment external to the pump. In some systems, the discharged ring-liquid is cooled by a heat exchanger or cooling tower , and then returned to the pump casing. In some recirculating systems, contaminants from the gas become trapped in the ring-liquid, depending on system configuration. These contaminants become concentrated as the liquid continues to recirculate, and eventually could cause damage and reduced life of the pump. In this case, filtration systems are required to ensure that contamination is kept to acceptable levels.

In non-recirculating systems, the discharged hot liquid (usually water) is treated as a waste stream. In this case, fresh cool water is used to make up the loss. Environmental considerations are making such "once-through" systems increasingly rare.

Liquid selection [ edit ] Liquid-ring vacuum pumps can use any liquid compatible with the process as the sealant liquid, provided it has the appropriate vapor pressure properties. Although the most common sealant is water, almost any liquid can be used. The second most common sealant liquid is oil. Since oil has a very low vapor pressure, oil-sealed liquid-ring vacuum pumps are typically air-cooled. For dry chlorine gas applications, concentrated sulfuric acid is used as the sealant.

The ability to use any liquid allows the liquid-ring vacuum pump to be ideally suited for solvent (vapor) recovery. For example, if a process such as distillation or a vacuum dryer is generating toluene vapors, then it is possible to use liquid toluene as the sealant, provided the cooling water is cold enough to keep the vapor pressure of the sealant liquid low enough to pull the desired vacuum.

[ 3 ] Ionic liquids in liquid-ring vacuum pumps can lower the vacuum pressure from about 70 mbar to below 1 mbar.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Liquid-ring pumps .

^ "Liquid Ring Vacuum Pump Technology" .

Gardner Denver . Retrieved December 24, 2022 .

^ google.com ^ "Solvent sealed liquid ring vacuum pump systems" .

^ basionics.com Archived 2009-09-01 at the Wayback Machine Ionic liquids – designable materials for high-performing fluids.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liquid-ring_pump&oldid=1280499719 " Categories : Pumps Gas technologies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 March 2025, at 23:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liquid-ring pump 9 languages Add topic

