Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 On The Qualities of a Physician 2 Works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Ali ibn Ridwan 21 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hausa Italiano Kurdî Latina مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Occitan Русский کوردی ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Egyptian astrologer and astronomer Ali Ibn Radwan 14th century painting of Ali Ibn Radwan ( astronomical clock in St. Nicholas' Church (Stralsund) Born 988 Giza , now Egypt Died 1061  (aged 73) Baghdad , Abbasid Caliphate , now Iraq Occupation Physician , Astrologer , Astronomer Nationality Arab , Egyptian Notable works Commentator of Galen 's Tetrabiblos, Commentator of Ancient Greek Medicine, De revolutionibus nativitatum, Tractatus de cometarum significationibus per xii signa zodiaci, On the Prevention of Bodily Ills in Egypt, Detailed of Supernova SN 1006 Abu'l Hassan Ali ibn Radwan Al-Misri ( Arabic : أَبُو اَلْحَسَنْ عَلِي بْنْ رَضْوَانْ بْنْ عَلِي بْنْ جَعْفَرْ اَلْمِصْرِيِّ ) (c. 988 - c. 1061) was an Arab [ 1 ] of Egyptian origin who was a physician , astrologer and astronomer , born in Giza .

He was a commentator on ancient Greek medicine , and in particular on Galen ; his commentary on Galen's Ars Parva was translated by Gerardo Cremonese . However, he is better known for providing the most detailed description of the supernova now known as SN 1006 , the brightest stellar event in recorded history , which he observed in the year 1006.

[ 2 ] This was written in a commentary on Ptolemy 's work Tetrabiblos .

He was later cited by European authors as Hali , Haly , or Haly Abenrudian . According to Alistair Cameron Crombie [ 3 ] he also contributed to the theory of induction . He engaged in a celebrated polemic against another physician, Ibn Butlan of Baghdad.

[ 4 ] On The Qualities of a Physician [ edit ] In "The Book of Medical Competence" he mentions the traits of the virtuous physician as the one who possesses the following seven characteristics: 1. He should be ethical, intelligent, with good vision, sane, and benevolent.

2. He should be clean and well-dressed.

3. He should treat patients' secrets as confidential, not revealing their illnesses.

4. His desire to cure patients should exceed his desire to profit from them; he should be more willing to cure the needy than the rich.

5. He should be eager to learn and help.

6. He should be pure of heart, honest, and not envious. Nothing about the wealth he has seen or the affairs of women should cross his mind.

7. He must be careful not to prescribe an untested potentially fatal medicine, or one that would cause abortion. He should cure his enemies as he would his loved ones.

Works [ edit ] A commentary on Ptolemy 's Tetrabiblos (the pseudo-Ptolemaic Centiloquy and its commentary, which is sometimes attributed to Ali, is actually the work of Ahmad ibn Yusuf ibn al-Daya ) De revolutionibus nativitatum (The Revolutions of Nativities), edited by Luca Gaurico , printed in Venice (1524) On the Prevention of Bodily Ills in Egypt : a treatise written to refute Ibn al-Jazzar 's claim that Egypt was a very unhealthy place. Ibn Radwan also argues that air (together with other environmental aspects) was fundamental to the health of a population.

[ 5 ] The Book of Medical Competence where he describes the qualities of a physician and more.

References [ edit ] ^ Samy Swayd (10 March 2015).

Historical Dictionary of the Druzes .

Rowman & Littlefield Publishers . p. 57.

ISBN 978-1-4422-4617-1 .

^ "Celestial Delights - Telescope Reviews & Guides - Explore the Wonders of the Universe" .

celestialdelights.info . Archived from the original on 2007-03-11 . Retrieved 2006-11-01 .

^ Augustine to Galileo 2 , p. 25 ^ Schacht, Joseph; Meyerhof, Max: The medico-philosophical controversy between Ibn Butlan of Baghdad and Ibn Radwan of Cairo: a contribution to the history of Greek learning among the Arabs.

Egyptian University. Faculty of Arts. Publication no. 13. Cairo 1937 ^ Pormann, Peter E.; Emilie Savage-Smith (2007).

Medieval Islamic Medicine .

Edinburgh University Press . p. 44.

ISBN 978-0-7486-2066-1 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Ali ibn Ridwan at Wikimedia Commons History of Islamic Science 2001 Columbia dissertation by Jennifer Ann Seymore The Life of Ibn Ridwan and his commentary of Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos ; not open link James H. Holden (1996).

"Arabian Astrology" . Retrieved 2006-10-09 .

"Ali ibn Ridwan: On the Prevention of Bodily Ills in Egypt" (PDF) . Translated by Michael W. Dols. 2006-09-12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-01-03 . Retrieved 2009-03-03 .

Margaret Donsbach (July–August 2006).

"The Scholar's Supernova" .

Saudi Aramco World . Archived from the original on 2009-02-07 . Retrieved 2009-03-04 .

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ali_ibn_Ridwan&oldid=1252627392 " Categories : 980s births 1061 deaths People from Giza Medieval Egyptian astrologers Medieval Egyptian astronomers Physicians from the Fatimid Caliphate 11th-century physicians 11th-century astrologers 11th-century Arab people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 October 2024, at 06:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ali ibn Ridwan 21 languages Add topic

