Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Term and criticism 3 Movements Toggle Movements subsection 3.1 The Sacred Heart painters 3.2 Hlebine School 4 Artists 5 Museums and galleries 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Naïve art 45 languages العربية Arpetan Asturianu Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Lietuvių Magyar მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art by a person lacking formal training For the album, see Naïve Art (album) .

Henri Rousseau 's The Repast of the Lion (circa 1907, Metropolitan Museum of Art ) is an example of naïve art.

Naïve art is usually defined as visual art that is created by a person who lacks the formal education and training that a professional artist undergoes (in anatomy, art history , technique, perspective , ways of seeing).

[ 1 ] When this aesthetic is emulated by a trained artist, the result is sometimes called primitivism , pseudo-naïve art , [ 2 ] or faux naïve art .

[ 3 ] Unlike folk art , naïve art does not necessarily derive from a distinct popular cultural context or tradition; [ 1 ] indeed, at least in the advanced economies and since the Printing Revolution , awareness of the local fine art tradition has been inescapable, as it diffused through popular prints and other media.  Naïve artists are aware of "fine art" conventions such as graphical perspective and compositional conventions, but are unable to fully use them, or choose not to. By contrast, outsider art ( art brut ) denotes works from a similar context but which have only minimal contact with the mainstream art world.

Naïve art is recognized, and often imitated, for its childlike simplicity and frankness.

[ 4 ] Paintings of this kind typically have a flat rendering style with a rudimentary expression of perspective.

[ 5 ] One particularly influential painter of "naïve art" was Henri Rousseau (1844–1910), a French Post-Impressionist who was discovered by Pablo Picasso .

The definition of the term, and its "borders" with neighbouring terms such as folk art and outsider art, has been a matter of some controversy.  Naïve art is a term usually used for the forms of fine art, such as paintings and sculptures, made by a self-taught artist, while objects with a practical use come under folk art.  But this distinction has been disputed.

[ 6 ] Another term that may be used, especially of paintings and architecture, is "provincial", essentially used for work by artists who had received some conventional training, but whose work unintentionally falls short of metropolitan or court standards.

Characteristics [ edit ] Alfred Wallis , 1942, before Noah's Ark , Zander Collection Niko Pirosmani , Deer , 1901 While naïve art [ 7 ] was often viewed (prior to the twentieth century) as outsider art produced by those without formal (or little) training or degrees, it is now a fully recognized art genre, represented in art galleries and academies worldwide.

The characteristics of naïve art have an awkward relationship to the formal qualities of painting, especially not respecting the three rules of the perspective (such as defined by the Progressive Painters of the Renaissance ): Decrease of the size of objects proportionally with distance, Muting of colors with distance, Decrease of the precision of details with distance, The results are: Effects of perspective geometrically erroneous (awkward aspect of the works, children's drawings look, or medieval painting look, but the comparison stops there) Strong use of pattern, unrefined color on all the plans of the composition, without enfeeblement in the background, An equal accuracy brought to details, including those of the background which should be shaded off.

Simplicity rather than subtlety are all supposed markers of naïve art. It has, however, become such a popular and recognizable style that many examples could be called pseudo-naïve .

Whereas naïve art ideally describes the work of an artist who did not receive formal education in an art school or academy , for example Henri Rousseau or Alfred Wallis , 'pseudo naïve' or 'faux naïve' art describes the work of an artist working in a more imitative or self-conscious mode and whose work can be seen as more imitative than original.

Strict naïvety is unlikely to be found in contemporary artists, given the expansion of Autodidactism as a form of education in modern times. Naïve categorizations are not always welcome by living artists, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] but this is likely to change as dignifying signals are known. Museums devoted to naïve art now exist in Kecskemét , Hungary; Kovačica , Serbia; Riga , Latvia; Jaén , Spain; Rio de Janeiro , Brazil; Vicq and Paris , France.

"Primitive art" is another term often applied to art by those without formal training, but is historically more often applied to work from certain cultures that have been judged socially or technologically "primitive" by Western academia, such as Native American, subsaharan African or Pacific Island art (see Tribal art ). This is distinguished from the self-conscious, "primitive" inspired movement primitivism . Another term related to (but not completely synonymous with) naïve art is folk art .

The terms "naïvism" and "primitivism" also exist, and are usually applied to professional painters working in the style of naïve art (like Paul Gauguin , Mikhail Larionov , and Paul Klee ).

[ 10 ] Term and criticism [ edit ] In 1870, in his poem Au Cabaret-Vert, 5 heures du soir , Arthur Rimbaud uses the word naïf to designate “clumsy” pictorial representations: “I contemplated the very naive subjects of the tapestry” , which is perhaps the case of the origin of the naïf employment by Guillaume Apollinaire some time later.

In recent years, an increasingly critical view has developed of the different, often discriminatory terms (e.g. ‘naïve art’, ‘ outsider art ’, ‘primitive art’) and the separation of non-academic and academic art. According to art historian and curator Susanne Pfeffer, being an artist is not a choice but a destiny; only one's background, gender or class determines whether someone can study art and thus be socially recognized as an artist. Art that therefore does not take place within the recognized system is usually rejected by this system. Due to the system's power of definition, which always lies with the system and not with the artists themselves, exclusionary terms are used that are never intended to be inclusive.

[ 11 ] The art critic Jerry Saltz advocates abolishing the separation between ‘outsider art’ and institutionalized, official art and including non-academic art in the presentation of permanent collections in major museums. He calls for artists such as Hilma af Klimt , Bill Traylor , Adolf Wölfli and John Kane to be canonized, as their discrimination tells a false and untruthful story of art history .

[ 12 ] Roberta Smith , art critic for the New York Times , also advocates a dissolution of the separation of non-academic and academic art and calls for museums to integrate non-academic art equally into their collection presentations. Smith points to the outstanding artistic quality of works by self-taught artists, which require a rewriting of the 20th-century art canon.

[ 13 ] In 2023 and 2024, the Sprengel Museum Hannover and the Kunstsammlungen Chemnitz presented the exhibition Which Modernism? In- and Outsiders of the Avant-Garde , with the intention of correcting the view of ‘naive’ artists as ‘outsiders’ and demonstrating their close links to the avant-garde.

[ 14 ] The exhibition described ‘naive art’ as a part of modernism and a stylistic phenomenon of equal status. ‘Naïve’ artists followed their own style, influencing other artists and being influenced by other artists.

[ 15 ] Movements [ edit ] The Sacred Heart painters [ edit ] German art collector and critic Wilhelm Uhde is known as the principal organiser of the first Naïve Art exhibition, which took place in Paris in 1928. The participants were Henri Rousseau , André Bauchant , Camille Bombois , Séraphine Louis and Louis Vivin , known collectively as the Sacred Heart painters.

Hlebine School [ edit ] A term applied to Croatian naive painters working in or around the village of Hlebine , near the Hungarian border, from about 1930. At this time, according to the World Encyclopedia of Naive Art (1984), the village amounted to little more than 'a few muddy winding streets and one-storey houses', but it produced such a remarkable crop of artists that it became virtually synonymous with Yugoslav naive painting.

[ 16 ] Hlebine is a small picturesque municipality in the north of Croatia that in 1920s became a setting against which a group of self-taught peasants began to develop a unique and somewhat revolutionary style of painting. This was instigated by leading intellectuals of the time such as the poet Antun Gustav Matoš and the biggest name in Croatian literature, Miroslav Krleža , who called for an individual national artistic style that would be independent from Western influences. These ideas were picked up by a celebrated artist from Hlebine – Krsto Hegedušić and he went on to found the Hlebine School of Art in 1930 in search of national “rural artistic expression”.

[ 17 ] Ivan Generalić was the first master of the Hlebine School, and the first to develop a distinctive personal style, achieving a high standard in his art.

[ 18 ] After the Second World War, the next generation of Hlebine painters tended to focus more on stylized depictions of country life taken from imagination. Generalić continued to be the dominant figure, and encouraged younger artists, including his son Josip Generalić .

The Hlebine school became a worldwide phenomenon with the 1952 Venice Biennale and exhibitions in Brazil and Brussels.

[ 19 ] Some of the best known naive artists are Dragan Gaži , Ivan Generalić , Maria Prymachenko , Josip Generalić , Krsto Hegedušić , Mijo Kovačić , Ivan Lacković-Croata , Franjo Mraz , Ivan Večenaj and Mirko Virius .

Artists [ edit ] Main article: List of Naïve art artists Museums and galleries [ edit ] Croatian Museum of Naïve Art , Zagreb , Croatia Musée international d'Art naïf Anatole Jakovsky , Nice , France Musée d'Art Naïf – Max Fourny , Paris , France International Museum of Naive Art , Vicq , France Museum of Bad Art , Massachusetts National Folk Decorative Art Museum , Kyiv , Ukraine See also [ edit ] Autodidacticism Anatole Jakovsky Chicago Imagists Neo-primitivism Véronique Filozof References [ edit ] ^ a b Benedetti, Joan M. (19 April 2008).

"Folk Art Terminology Revisited: Why It (Still) Matters" . In Roberto, K. R. (ed.).

Radical Cataloging: Essays at the Front . McFarland. p. 113.

ISBN 978-1-4766-0512-8 .

^ Risatti, Howard (15 September 2009).

"Aesthetics and the Function/Nonfunction Dichotomy" .

A Theory of Craft: Function and Aesthetic Expression . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 223.

ISBN 978-0-8078-8907-7 .

OCLC 793525283 .

^ Levy, Silvano (2008).

Lines of Thought: The Drawings of Desmond Morris . Kettlestone: Kettlestone Press. p. 138.

ISBN 978-0-9560153-0-3 .

OCLC 377804527 .

^ Walker, John Albert (26 April 1992).

Glossary of Art, Architecture, and Design Since 1945 . London: Library Association Publishing. p. 433.

ISBN 978-0-85365-639-5 .

OCLC 26202538 .

^ Matulka, Denise I. (2008).

"Anatomy of a Picture Book: Picture, Space, Design, Medium, and Style § Naïve Art" .

A Picture Book Primer: Understanding and Using Picture Books . Westport: Libraries Unlimited. p. 80.

ISBN 978-1-59158-441-4 .

OCLC 225846825 .

^ Wertkin, Gerard C. (2004). "Introduction". In Wertkin, Gerald C. Encyclopedia of American Folk Art. New York, London: Routledge. pp. xxxiv–xxxvi.

^ Nathalia Brodskaïa L'Art naïf éd. Parkstone International ISBN 9781859956687 ^ Geller, Amy.

"Lure of the Naïve" (PDF) .

amygellerillustration.com/ . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 4, 2012 . Retrieved July 12, 2016 .

^ [translation, [text] Natalia Brodskaia; Darton], adaptation Mike (2000).

Naïve art . New York: Parkstone Press. p. 74.

ISBN 1859953352 .

^ Irina Arnoldova. Painter Sergey Zagraevsky: the view of an art critic ^ Pfeffer, Susanne (2023). "Being an Artist". In Zander, Susanne (ed.).

26 Artists. Works from the Zander Collection . Cologne: Verlag der Buchhandlung Walther und Franz König, Köln. p. 355.

ISBN 978-3-7533-0381-9 .

^ "Jerry Saltz on the Outsider Art Fair — and Why There's No Such Thing As 'Outsider' Art" .

^ "Curator, Tear Down These Walls" .

^ Bußmann, Frédéric; Spieler, Reinhard (2023).

Welche Moderne? In- und Outsider der Avantgarde . Berlin: Distanz Verlag. p. 15.

ISBN 978-3-95476-575-1 .

^ Bußmann, Frédéric; Spieler, Reinhard (2023).

Welche Moderne? In- und Outsider der Avantgarde . Berlin: Distanz Verlag. p. 51.

ISBN 978-3-95476-575-1 .

^ "Hlebine School – oi" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Hlebine School of Art: More than peasant doodles" .

MoonProject . Retrieved 2016-03-17 .

^ Otvorena.hr, Otvorena mreza -.

"The Croatian Museum of Naive Art – Guide to the Permanent Display" .

www.hmnu.org . Archived from the original on 2013-09-27 . Retrieved 2016-03-17 .

^ DK Eyewitness Travel Guide: Croatia . Penguin. 2015-04-07.

ISBN 9781465441737 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Naïve art .

Walker, John.

"Naive Art" .

Glossary of Art, Architecture & Design since 1945 , 3rd. ed. (archived link, April 11, 2012) Bihalji-Merin, Oto (1959).

Modern Primitives: Masters of Naive Painting . trans. Norbert Guterman. New York: Harry N. Abrams.

Fine, Gary Alan (2004).

Everyday genius: self-taught art and the culture of authenticity . Chicago, IL: University Of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-24950-6 .

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Other Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐nnhrm
Cached time: 20250811235443
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.533 seconds
Real time usage: 0.654 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2009/1000000
Revision size: 16451/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 145355/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1594/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80449/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.318/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5866832/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  486.722      1 -total
 38.26%  186.205      1 Template:Reflist
 28.11%  136.828     12 Template:Cite_book
 22.34%  108.757      4 Template:Navbox
 20.95%  101.975      1 Template:Western_art_movements
 12.10%   58.896      1 Template:Short_description
 10.17%   49.498      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.73%   47.381      1 Template:Sister_project
  9.28%   45.154      1 Template:Side_box
  8.50%   41.369      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:192128:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235443 and revision id 1297232442. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Naïve_art&oldid=1297232442 " Categories : Naïve art Art movements Outsider art Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 22:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Naïve art 45 languages Add topic

