Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Membership 2 Functions Toggle Functions subsection 2.1 Supreme court 2.2 Probouleusis 3 Legacy 4 List of known gerontes of pre-Roman Sparta 5 Notes 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Ancient sources 6.2 Modern sources Toggle the table of contents Gerousia 34 languages Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Кыргызча Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Senate of ancient Sparta "Gerusia" redirects here. For the village in Iran, see Gerusia, Iran . For the moth genus, see Gerusia (moth) .

The Spartan Constitution Part of a series on Sparta Spartan Constitution Great Rhetra Legislators Lycurgus Chilon Epitadeus Agis IV Cleomenes III Government List of Kings of Sparta Agiads Eurypontids Gerousia Ephorate Ekklesia Navarchy Social groups Spartiates Perioeci Helots Neodamodes Trophimoi Mothax Sciritae Epeunacti Partheniae Society Agoge Crypteia Spartan army Syssitia Xenelasia Women Cults Aphrodite Ambologera Areia Temple Artemis Caryatis Isora Orthia ) Hyacinth Menelaion Festivals Carneia Gymnopaedia Hyacinthia Xanthika Legacy Laconophilia Laconism Spartan mirage v t e The Gerousia (γερουσία) was the council of elders in ancient Sparta. Sometimes called Spartan senate in the literature, it was made up of the two Spartan kings , plus 28 Spartiates over the age of sixty, known as gerontes . The Gerousia was a prestigious body, holding extensive judicial and legislative powers, which shaped Sparta's policies.

Ancient Greeks considered that the Gerousia was created by the mythical Spartan lawgiver Lycurgus in his Great Rhetra , the constitution of Sparta.

The gerontes were elected through peculiar shouting elections, which were open to manipulation, especially from the kings.

Membership [ edit ] The Gerousia consisted of thirty members in total. Twenty-eight elected members (called gerontes) and the two kings , who were members by right, entering the chamber upon their accession. Unlike the kings, the 28 gerontes had to be at least 60 years old—the age when Spartan citizens were no longer required to serve in the army . Membership of the Gerousia was for life, which made the gerontes' position very prestigious within Spartan society.

[ 1 ] The electoral procedure is known thanks to Plutarch , who wrote in the 2nd century AD, but whose source was a lost study on the Spartan constitution by Aristotle .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] There were no ballots: the gerontes were elected by shouting . The candidates passed one by one before the Spartan citizens , who therefore shouted according to their preference. The loudness of the shouts was assessed by a jury confined into a windowless building, who then declared winner the candidate with the loudest shouts.

[ 3 ] Aristotle considered this system "childish", probably because influential people (such as the kings) could easily manipulate the elections.

[ 4 ] The gerontes were likely drawn from a limited aristocracy composed of only a few families, sometimes called the kaloi kagatoi . Modern scholars have debated since the 19th century on whether these families had a legal privilege on Gerousia membership, [ 5 ] or just a de facto monopoly.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Of the latter opinion, G. E. M. de Ste. Croix compared the situation in Sparta with that of the Roman Republic , where a few gentes monopolised senior magistracies, notably thanks to their patronage network—a practice likely prevalent in Spartan politics.

[ 8 ] As the kings were by right members of the Gerousia, they usually entered the chamber well before the age of sixty and served much longer terms than the ordinary gerontes, which they could use to build their influence there. Several shrewd kings, such as Cleomenes I or Agesilaus II , developed over the years such a network of supporters among the gerontes that they de facto controlled the Gerousia, therefore Sparta's external and internal policies. This patronage of the gerontes by a king is illustrated by the story reported by Plutarch of Agesilaus II offering an ox and cloak to every new member of the Gerousia.

[ 9 ] Paul Cartledge notes that when a king was absent, his nearest relative could cast a vote for him in the Gerousia, which means that at least two gerontes besides the kings were of royal stock (one for each dynasty) and further shows the influence that the kings had on the electoral procedure, as they could engineer the elections of their relatives.

[ 10 ] The Gerousia was probably reformed by the king Cleomenes III (r.235–222), who made the gerontes elected annually. No longer elected for life, the source of the gerontes' prestige was removed and the Gerousia became a more pliable chamber as a result.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Functions [ edit ] Supreme court [ edit ] The Gerousia served as the court in charge of capital cases. A king could even be prosecuted before a special court of 34 members, made of the Gerousia and the five ephors (the defendant king could not sit in the Gerousia during the trial).

[ 13 ] A famous case was the trial of king Pausanias in 403; accused of betrayal for having restored democracy in Athens , he was nonetheless acquitted by a 19-15 decision, in which the other king Agis II had cast his vote against him.

[ 14 ] Thanks to this judicial power, the gerontes were able to significantly influence foreign policy, although they had no constitutional power in that field, because the fear of prosecution before the Gerousia compelled Spartan officials to follow the gerontes' opinion.

[ 15 ] For example, in 371 the king Cleombrotus was advised by his friends to energetically wage war against Thebes to avoid a later trial.

[ 13 ] Probouleusis [ edit ] The Gerousia debated motions which were to be put before the citizen assembly , with the power to prevent any motion from being passed on.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The Great Rhetra suggests that it had the power to overturn decisions made by the Spartan assembly.

[ 18 ] Legacy [ edit ] The name Gerousia continued to be known in Laconia in the Deep or Mesa Mani known as the "Gerontikoi" until recent times.

[ 19 ] In the Parliament of modern Greece , the name of the upper house was Gerousia between 1844–1864 and 1927–1935.

List of known gerontes of pre-Roman Sparta [ edit ] Very few names of gerontes have been preserved before the Roman conquest.

Hetoimaridas, an Heraclid and influential geronte who convinced the Spartans not to go to war against Athens in 475.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Lichas was likely a geronte at the end of the 5th century. He was an Olympic victor and played a significant role in shaping Spartan diplomacy.

[ 22 ] He died in Miletus c.396.

[ 23 ] Etymokles, a friend of king Agesilaus II ; while a geronte, he was also a member of an embassy to Athens when Sphodrias attempted to capture Piraeus in 378.

[ 24 ] Prothöos, perhaps a geronte in 371, he argued for the recall of king Cleombrotus , who was leading an army against Thebes. His call was dismissed, and Sparta was defeated at the subsequent battle of Leuctra .

[ 25 ] Aineidas, a geronte from the middle of the 4th century, only known from an inscription.

[ 26 ] Agasisthenes, a geronte c.150, who made a motion in the Gerousia to send into exile 24 citizens to avoid war with the Achaean League .

[ 27 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Cartledge, Agesilaos , p. 121.

^ Plutarch, Lycurgus , 26.

^ a b Cartledge, Agesilaos , p. 122.

^ Cartledge, Agesilaos , pp. 122, 123, even hints of a cooptation system.

^ Forrest, History of Sparta , pp. 46, 63, 113.

^ Hicks, "Supposed Qualification", p. 23.

^ Cartledge, Agesilaos , pp. 18, 122 ("so it is probably safest to assert only that in practice, de facto rather than de iure , the Gerontes were drawn from a restricted social group").

^ Ste. Croix, Origins of the Peloponnesian War , pp. 353, 354.

^ Ellen G. Millender, "Kingship: The History, Power, and Prerogatives of the Spartans' 'Divine' Dyarchy", in Powell (ed.), A Companion to Sparta , p. 467.

^ Cartledge, Agesilaos , pp. 109, 122.

^ Cartledge, Hellenistic and Roman Sparta , p. 47.

^ Daniel Stewart, "From Leuktra to Nabis, 371–192", in Powell (ed.), A Companion to Sparta, p. 393.

^ a b Cartledge, Agesilaos , p. 123.

^ Cartledge, Agesilaos , p. 351.

^ Ste. Croix, Origins of the Peloponnesian War , pp. 124–126.

^ Holland 2009 , p. 81 ^ Cartledge 2003 , p. 61 ^ Cartledge 2003 , p. 62 ^ Cartledge 2003 , p. 60 ^ Poralla & Bradford, Prosopographie , p. 54.

^ Ste. Croix, Origins of the Peloponnesian War , pp. 143, 170.

^ Cartledge, Agesilaos , p. 188.

^ Pouilloux & Salviat, Lichas, Lacédémonien , p. 390.

^ Cartledge, Agesilaos , p. 136.

^ Cartledge, Agesilaos , pp. 307, 308.

^ Poralla & Bradford, Prosopographie, p. 192.

^ Bradford, Prosopography , p. 10.

References [ edit ] Ancient sources [ edit ] Plutarch , Parallel Lives (Lycurgus, Agesilaus).

Modern sources [ edit ] Cartledge, Paul (2003), The Spartans: An Epic History , London: Pan Books, ISBN 978-1-4472-3720-4 Alfred S. Bradford, A Prosopography of Lacedaemonians from the Death of Alexander the Great, 323 B. C., to the Sack of Sparta by Alaric, A. D. 396 , Munich, Beck, 1977.

ISBN 3-406-04797-1 Paul Cartledge , Agesilaos and the Crisis of Sparta , Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987.

ISBN 978-0-7156-3032-7 —— & Antony Spawforth, Hellenistic and Roman Sparta, A tale of two cities , London and New York, Routledge, 2002 (originally published in 1989).

ISBN 0-415-26277-1 G. E. M. de Ste. Croix , The Origins of the Peloponnesian War , London, Duckworth, 1972.

ISBN 0-7156-0640-9 Forrest, W. G. (1968).

A history of Sparta, 950-192 B.C.

. New York: Norton.

ISBN 9780393004816 .

SBN 393-00481-3 .

R. D. Hicks, " A Supposed Qualification for Election to the Spartan Senate ", The Classical Review , Vol. 20, No. 1 (Feb., 1906), pp. 23-27.

Holland, Tom (2009), Persian Fire , London: Abacus, ISBN 978-0-349-11717-1 Paul Poralla & Alfred S. Bradford, Prosopographie der Lakedaimonier, bis auf die Zeit Alexanders des Grossen , Chicago, 1985 (originally published in 1913).

OCLC 1151065049 J. Pouilloux & F. Salviat, " Lichas, Lacédémonien, archonte à Thasos, et le livre viii de Thucydide ", Comptes rendus des séances de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres , 127-2, 1983, pp. 376–403 Anton Powell (editor), A Companion to Sparta , Hoboken, Wiley, 2018.

ISBN 978-1-4051-8869-2 G. E. M. de Ste. Croix , The Origins of the Peloponnesian War , London, Duckworth, 1972.

ISBN 0-7156-0640-9 Schulz, Fabian (2011), Die homerischen Räte und die spartanische Gerusie , Düsseldorf: Wellem Verlag Tod, Marcus Niebuhr (1911).

"Gerousia" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 11 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 903.

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gerousia&oldid=1287930900 " Categories : Government of Sparta Ancient Greek titles Defunct unicameral legislatures Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 09:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gerousia 34 languages Add topic

