Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Shelf cloud 1.2 Roll cloud 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Arcus cloud 23 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lombard Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A striated shelf cloud, in Massachusetts in July 2022 Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e Low-altitude horizontal cloud formation An arcus cloud is a low, horizontal cloud formation, usually appearing as an accessory cloud to a cumulonimbus .

Roll clouds and shelf clouds are the two main types of arcus clouds. They most frequently form along the leading edge or gust fronts of thunderstorms ; some of the most dramatic arcus formations mark the gust fronts of derecho -producing convective systems . Roll clouds may also arise in the absence of thunderstorms, forming along the shallow cold air currents of some sea breeze boundaries and cold fronts .

Types [ edit ] Shelf cloud [ edit ] A shelf cloud is a low, horizontal, wedge-shaped arcus cloud attached to the base of the parent cloud, which is usually a thunderstorm cumulonimbus, but could form on any type of convective clouds. Rising air motion can often be seen in the leading (outer) part of the shelf cloud, while the underside can often appear as turbulent and wind-torn. Cool, sinking air from a storm cloud 's downdraft spreads out across the land surface, with the leading edge called a gust front . This outflow cuts under warm air being drawn into the storm's updraft . As the lower and cooler air lifts the warm moist air, its water condenses, creating a cloud which often rolls with the different winds above and below ( wind shear ).

People seeing a shelf cloud may believe they have seen a wall cloud . This is likely to be a mistake, since an approaching shelf cloud appears to form a wall made of cloud.  Shelf clouds usually appear on the leading edge of a storm, while wall clouds are usually at the rear of the storm.

A sharp, strong gust front will cause the lowest part of the leading edge of a shelf cloud to be ragged and lined with rising fractus clouds . In a severe case there will be vortices along the edge, with twisting masses of scud that may reach to the ground or be accompanied by rising dust. A very low shelf cloud accompanied by these signs is the best indicator that a potentially violent wind squall is approaching. An extreme example of this phenomenon looks almost like a tornado and is known as a gustnado .

[ 1 ] Underside of a weak shelf cloud A time-lapse photography of shelf cloud just before a thunderstorm in Pondicherry , India A shelf cloud over Enschede , Netherlands A shelf cloud in Durango, Mexico Roll cloud [ edit ] A roll cloud ( Cloud Atlas name volutus ) is a low, horizontal, tube-shaped, and relatively rare type of arcus cloud. They differ from shelf clouds by being completely detached from other cloud features. Roll clouds usually appear to be "rolling" about a horizontal axis. They are a solitary wave called a soliton , which is a wave that has a single crest and moves without changing speed or shape. This rolling is due to the variation in speed and direction of the winds with altitude ( wind shear ).

[ 2 ] One of the most famous frequent occurrences is the Morning Glory cloud in Queensland , Australia ,  which can occur up to four out of ten days in October.

[ 3 ] One of the main causes of the Morning Glory cloud is the mesoscale circulation associated with sea breezes that develop over the Cape York Peninsula and the Gulf of Carpentaria . Such coastal roll clouds have been seen in many places, including California , the English Channel , Shetland Islands , the North Sea coast, coastal regions of Australia, and Nome, Alaska.

However, similar features can be created by downdrafts from thunderstorms or advancing cold front, and are not exclusively associated with coastal regions.

[ 2 ] They have been reported at different locations inland, including Kansas .

[ 4 ] Roll clouds have not been associated with funnel clouds or tornadoes , as they are a horizontal vortex.

[ 2 ] A roll cloud associated with a severe thunderstorm over Racine, Wisconsin , United States Coastal roll cloud in Punta del Este , Maldonado , Uruguay , a type known as Volutus [ 5 ] A sequence of volutus clouds at sea in the Drake Passage of the Southern Ocean Roll clouds over southern Brazil See also [ edit ] Atmospheric convection Horizontal convective rolls (cloud streets) International Cloud Atlas World Meteorological Organization References [ edit ] ^ Meteorological Service of Canada (December 19, 2002).

"Gust fronts and wind squalls" .

Severe Weather Watcher Handbook .

Environment Canada . Archived from the original on June 23, 2006 . Retrieved 2008-06-22 .

^ a b c Dan Bush (January 17, 2006).

"Astronomy Picture of the Day Archive" .

NASA . Retrieved June 1, 2014 .

.

^ Clarke, R. H.; Smith, R. K.; Reid, D. G. (1981).

"The Morning Glory of the Gulf of Carpentaria: An Atmospheric Undular Bore" .

Mon. Wea. Rev .

109 (8): 1726– 1750.

Bibcode : 1981MWRv..109.1726C .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0493(1981)109<1726:TMGOTG>2.0.CO;2 .

^ "Roll clouds slide over Wichita" .

ktvb.com . 28 April 2020 . Retrieved 2023-07-24 .

^ Sutherland, Scott (March 23, 2017).

"Cloud Atlas joins the digital age while adding a dozen new cloud types" .

The Weather Network . Pelmorex Media . Retrieved 13 August 2025 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Arcus clouds .

Meteorological Service of Canada (May 14, 1999).

"Spotter training : Identifying Clouds" .

Environment Canada . Archived from the original on July 15, 2013 . Retrieved 2010-10-07 .

"Stunning shelf cloud captured in Dorset before storm hit" . BBC News. 6 September 2022 . Retrieved 10 September 2022 .

v t e Cloud genera and selected species, supplementary features, and other airborne hydrometeors - WMO Latin terminology except where indicated Mesospheric Extreme-level 80–85 km Noctilucent (NLC) Polar mesospheric clouds Noctilucent type I veils Noctilucent type II bands Noctilucent type III billows Noctilucent type IV whirls Stratospheric Very high-level 15–30 km Nacreous polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) Cirriform nacreous Lenticular nacreous Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) No differentiated sub-types; tends to resemble cirrostratus Tropospheric High-level 3–18 km Cirrus (Ci) Species Cirrus castellanus (Ci cas) Cirrus fibratus (Ci fib) Cirrus floccus (Ci flo) Cirrus spissatus (Ci spa) Cirrus uncinus (Ci unc) Ci-only varieties Cirrus intortus (Ci in) Cirrus vertebratus (Ci ve) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Cirrostratus (Cs) Species Cirrostratus fibratus (Cs fib) Cirrostratus nebulosus (Cs neb) High-level-only mutatus cloud Mutatus non-height specific (see below) Medium-level 2–8 km Altocumulus (Ac) Species Altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas) Altocumulus floccus (Ac flo) Altocumulus lacunosus (Ac la) Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len) Altocumulus stratiformis (Ac str) Altocumulus volutus (Ac vol) Altostratus (As) Altostratus undulatus Nimbostratus (Ns) Multi-level Varieties Nimbostratus virga (Ns vir) Low-level 0–2 km Cumulonimbus (Cb) Towering vertical Species Cumulonimbus calvus (Cb cal) Cumulonimbus capillatus (Cb cap) Cb-only supplementary features Cumulonimbus cauda ((cau) Tail cloud) Cumulonimbus incus (inc) Cumulonimbus murus ((mur) Wall cloud) Cb-only accessories and other Cumulonimbus flumen ((Cb flu) Beaver tail) Overshooting top Hot tower Cumulus (Cu) Variable vertical extent Species Fractus Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) ( Cumulus congestus (Cu con) ( Cumulus castellanus (unofficial alternative name for Cu con)) ( ICAO term for Cu con and "Cu cas" is  Towering cumulus [Tcu])) Other Horseshoe Trade wind cumulus Stratus (St) Species Stratus fractus (St fra) Stratus nebulosus (St neb) St-only genitus cloud and other Stratus silvagenitus (St sil) Fog (Fg) Surface level Stratocumulus (Sc) Species Stratocumulus castellanus (Sc cas) Stratocumulus floccus (Sc flo) Stratocumulus lenticularis (Sc len) Stratocumulus stratiformis (Sc str) Stratocumulus Undulatus Stratocumulus volutus (Sc vol) Low-level-only supplementary features Arcus ((arc) Shelf) Tuba ((tub) Funnel cloud) Low-level-only accessory cloud and other Pileus (pil) Velum (vel) Pannus (pan) Other- Actinoform cloud (Stratocumulus) Non-height specific Varieties Duplicatus (du) Lacunosus (la) Opacus (op) Perlucidus (pe) Radiatus (ra) Translucidus (tr) Undulatus (un) Supplementary features Asperitas (asp) Cavum (cav) Fluctus (flu) Mamma (mam) Praecipitatio (pra) Virga (vir) Mother clouds and human-made clouds (Mother cloud)+genitus (e.g. cumulogenitus (cugen) (Mother cloud)+mutatus (e.g. cumulomutatus (cumut) Homogenitus (hogen) Homomutatus (homut) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arcus_cloud&oldid=1305731113 " Categories : Cumulus Accessory clouds Hidden categories: CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 19:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arcus cloud 23 languages Add topic

