Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biological positivism Toggle Biological positivism subsection 1.1 Physical characteristics 1.2 Intelligence 1.3 Other medical factors 2 Psychological positivism 3 Social positivism 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Positivist school (criminology) 3 languages Bosanski עברית Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School of thought in criminology Criminology and penology Theory Anomie Biosocial criminology Broken windows Collective efficacy Crime analysis Criminalization Differential association Deviance Expressive function of law Labeling theory Psychopathy Rational choice Risk and actuarial criminology Social control Social learning Strain Subculture Symbolic interactionism Victimology Secondary victimisation Victim blaming Types of crime Against Humanity Person State Class Blue-collar White-collar Cold case Perfect Corporate Hate Immigrant International Juvenile Organized Political Public-order State State-corporate Transnational Victimless War Narcotic slavery Methods Comparative Profiling Ethnography Uniform Crime Reports Crime mapping reform sentencing Crime statistics Positivist school Qualitative Quantitative BJS NIBRS Penology Crime prevention Corrections Denunciation Deterrence Incapacitation Sentence Trial Prison Prisoner Solitary confinement Punishment Rehabilitation Recidivism Zero tolerance Criminal justice Participatory Restorative Retributive Right to an effective remedy Utilitarian Transformative Prison abolition Prison reform open Prisoner abuse Prisoners' rights Victims' rights Schools Anarchist Chicago Classical Conflict Critical Environmental Feminist Integrative Italian Law and order Marxist Neo-classical Populist Positivist Postmodernist Realism Left Right Subfields American Anthropological Biosocial criminology Conflict Criminology Culture Cyber Demography Development Environmental Experimental Organizational Political Public Radical criminology Browse Index Journals Organizations People v t e The Positivist School was founded by Cesare Lombroso and led by two others: Enrico Ferri and Raffaele Garofalo . In criminology , it has attempted to find scientific objectivity for the measurement and quantification of criminal behavior. Its method was developed by observing the characteristics of criminals to observe what may be the root cause of their behavior or actions.

[ 1 ] Since the Positivist's school of ideas came around, research revolving around its ideas has sought to identify some of the key differences between those who were deemed "criminals" and those who were not, often without considering flaws in the label of what a “criminal” is.

As the scientific method became the major paradigm in the search for knowledge, the Classical School 's social philosophy was replaced by the quest for scientific laws that would be discovered by experts. It is divided into biological, psychological, and social laws.

Biological positivism [ edit ] If Charles Darwin 's Theory of evolution was scientific as applied to animals, the same approach should be applied to "man" as an "animal". Darwin's theory of evolution stated that new species would evolve by the process of evolution. It meant that creatures would adapt to their surroundings and from that, a new species would be created over time. Biological positivism is a theory or approach that takes an individual's characteristics and behavior that make up their genetic disposition is what causes them to be criminals. Biological positivism in theory states that individuals are born criminals and some are not.

Physical characteristics [ edit ] Historically, medicine became interested in the problem of crime, producing studies of physiognomy (see Johann Kaspar Lavater and Franz Joseph Gall ) and the science of phrenology which linked attributes of the mind to the shape of the brain as revealed through the skull . These theories were popular because they absolved society and any failures of its government of responsibility for criminal behavior.  The problem lay in the propensities of individual offenders who were biologically distinguishable from law-abiding citizens. This theme was amplified by the Italian School and through the writings of Cesare Lombroso (see L'Uomo Delinquente , The Criminal Man and Anthropological criminology ) which identified physical characteristics associated with degeneracy demonstrating that criminals were atavistic throwbacks to an earlier evolutionary form.

Charles Goring (1913) failed to corroborate the characteristics but did find criminals shorter, lighter and less intelligent, i.e. he found criminality to be "normal" rather than "pathological" (cf the work of Hooton found evidence of biological inferiority).

William Sheldon identified three basic body or somatotypes (i.e.

endomorphs, mesomorphs , and ectomorphs ), and introduced a scale to measure where each individual was placed. He concluded that delinquents tended to mesomorphy. Modern research might link physical size and athleticism and aggression because physically stronger people have the capacity to use violence with less chance of being hurt in any retaliation. Otherwise, such early research is no longer considered valid. The development of genetics has produced another potential inherent cause of criminality, with chromosome and other genetic factors variously identified as significant to select heredity rather than environment as the cause of crime ( see: nature versus nurture ). However, the evidence from family, twin, and adoption studies shows no conclusive empirical evidence to prefer either cause.

Intelligence [ edit ] There are a number of reputable studies that demonstrate a link between lower intelligence and criminality.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] However, when studies are conducted among the prison population, they are only studying those criminals actually caught. In other words, it might be that less intelligence people are more likely to be caught, rather than less intelligent people are more likely to commits crimes. For example, individuals with higher intelligence are more likely to avoid being arrested.

[ 5 ] Emotional intelligence has also been closely related to aggression and criminals.

[ citation needed ] People who tend to have a lower emotional intelligence are those that have a hard time managing their emotions and are more prone to act out and perpetrate criminal behavior.

[ citation needed ] Other medical factors [ edit ] Testosterone and adrenaline have been associated with aggression and violence , and the arousal and excited state associated with them.

[ citation needed ] The excessive consumption of alcohol can lower blood sugar levels and lead to aggressiveness, and the use of chemicals in foods and drinks has been associated with hyper-activity and some criminal behaviour.

Psychological positivism [ edit ] Sigmund Freud divided the personality into the id , the primitive biological drives, the superego , the internalised values, and the ego , memory , perception , and cognition . He proposed that criminal behaviour is either the result of mental illness or a weak conscience.

John Bowlby proposed an attachment theory in which maternal deprivation was a factor that might lead to delinquency. This has been discounted in favour of general privation ( Michael Rutter : 1981) or "broken homes" (Glueck: 1950) in which absentee or uncaring parents tend to produce badly behaved children.

Hans Eysenck (1987) stated that, "…certain types of personality may be more prone to react with anti-social or criminal behaviour to environmental factors of one kind or another."  He proposed three dimensions of personality: introversion / extroversion , neuroticism, and psychoticism . For these purposes, personality is the settled framework of reference within which a person addresses the current situation and decides how to behave. Some traits will be dominant at times and then in a balanced relationship to other traits, but each person's traits will be reasonably stable and predictable (see Marshall: 1990 and Seidman: 1994). Hence, once conditioned into a criminal lifestyle, the relevant personality traits are likely to persist until a countervailing conditioning force re-establishes normal social inhibitions. Some forms of criminal behavior such as sexual offences have been medicalized with treatment offered alongside punishment.

Social positivism [ edit ] Main article: Social positivism In general terms, positivism rejected the Classical Theory's reliance on free will and sought to identify positive causes that determined the propensity for criminal behaviour. The Classical School of Criminology believed that the punishment against a crime, should in fact fit the crime and not be immoderate. This school believes in the fundamental right of equality and that each and every person should be treated the same under the law.  Rather than biological or psychological causes, this branch of the School identifies "society" as the cause. Hence, environmental criminology and other sub-schools study the spatial distribution of crimes and offenders (see Adolphe Quetelet , who discovered that crimes rates are relatively constant, and the Chicago School which, under the leadership of Robert E. Park , viewed the city as a form of superorganism, zoned into areas engaged in a continuous process of invasion, dominance, and succession).  Meanwhile, Émile Durkheim identified society as a social phenomenon, external to individuals, with crime a normal part of a healthy society. Deviancy was nothing more than "boundary setting," pushing to determine the current limits of morality and acceptability.

References [ edit ] ^ July 21, Posted; Justice, 2017 | Criminal (2017-07-21).

"Classifying Crime: Major Schools of Criminology" .

Southeastern University Online . Retrieved 2019-11-12 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Silver, Ian A.; Nedelec, Joseph L. (2018-11-01).

"Cognitive abilities and antisocial behavior in prison: A longitudinal assessment using a large state-wide sample of prisoners" .

Intelligence .

71 : 17– 31.

doi : 10.1016/j.intell.2018.09.004 .

ISSN 0160-2896 .

S2CID 149606301 .

^ Loeber, Rolf; Menting, Barbara; Lynam, Donald R.; Moffitt, Terri E.; Stouthamer-Loeber, Magda; Stallings, Rebecca; Farrington, David P.; Pardini, Dustin (2012-11-01).

"Findings From the Pittsburgh Youth Study: Cognitive Impulsivity and Intelligence as Predictors of the Age–Crime Curve" .

Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry .

51 (11): 1136– 1149.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaac.2012.08.019 .

ISSN 0890-8567 .

PMID 23101740 .

^ Hirschi, Travis; Hindelang, Michael J. (2017), "Intelligence and Delinquency: A Revisionist Review" , The Craft of Criminology , pp.

121– 142, doi : 10.4324/9781315131511-10 , ISBN 9781315131511 , retrieved 2023-02-10 ^ Boccio, Cashen M.; Beaver, Kevin M.; Schwartz, Joseph A. (2018-01-01).

"The role of verbal intelligence in becoming a successful criminal: Results from a longitudinal sample" .

Intelligence .

66 : 24– 31.

doi : 10.1016/j.intell.2017.10.003 .

ISSN 0160-2896 .

Further reading [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Goring, Charles. (1913).

The English Convict: A Statistical Study . London: HMSO.

Hooton, Earnest A.

The American Criminal Marshall, W. L.; Laws, D. R. & Barbaree, H. E. (eds.), (1990).

Handbook of Sexual Assault: Issues, Theories, and Treatment of the Offender , New York, NY: Plenum Press.

OpenLearn. (n.d.). Positivist School of Criminology. Retrieved November 26, 2019, from https://www.open.edu/openlearn/society-politics-law/introduction-critical-criminology/content-section-1.2.

Seidman, Bonnie T.; Marshall, W. L.; Hudson, Stephen M.; Robertson, Paul J. (2 July 2016). "An Examination of Intimacy and Loneliness in Sex Offenders".

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

9 (4): 518– 534.

doi : 10.1177/088626094009004006 .

S2CID 145299000 .

Sharma, Neelu; Prakash, Om; Sengar, K. S.; Chaudhury, Suprakash; Singh, Amool R. (2015).

"The relation between emotional intelligence and criminal behavior: A study among convicted criminals" .

Industrial Psychiatry Journal .

24 (1): 54– 58.

doi : 10.4103/0972-6748.160934 .

PMC 4525433 .

PMID 26257484 .

Southeastern University. (2017, July 21). Classifying Crime: Major Schools of Criminology. Retrieved November 26, 2019, from https://online.seu.edu/articles/classifying-crime-major-schools-of-criminology/.

Sulloway, F. J. (2005, December 1). The Evolution of Charles Darwin. Retrieved December 9, 2019, from https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/the-evolution-of-charles-darwin-110234034/.

Wickert, C. (2019, April). Biological theories of crime. Retrieved November 26, 2019, from https://soztheo.de/theories-of-crime/biological-theories-of-crime/?lang=en.

v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Positivist_school_(criminology)&oldid=1291829491 " Categories : Criminology Positivism Social theories Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 17:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Positivist school (criminology) 3 languages Add topic

