Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mechanism 2 Common issues 3 Infill housing programs 4 Leapfrog development in Phoenix, Arizona Toggle Leapfrog development in Phoenix, Arizona subsection 4.1 Common issues in Phoenix 4.2 Arizona government response 4.2.1 Arizona Groundwater Management Act 4.2.2 Development impact fees 4.3 Phoenix's infill housing program 5 References Toggle the table of contents Leapfrog development 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Urbanization process Leapfrog development occurs when developers skip over land to obtain cheaper land further away from cities, thus, leaving huge areas empty between the city and the new development. It can be seen when it comes to the development or urbanization of more rural areas.

Mechanism [ edit ] Leapfrog development can occur for numerous reasons. Often, developers are more likely to hold onto land closer to cities and instead develop less valuable land further from urban centers. Moreover, some developers prefer to build in large open areas as it can be easier and less restricted than building in cities.

[ 1 ] Other reasons for leapfrog development include household preferences, available amenities, minimized commutation costs and the costs and regulations involved in construction.

[ 2 ] Common issues [ edit ] Leapfrog developments can have several common problems, including vacant land left between cities and developments, inefficient land distribution, increased pollution due to an increase in traffic and congestion, and the extension of amenities that can be costly.

[ 3 ] Infill housing programs [ edit ] When leapfrogging occurs, infill development often follows. The eventual development of the vacant land between the city and the leapfrog development is called infill. As infill development increases, leapfrog development will eventually slow over time.

[ 1 ] Leapfrog development in Phoenix, Arizona [ edit ] There are plenty of leapfrog developments outside of the urban center of Phoenix, Arizona , making it an excellent subject to examine the effects of such developments. Additionally, western cities are typically less built-up and enclosed versus northeastern and midwestern cities, making leapfrog developments and their effects more noticeable. Starting in the 1940s, developers in Arizona began to develop communities a considerable distance away from Phoenix as the land prices were very low. These communities are categorized as leapfrog developments as a substantial amount of land was “skipped” over.

Common issues in Phoenix [ edit ] Phoenix's earlier planned communities provided amenities, but that did not prevent problems from arising later. For instance, developers planned on bringing businesses, jobs, libraries, and other amenities to these communities but could not meet the growing demand. Due to the limited employment opportunities within these communities, people living in these developments had to commute, which created concerns about an increase in pollution. Additionally, it was found to be expensive to extend gas, sewage, and water lines from the city and its neighboring areas to the new distant communities.

[ 4 ] Arizona government response [ edit ] Arizona Groundwater Management Act [ edit ] In 1980, the state and local governments in Arizona passed the Arizona Groundwater Management Act, making leapfrogging in more remote Arizona areas more difficult. Under this act, developments were required to show they had access to a one-hundred-year supply of water that would not contribute to the depletion of groundwater . Effectively, this meant that developers had to rely heavily on municipal water-lines, making it far more costly for them to expand in areas distant from existing municipalities.

[ 4 ] Development impact fees [ edit ] The cost of extending infrastructure can be exorbitant, so many places like Phoenix issued development impact fees. Developers would subject to these fees if they built new communities distant from the city. The additional expense discouraged leapfrog developments and removed at least part of the hefty financial burden the city bore by extending infrastructure for these developments.

[ 4 ] Developers and those opposed to the development impact fees argued that these fees would hurt the home buyers by increasing the cost of properties. Additionally, they argued that the fees could hurt lower-income families due to rising rents and delays in the construction of new affordable housing units. Another concern was that impact fees would cause people, businesses, and the associated tax revenue to move to areas without development impact fees.

[ 4 ] However, results of an Arizona task force show that the impact fees would not have a significant effect on homeowners. Impact fees were unlikely to drastically increase home prices, "with a $3,000 fee the increase in the monthly mortgage payment for a 30-year level payments loan at 10 percent would be $52.70." [ 4 ] The only instance in which homeowners and low-income families would be negatively affected would be a situation in which the impact fees increased drastically. but this scenario is judged as unlikely to occur.

[ 4 ] Phoenix decided to suspend these development impact fees in a section of the city due to fear that several commercial developments would leave and opt to develop elsewhere.

[ 4 ] Phoenix's infill housing program [ edit ] Phoenix's Infill Housing Program started in 1995. The program used incentives to encourage building developments or homes on land between leapfrog developments and the city that had been "skipped" over.

[ 4 ] These incentives included eliminating some or all of the cost of fees for permits, zoning, and water, as well as a potentially expedited development process. Phoenix's mayor stated that the Infill Housing Program seems to be successful, but progress is slow.

[ 4 ] Phoenix's infill housing program may be working slowly because infill developments transpire more slowly than other types of developments. A study of leapfrog developments in Maryland found that infill developments occur at an annual rate of about one percent, meaning that the skipped over land is developed at about one percent per year.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Irwin, E., Zhang, W., & Wrenn, D. (2012, November 4). Tests of the urban economic model using a new measure of leapfrog development. Retrieved from https://www.academia.edu/2600520/Tests_of_the_urban_economic_model_using_a_new_measure_of_leapfrog_development ^ Chen, Yong, et al. “Market Thinness, Income Sorting and Leapfrog Development across the Urban-Rural Gradient.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, vol. 66, 2017, pp. 213–223., doi : 10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2017.07.001 ^ Akher, S. T., & Noon, M. H. (2016). Modeling spillover effects of leapfrog development and urban sprawls upon institutional delinquencies: A case for Pakistan. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 216, 274-294.

^ a b c d e f g h i Heim, Carol E. “Leapfrogging, Urban Sprawl, and Growth Management: Phoenix, 1950–2000.” American Journal of Economics and Sociology, vol. 60, no. 1, 2001, pp. 245–283., doi : 10.1111/1536-7150.00063 v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leapfrog_development&oldid=1206172820 " Category : Urban planning Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 February 2024, at 11:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leapfrog development 1 language Add topic

