Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early exploration 1.2 From Age of Exploration to present 1.2.1 Human-powered 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ocean exploration 4 languages 한국어 Македонски Tagalog தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of oceanography describing the exploration of ocean surfaces Atlantic Ocean Ocean exploration is a part of oceanography describing the exploration of ocean surfaces. Notable explorations were undertaken by the Greeks , the Phoenicians , the Romans , the Polynesians , Phytheas, the Vikings , Arabs and the Portuguese . Scientific investigations began with early scientists such as James Cook, Charles Darwin, and Edmund Halley. Ocean exploration itself coincided with the developments in shipbuilding , diving , navigation , depth, measurement , exploration , and cartography .

History [ edit ] Early exploration [ edit ] 4500 BC Around this time, humans began diving into the sea as a source of food gathering, commerce, and possibly even warfare.

4000 BC Egyptians developed sailing vessels, which were probably used only in the eastern Mediterranean near the mouth of the Nile River .

4000 BC - 1000 AD Polynesian colonization of South Pacific Islands.

1800 BC Basic measuring of the depths is done in Egypt.

1500 BC Middle Eastern people explored the Indian Ocean 600 BC Phoenicians developed sea routes around the entire Mediterranean and into the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean . Going around Africa they reached England by sailing along the western European coast. Although they understood celestial navigation , they probably stayed within sight of land whenever possible.

500-200 BC Greeks developed trade routes in the Mediterranean using the length of the day (corrected for the time of the year) to estimate latitude .

450 BC Herodotus produces a map of the Mediterranean region.

325 BC Pytheas , a Greek astronomer and geographer , sailed north out of the Mediterranean, reaching England and possibly even Iceland and Norway. He also developed the use of sightings on the North Star to determine latitude.

c.240 BC Eratosthenes of Cyrene measures the circumference of Earth with a high precision.

[ 1 ] 150 AD Ptolemy produces a map of the Roman world, including lines of latitude and longitude , the continents of Asia , Europe, and Africa and the surrounding oceans.

900-1430 Vikings explore and colonize Iceland , Greenland , Newfoundland .

1002 Leif Erikson reaches North America nearly 500 years before Columbus.

[ 2 ] 1405-1433 Chinese send seven voyages to extend Chinese influence and impress their neighbor states. These expensive voyages are ended after a short time. See Zheng He (1371–1433).

From Age of Exploration to present [ edit ] Further information: European and American voyages of scientific exploration 1492-1504 Christopher Columbus reaches America looking for a searoute to the Indies ; discovering  various lands and islands and establishing a colony on Hispaniola 1498 Vasco da Gama sails around Africa from Portugal reaching India and establishing trade routes 1499-1504 Amerigo Vespucci explores New World 1519-1522 Ferdinand Magellan 's ships circumnavigate the world.

1620 Dutch inventor Cornelis Drebbel builds the world's first submarine and makes several trips in the River Thames near London at a depth of about 12 or 15 feet.

1698-1700 Edmund Halley made probably the first primarily scientific voyage to study the variation of the magnetic compass , sailing as far as 52 deg S. in the Atlantic Ocean . On a previous expedition to St. Helena , he made an important contribution to knowledge of the trade winds.

1768-1780 James Cook explores the southern parts of the oceans looking for the southern continent. He was the first to use a marine chronometer to determine longitude.

1785 Benjamin Franklin writes Sundry Marine Observations on improvements to ships and the Gulf Stream .

1831-1836 Charles Darwin sails on the Beagle, exploring the Galapagos and many other areas.  It is this work which led him to develop the concepts of natural selection and evolution .

1860 First chart of the Gulf Stream published by the United States Coast Survey .

1872-1876 H.M.S. Challenger travels around the world on a scientific mission taking sediment samples, water samples, soundings, and collecting many biological specimens.

1960 Bathyscaphe Trieste dives to what was believed to be the deepest point in the Mariana Trench . A depth of 10,915 meters was observed.

1969 The Ben Franklin (PX-15) drifts submerged for 30 days in the Gulf Stream .

Human-powered [ edit ] The renaissance of ocean exploration occurred in the 20th century, when human-powered exploration became increasingly popular. Via this new medium, pioneering has once again become the goal of ocean explorers .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Oceans portal Deep-sea exploration – Investigation of ocean conditions beyond the continental shelf Exploration – Process of investigating unfamiliar things List of explorers List of maritime explorers Ocean – Body of salt water covering most of Earth Oceanography – Study of physical, chemical, and biological processes in the ocean Office of Ocean Exploration – US government scientific agency Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Timeline of maritime migration and exploration References [ edit ] ^ Russo, Lucio (2004).

The Forgotten Revolution . Berlin: Springer. pp.

273– 277.

^ Sverdrup, Keith A.; Alyn C. Duxbury; Alison B. Duxbury (2005).

An Introduction to the World's Oceans . New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 4.

ISBN 0-07-252807-9 .

^ "Ocean Rowing Society International launches the first real adventure database" .

Guinness World Records . 2021-04-07 . Retrieved 2021-08-12 .

Sources [ edit ] NOAA, Interactive Timeline of significant and interesting events throughout the 200-year history of NOAA and its predecessor organizations.

SeaSky.org - Ocean Exploration Timeline with Credits & Sources NOAA - Sounding Pole to Sea Beam History of Ocean Exploration USC Earth Sciences, History of Oceanography skb's virtual cave - Notable oceanographic expeditions External links [ edit ] Ocean Explorer - Public outreach site for explorations sponsored by the Office of Ocean Exploration.

NOAA, Ocean Explorer History NOAA, Ocean Explorer Gallery - A rich collection of images, video, audio and podcast .

NOAA's Office of Ocean Exploration Deep-sea exploration Archived 2009-04-08 at the Wayback Machine v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal v t e Ancient seafaring Vessels Types Balangay Bangka Beden Coracle Dhow Dragon boat Dugout canoe Fire ship Galley Penteconter Kunlun ship Liburna Longship Multihull Navis lusoria Obelisk ship Outriggers Sakman Single-outrigger Catamaran Trimaran Polyremes Bireme Oared warships Trireme Quadrireme Quinquereme Hexareme Tessarakonteres Raft Reed boat Sailing ship Solar ship Tomol Tākitimu Uru by region Austronesia Egypt Persia Rome Propulsion Paddling Sailing Towing Poling Components Anchor Bow Cabin Deck Figurehead Hull Planking Keel Mast Oar Paddle Rope Rudder Steering oar Sail Sail components Stem Sternpost Strake Tiller Construction Boat building Careening Carvel built Clinker built Dugout Framing Frame-first Shell-first Joinery Lashed-lug Mortise and tenon Phoenician joint Scarf joint Sewn-plank Shipbuilding By region: Egypt Rigging Crab claw Fore-and-aft Lateen Settee Tanja Triangular sail Junk Mast-aft Spritsail Square Armaments Ballista Catapult Corvus Dolphin Fire ship Harpax Ram Sambuca Wrecks and relics Earliest Pesse canoe Dufuna canoe Abydos Moor Sand Dokos Khufu ship Ferriby Boats Dover Bronze Age Boat Uluburun Canaanite Cape Gelidonya Zambratija Rochelongue Austronesia Pontian boat Butuan boats Black Sea‎ Sinop D Greek Kyrenia Leontophoros Syracusia Ashkelon Antikythera Canaanite and Phoenician Bajo de la Campana Canaanite shipwreck Gozo Ma'agan Michael Mazarrón Punic Marsala Punic shipwreck Roman Alkedo Arles Rhône 3 Blackfriars I Caligula's Giant Ship De Meern ships Isis Madrague de Giens Nemi ships Marausa Yassi Ada Nordic Hjortspring boat Nydam boat Lists Oldest surviving Museum ships Surviving ancient ships Navigation, and ports and harbors Navigation Celestial Charts Coastal Lighthouses History Ocean swell Stick chart Periplus Piloting Pilot boat Maritime pilot By region: Inuit Micronesian Polynesia Ports and harbors Actium Aden Adulis Alexandria Apollonia Aradus Arikamedu Arsinoe Avalites Barbarikon Barygaza Basra Berenice Troglodytica Bosphorus Byblos Caesarea Maritima Canopus Carthage Centumcellae Charmutha Chittagong Delos Essina Giao Chỉ Godavaya Guangzhou Jambukola Jeddah Kaveri Poompattinam Kedah Korkai Leptis Magna Lothal Manthai Madurai Malao Mersa Gawasis Myos Hormos Martaban Mueang Phra Rot Muscat Muziris Narbonne Nesis Óc Eo ( Cattigara ) Opone Ostia Antica Palembang Piraeus Portus Augusti Portus Pisanus Prosphorion Ptolemais Theron Puteoli Qal'at al-Bahrain Qandala Quilon Rhacotis Sarapion Satingpra Sidon Socotra Sounagoura Thapsus Trincomalee Tulum Tyndis Tyre Wadi al-Jarf Zanzibar History Prehistory Timeline Britain Oceania Remote Near Ubaid period Indus Valley Civilizations Ancient Egypt Old Kingdom Austronesia Sa Huỳnh Lapita Micronesia Langkasuka Kedah Champa Kutai Tarumanagara Kalingga Srivijaya Sunda Polynesia Minoan Indus Valley Tamilakam Chola Chera Pandya Somalia Dilmun Maya Nuragic Mycenaean Phoenicia Olmecs Carthage Greece Archaic Classical Rome Achaemenid Nabatea Aksum Migration and exploration Peopling of Australia Peopling of Micronesia Austronesian Expansion Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul Ocean exploration Phoenician maritime expansion Sardinia Circumnavigation of Africa Pytheas' voyage to Britain Roman circumnavigation of Britain Timeline Mariners and explorers Henenu Euthymenes Hanno the Navigator Himilco Sataspes Androsthenes of Thasos Archias of Pella Alexander the Great Nearchus Pytheas Megasthenes Xu Fu Hippalus Julius Caesar Eudoxus of Cyzicus Maes Titianus Military Navies Egyptian Achaemenid Greek Roman Battles Mediterranean: Alashiya Nile Delta Salamis Artemisium Eurymedon Naupactus Olpae Syracuse Cynossema Arginusae Mytilene Hellespont Echinades Salamis II Mylae Cape Hermaeum Ecnomus Drepana Aegates Lake Trasimene Chios Myonessus Nile Naulochus Mycale Actium Tactics Boarding Grappling Incendiaries Oared vessels Sailing ships Greek navy Ramming By region China India Odisha Japan Rome South America Rafts Economy and trade Whaling Fishing Egypt Land of Punt Indo–Mesopotamia relations Meluhha Tin Spice trade Austronesian network Sa Huynh-Kalanay Incense trade Maritime Silk Road Periplus of the Erythraean Sea Maya Greece Greco–Indian shipping Rome Indo–Roman Piracy History Mediterranean piracy Ameinias the Phocian Cilician pirates Jewish pirates Kidnapping of Julius Caesar Pompey's campaign against the pirates Research and education Scholars Historians David Blackman Lionel Casson Fik Meijer John Sinclair Morrison William L. Rodgers Chester G. Starr Archaeologists George Bass Jean-Yves Empereur Boris Rankov J. Richard Steffy Peter Throckmorton Shelley Wachsmann Topics and theories Coastal defence and fortification Grave goods Lighthouses Alexandria Marine art Marine navigation Maritime archaeology Naval warfare Maritime temples Temple of Isthmia Temple of Poseidon, Sounion Samothrace temple complex Nusantao network Phoenician discovery of America Pre-Columbian theories Sea Peoples Shipbuilding Shell middens Ship burial Tacking Thalassocracy Underwater archaeology Underwater exploration Sites H3 Qal'at al-Bahrain Experimental archaeology Ship replica Heyerdahl expeditions Kon-Tiki Ra and Ra II Austronesian replicas Hōkūleʻa Sarimanok Te Au o Tonga Hawaiʻiloa canoe Samudra Raksa Alingano Maisu Saina Balangay Voyage Faʻafaite Gaualofa Marumaru Atua Mediterranean Olympias Regina Phoenician Ship Expedition Viking replicas Viking Others Vital Alsar Ivlia Abora Viracocha Tangaroa Oakleaf Morgawr Institutes and conferences Advisory Council on Underwater Archaeology Archaeological Institute of America European Association of Archaeologists Institute of Nautical Archaeology International Congress of Maritime Museums Nautical Archaeology Society RPM Nautical Foundation Sea Research Society Society for American Archaeology Museums and memorials Boat Museum, Kolkata Bodrum Museum of Underwater Archaeology Giza Solar boat museum Grand Egyptian Museum Ancient Shipwreck Museum at Kyrenia Castle Museum of Ancient Seafaring Museum of Ancient Ships, Pisa National Museum of Subaquatic Archaeology Viking ship museums: Oslo Roskilde Legend and literature Legend Ark of bulrushes Flood myths Genesis Gilgamesh Greek Literature Odyssey Histories (Herodotus) On the Ocean Argonautica Histories (Polybius) Metamorphoses Geography Aeneid Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ocean_exploration&oldid=1301544552 " Category : Ocean exploration Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 11:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ocean exploration 4 languages Add topic

