Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organizing for development 2 Land development 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Real estate development 18 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Deutsch Eesti فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Nederlands Português Русский Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process that creates or renovates new or existing spaces Not to be confused with Real estate investing .

The Solidere development of the Beirut seafront and harbor In the Netherlands , virtually all housing is developed and built through property developers, including development in upmarket segments.

Advertisement for mobile homes on the Florida Keys , June 1973 Real estate development , or property development , is a business process , encompassing activities that range from the renovation and re- lease of existing buildings to the purchase of raw land and the sale of developed land or parcels to others. Real estate developers are the people and companies who coordinate all of these activities, converting ideas from paper to real property .

[ 1 ] Real estate development is different from construction or housebuilding , although many developers also manage the construction process or engage in housebuilding.

Developers buy land, finance real estate deals, build or have builders build projects, develop projects in joint ventures, and create, imagine, control, and orchestrate the process of development from beginning to end.

[ 2 ] Developers usually take the greatest risk in the creation or renovation of real estate and receive the greatest rewards. Typically, developers purchase a tract of land, determine the marketing of the property, develop the building program and design, obtain the necessary public approval and financing, build the structures, and rent out, manage, and ultimately sell it.

[ 1 ] Sometimes property developers will only undertake part of the process. For example, some developers source a property and get the plans and permits approved before selling the property with the plans and permits to a builder at a premium price. Alternatively, a developer who is also a builder may purchase a property with the plans and permits in place so that they do not have the risk of failing to obtain planning approval and can start construction on the development immediately. The financial risks of real estate development and real estate investing differ due to leverage effects.

[ 3 ] Supply and demand curves with economic equilibrium of price and quantity apply to real estate development Developers work with many different counterparts along each step of this process, including architects, city planners, engineers, surveyors, inspectors, contractors, lawyers, leasing agents, etc. In the Town and Country Planning context in the United Kingdom, 'development' is defined in the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 s55.

Organizing for development [ edit ] A development team can be put together in one of several ways.  At one extreme, a large company might include many services, from architecture to engineering .  At the other end of the spectrum, a development company might consist of one principal and a few staff who hire or contract with other companies and professionals for each service as needed.

Assembling a team of professionals to address the environmental, economic, private, physical and political issues inherent in a complex development project is critical. A developer's success depends on the ability to coordinate and lead the completion of a series of interrelated activities efficiently and at the appropriate time.

[ 4 ] Development process requires skills of many professionals: architects , landscape architects , civil engineers and site planners to address project design; market consultants to determine demand and a project's economics ; attorneys to handle agreements and government approvals ; environmental consultants and soils engineers to analyze a site's physical limitations and environmental impacts ; surveyors and title companies to provide legal descriptions of a property; and lenders to provide financing. The general contractor of the project hires subcontractors to put the architectural plans into action.

Land development [ edit ] Further information: Land development Purchasing unused land for a potential development is sometimes called speculative development .

Subdivision of land is the principal mechanism by which communities are developed.  Technically, subdivision describes the legal and physical steps a developer must take to convert raw land into developed land.  Subdivision is a vital part of a community's growth, determining its appearance, the mix of its land uses , and its infrastructure, including roads , drainage systems, water , sewerage , and public utilities .

Land development can pose the most risk, but can also be the most profitable technique as it is dependent on the public sector for approvals and infrastructure and because it involves a long investment period with no positive cash flow .

After subdivision is complete, the developer usually markets the land to a home builder or other end user, for such uses as a warehouse or shopping center . In any case, use of spatial intelligence tools mitigate the risk of these developers by modeling the population trends and demographic make-up of the sort of customers a home builder or retailer would like to have surrounding their new development.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Affordable housing Brownfield regulation and development Land consumption NIMBY Real estate business Shared ranch Urban sprawl YIMBY movement References [ edit ] ^ a b Frej, Anne B; Peiser, Richard B. (2003).

Professional Real Estate Development: The ULI Guide to the Business (2 ed.). Urban Land Institute. p.

3 .

ISBN 0874208947 .

OCLC 778267123 .

^ New York Times, March 16, 1963, "Personality Boom is Loud for Louis Lesser" ^ Geltner, David, Anil Kumar, and Alex M. Van de Minne. "Riskiness of real estate development: A perspective from urban economics and option value theory." Real Estate Economics 48.2 (2020): 406-445.

^ Homes, Synsera (13 September 2019).

"Article: What does a property developer do? Sept 2019" .

Synsera Homes .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-08 . Retrieved 2020-04-15 .

^ "What is a Lady Bird Deed" . April 18, 2020.

Archived from the original on 2020-09-27 . Retrieved 2020-04-18 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Real estate development at Wikimedia Commons v t e Real estate developments Commercial Airport Business park Bus station Commercial area Mixed-use development Office building Port inland Power center Retail park Riverfront Shopping center ( Shopping mall ) Train station Shopping streets and districts Industrial Business cluster Industrial district Industrial park Technology centers Residential Agrihood Boarding house Bungalow court City block Closed community Company town Conservation community Executive home Golf course community Gated community Housing estate Intentional community Luxury apartment McMansion Mixed-use development Model dwellings for the poor Multifamily residential Penthouse apartment Private community Public housing Residential airpark Residential area Retirement community Revenue house Rooming house Single-room occupancy Subdivision Tract housing Disability Assisted living Behavior modification facility Residential treatment center Therapeutic boarding school Elderly care Age-restricted community Nursing home Retirement home Senior living Science/education Akademgorodok Atomgrad Campus Research park Satellite campus Science park Municipal Arcology Civic center Garden city movement Model village Planned cities Planned community Urban green space parks Buildings ( types ) Apartment House types Skyscraper Tower block Villa Miscellaneous Brownfield land Cemetery Residential cluster development Construction Context theory Eminent domain Greenfield land Greyfield land Groundscraper Land-use planning Nonbuilding NIMBY Park Parking ( Multistorey car park ) Planning permission Playground Redevelopment Regional planning Urban design Urban planning YIMBY Zoning Housing portal v t e Real estate Property Tertiary sector By location Bangladesh Canada China Indonesia Italy Turkey Kenya Pakistan Panama Puerto Rico Russia Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates United Kingdom Types Commercial property Commercial building Corporate Real Estate Extraterrestrial real estate International real estate Lease administration Niche real estate Garden real estate Healthcare real estate Vacation property Arable land Golf property Luxury real estate Off-plan property Private equity real estate Real estate owned Residential property Sectors Property management Real estate development Real estate investing Real estate flipping Relocation Law and regulation Adverse possession Chain of title Closing Concurrent estate Conditional sale Conveyancing Deed Eminent domain Encumbrance Foreclosure Just cause eviction Land law Land registration Leasehold estate Lease Property abstract Real estate transaction Real estate contract Real property Rent regulation Severance Torrens title Zoning Economics, financing and valuation Asset-based lending Capitalization rate Cash out refinancing Effective gross income Gross rent multiplier Hard money loan Highest and best use Home equity Home equity investments Home equity loan Home equity line of credit Investment rating for real estate Mortgage insurance Mortgage loan Negative equity Real estate derivative Real estate economics Real estate bubble Real estate valuation Remortgage Rental value Reverse mortgage Parties Appraiser Buyer agent Buyer broker Chartered Surveyor Exclusive buyer agent Land banking Landlord Moving company Property manager Real estate broker Real estate investment club Real estate investment trust Real property administrator Tenant Other Companies Eviction Filtering Gentrification Graduate real estate education Green belt Indices Industry trade groups Investment firms Land banking People Property cycle Real estate trends Undergraduate real estate programs Urban decay Urban planning List of housing markets by real estate prices Category Commons List of topics v t e Land use General Degradation Development/Conversion Planning Conflict Land management Landscaping Integrated landscape management Land grabbing Land consumption Land loss Habitat destruction Illegal construction Land reclamation Land rehabilitation Landscape ecology Rangeland management Environmental planning Leopold matrix Watertable control Developed environments Built-up area Locally unwanted land use Property Property Subdivision (land) Real estate development Land development bank Land (economics) Customary land Related fields Soil Soil science Soil compaction Soil contamination Alkali soil Pollution Deforestation Urban planning Agriculture Drainage system (agriculture) Land change modeling Categories: Land use v t e Construction Types Home construction Offshore construction Underground construction Tunnel construction History Architecture Construction Industrialization Infrastructure Structural engineering Timeline of architecture Water supply and sanitation World's tallest buildings Professions Architect Building engineer Building estimator Building officials Chartered Building Surveyor Civil engineer Civil estimator Clerk of works Project manager Quantity surveyor Site manager Structural engineer Superintendent Trades workers ( List ) Banksman Boilermaker Bricklayer Carpenter Concrete finisher Construction foreman Construction worker Electrician Glazier Ironworker Millwright Plasterer Plumber Roofer Steel fixer Welder Organizations American Institute of Constructors (AIC) American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Asbestos Testing and Consultancy Association (ATAC) Associated General Contractors of America (AGC) Association of Plumbing and Heating Contractors (APHC) Build UK Construction History Society Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors (CICES) Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering (CIPHE) Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA) The Concrete Society Construction Management Association of America (CMAA) Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) FIDIC Home Builders Federation (HBF) Lighting Association National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) National Association of Women in Construction (NAWIC) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) National Kitchen & Bath Association (NKBA) National Railroad Construction and Maintenance Association (NRC) National Tile Contractors Association (NTCA) Railway Tie Association (RTA) Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) Scottish Building Federation (SBF) Society of Construction Arbitrators By country India Iran Japan Romania Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom United States Regulation Building code Construction law Site safety Zoning Architecture Style List Industrial architecture British Indigenous architecture Interior architecture Landscape architecture Vernacular architecture Engineering Architectural engineering Building services engineering Civil engineering Coastal engineering Construction engineering Structural engineering Earthquake engineering Environmental engineering Geotechnical engineering Methods List Earthbag construction Modern methods of construction Monocrete construction Slip forming Other topics Building material List of building materials Millwork Builder's signature Builders' rites Construction bidding Construction delay Construction equipment theft Cornerstone Floor loan Construction management Construction waste Demolition Design–build Design–bid–build DFMA Heavy equipment Interior design Illegal construction Lists of buildings and structures Megaproject Megastructure Plasterwork Damp Proofing Parge coat Roughcast Harling Real estate development Real-estate bubble Stonemasonry Sustainability Topping out Unfinished building Urban design Urban planning Outline Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐mlx2l
Cached time: 20250814234510
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.367 seconds
Real time usage: 0.502 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 980/1000000
Revision size: 7866/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 79856/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 842/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 46963/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.201/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5450807/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  361.771      1 -total
 31.70%  114.681      5 Template:Navbox
 29.10%  105.272      1 Template:Reflist
 25.27%   91.405      1 Template:Developments
 21.62%   78.218      1 Template:Cite_book
 17.62%   63.741      1 Template:Short_description
 10.47%   37.861      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.39%   23.129      1 Template:Cci
  6.00%   21.689      1 Template:Distinguish
  5.58%   20.199      1 Template:Sister-inline Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23572959:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234510 and revision id 1290885021. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Real_estate_development&oldid=1290885021 " Categories : Real estate and property developers Architecture Construction Real estate Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 May 2025, at 18:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Real estate development 18 languages Add topic

