Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Relationship with NIWA 1.2 NZ Institute for Earth Science 2 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 2.1 World Meteorological Organization 2.2 MetraWeather 2.3 Numerical weather prediction 3 Weather forecasts for New Zealand Toggle Weather forecasts for New Zealand subsection 3.1 Land 3.2 Marine 3.3 Aviation (ICAO services) 4 The Pacific 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents MetService 7 languages Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°16′54″S 174°46′39″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.28176°S 174.77748°E ﻿ / -41.28176; 174.77748 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Meteorological service of New Zealand This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "MetService" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Meteorological Service of New Zealand Te Ratonga Tirorangi ( Māori ) Crown entity overview Formed 1 July 1992 (33 years ago) ( 1992-07-01 ) Preceding Crown entity New Zealand Meteorological Service Jurisdiction New Zealand Headquarters Wellington , New Zealand 41°16′54″S 174°46′39″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.28176°S 174.77748°E ﻿ / -41.28176; 174.77748 Employees 304 Crown entity executives Sophie Haslem, Chair Stephen Hunt, Chief Executive Website metservice .com Meteorological Service of New Zealand Limited , or simply MetService ( Māori : Te Ratonga Tirorangi , lit.

'sky-looking service'), is the national meteorological service of New Zealand . MetService was established as a state-owned enterprise in 1992. It employs about 300 staff, and its headquarters are in Wellington , New Zealand. Prior to becoming a state-owned enterprise, New Zealand's national meteorological service has existed in a number of forms since the appointment of the country's first Director of Meteorological Stations in August 1861.

As New Zealand's national meteorological service, MetService produces and issues forecasts and official weather warnings on behalf of New Zealand's Ministry of Transport and is certified by the Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand .

International media, aviation and energy business is conducted under the MetraWeather brand.

MetService has been certified to the ISO 9001 standard since November 1995.

[ citation needed ] From 1 July 2025 MetService will become a subsidiary of NIWA , which will be part of the new New Zealand Institute for Earth Science .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] The weather forecasting service began in 1861, when a spate of shipwrecks prompted the Government to start a storm warning service as part of the then Marine Department .

Forecasting remained a marine service until 1926, when it became part of the newly formed Department of Scientific and Industrial Research . In 1927 Edward Kidson was appointed Dominion Meteorologist by Earnest Marsden . At the time the New Zealand Meteorological Service was a very small institution with a staff of five and a complete lack of useful long-period meteorological records.

[ 3 ] At the outbreak of World War Two in 1939, forecasting became part of the Royal New Zealand Air Force . The focus on aviation continued with a move in 1964 to the then Department of Civil Aviation, which in 1968 became part of a new "super ministry", the Ministry of Transport .

During the 1980s there was increasing pressure on government funding for meteorology in New Zealand, together with a government-wide move to "user-pays" for specialised services, and to more autonomy and accountability for government departments.

[ 4 ] A combination of commercial competition in the deregulated market for meteorological services and reform of publicly funded science led to the establishment of MetService as a state-owned enterprise on 1 July 1992.

[ 4 ] In 2013, MetService invested in a 49% shareholding in MetOcean Solutions Limited, a New Zealand oceanographic services company. MetOcean was an established company specialising in oceanographic analysis for research and forecasting for many purposes, including ports, offshore oil & gas industries and surfers.

[ 5 ] In early September 2020, MetService's website came under a wave of distributed denial of service attacks that also targeted the New Zealand Exchange , Stuff , Radio New Zealand and Westpac bank.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Relationship with NIWA [ edit ] In 1992, the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) was spun off from the MetService to become a separate Crown entity focusing on long-term weather patterns and climate change. Following the separation of the two organisations, MetService remained the official weather forecasting authority.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Over the next 32 years, the two entities clashed over access to books in the old MetService library and the accuracy of their weather reports. In January 2007, the New Zealand Government brought a mediator to repair relations between the MetService and NIWA. In 2009, the two organisations signed a memorandum of understanding to work more closely together.

[ 10 ] However, the two organisations continued to clash over the accuracy of their weather reports.

[ 9 ] In 2020, MetService chief executive Peter Lennox told Parliament that they have more weather models and meteorologists and produced more detailed forecast than NIWA.

[ 11 ] In 2021, Private weather forecaster WeatherWatch commented that it is "bizarre" the government is funding two weather forecasters and compared it to "Fire Service getting into Police Speeding Infringements".

[ 12 ] In 2022, MetService objected to the Department of Conservation 's purchase of NIWA's forecasts for use in its parks, claiming it was "inappropriate for public service" due to its reliance on automated forecasts without intervention from professional meteorologists. MetService has a contract with the Ministry of Transport to provide weather forecasts.

[ 9 ] Following several extreme weather events in 2023, the Government commissioned the Sapere research group to explore how the two metereological services could combine their capabilities. In late September 2024, Science, Innovation and Technology Minister, Judith Collins announced that NIWA would be acquiring MetService in order to streamline weather forecasting services and give easier access to weather information from one source.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Metservice issued a statement welcoming the merger, stating "we see this as an opportunity to have a more connected weather forecasting system that allows a better integration between climate science, forecasting, hydrology, and coastal hazards." [ 8 ] NZ Institute for Earth Science [ edit ] On 14 May 2024, Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology Shane Reti announced that the MetService and NIWA would be integrated into a new Public Research Organisation called the New Zealand Institute for Earth Science .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] World Meteorological Organization [ edit ] The world's national meteorological and hydrological services work with the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), a specialised agency of the United Nations. As part of the WMO World Weather Watch , MetService sends observational data gathered from the New Zealand region to other WMO member countries around the world. This is used as input to computer models of the weather at the world's major numerical weather prediction centres.

MetService operates a data collection network within New Zealand. It complies with recognised international standards as prescribed by the WMO over and around New Zealand. In particular, data are collected through: Surface observations over New Zealand Upper air observations using a variety of means ground-based equipment , aircraft, weather radars Voluntary observing ships A network of drifting buoys in the Tasman Sea .

Norm Henry, General Manager of Science and Strategy, is the current permanent representative of New Zealand with the WMO.

MetraWeather [ edit ] MetraWeather (Australia) Pty Ltd, MetraWeather (UK) Ltd and MetraWeather‌ (Thailand)‌ Ltd are wholly owned subsidiaries of Meteorological Service of New Zealand Limited, providing weather intelligence and information presentation products and services globally under the MetraWeather brand to: Port and harbour managers and offshore oil & gas operators Transport and related infrastructure operations, including aviation, roading and rail Energy generators ( combined cycle gas turbine operators, hydro power operators and wind farm operators), retailers and network managers Broadcast and interactive media, via the Weatherscape XT weather presentation system Retailers and logistics managers Numerical weather prediction [ edit ] The cooperative relationship among the world's national meteorological services enables the sharing of much weather information, including the output from global numerical weather prediction (NWP) models. Meteorologists at MetService routinely use information from the world's major modelling centres for day-to-day production of forecasts and weather warnings.

The global models that MetService uses generally provide reliable forecasts of weather features, like highs and lows , over forecast periods of several days; however, they are less effective at predicting small-scale weather features like sea breezes and localised showers. Such features are often strongly affected by the local geography, which tends to be poorly represented in the global models.

An effective way of dealing with this problem is to use another type of NWP model known as a limited-area model . MetService routinely runs a number of limited-area models based on both MM5 and WRF with lateral boundary conditions provided by each of the available global models. The
primary model configuration for regional forecasting in New Zealand has a horizontal spacing between grid points of 12 km, which allows weather features down to about 50 km wide to be represented (highs and lows are thousands of kilometres wide). This domain is nested within a much larger domain of 60 km grid spacing, which enables the weather to be modelled over quite a large geographical area for reasonable computational cost.

Weather forecasts for New Zealand [ edit ] Forecasts and warnings funded by the New Zealand government include: Land [ edit ] Basic public and mountain forecasts Warnings of hazardous weather affecting land areas Marine [ edit ] Warnings of gales, storms and hurricanes for New Zealand's marine area of responsibility, METAREA XIV Synopses and forecasts for New Zealand's marine area of responsibility, METAREA XIV Warnings and forecasts for coastal waters Aviation ( ICAO services) [ edit ] Meteorological Watch Office (MWO) Volcanic Ash Advisory Centre (VAAC) OPMET data The Pacific [ edit ] MetService maintains close links with the meteorological agencies of various Pacific Island states.

All warnings of hazardous weather for the South Pacific region, normally received from the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi, Fiji , are forwarded to Radio New Zealand International and to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

MetService provides backup for the main warning and forecasting responsibilities of the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi, Fiji, should that centre temporarily shut down or be cut off, possibly due to a direct hit by a cyclone. They also take over Primary warning responsibility should a cyclone move to the south of 25S.

See also [ edit ] 2025–26 South Pacific cyclone season Climate of New Zealand References [ edit ] De Lisle, John Felix.

Sails to satellites: a history of meteorology in New Zealand . History of the New Zealand Meteorological Service from its inception through to 1985, written by a former director. While published by the then New Zealand Meteorological Service, the author states in the Preface that "The Service, which sponsored this book, has had no influence upon the interpretation of historical events, or the judgements made." New Zealand Meteorological Service, 1986.

ISBN 0-477-07300-X ^ a b Reti, Shane (14 May 2025).

"Bold science reforms to fuel economic growth" .

www.beehive.govt.nz .

New Zealand Government .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2025 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 .

^ a b Palmer, Russell (14 May 2025).

"Chairs, board members named for new science mergers" .

RNZ .

Archived from the original on 15 May 2025 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ James W. Brodie. 'Kidson, Edward', Dictionary of New Zealand Biography, first published in 1998. Te Ara - the Encyclopedia of New Zealand, https://teara.govt.nz/mi/biographies/4k12/kidson-edward ^ a b Steiner, J Thomas; Martin, John R; Gordon, Neil D; Grant, Malcolm A (September 1991).

"Commercialization in the provision of meteorological services in New Zealand" .

Meteorological Applications .

4 (3): 247– 257.

Bibcode : 1997MeApp...4..247S .

doi : 10.1017/S1350482797000480 .

^ Annual Report 2014 , MetService, 18 September 2014 ^ Anthony, John (2 September 2020).

"MetService website crashes again following DDoS cyberattack" .

Stuff .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2020 . Retrieved 1 September 2020 .

^ "Metservice latest site to be hit by cyber attack" .

Otago Daily Times . 1 September 2020.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2020 . Retrieved 1 September 2020 .

^ a b "NIWA to take over MetService in forecaster merger" .

RNZ . 26 September 2024. Archived from the original on 9 October 2024 . Retrieved 22 October 2024 .

^ a b c Waiwiri-Smith, Lyric (27 September 2024).

"Can Niwa and MetService resolve their thunderous feud before the merger?" .

The Spinoff . Archived from the original on 3 October 2024 . Retrieved 22 October 2024 .

^ "Better forecasts tipped as weather agencies end feud" .

Stuff . 17 February 2009.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ "Weather wars: MetService, Niwa grilled over forecaster 'double-up' " .

The New Zealand Herald . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ "ComCom ends investigation after MetService makes changes for good – but what about Niwa?" .

WeatherWatch.co.nz . 12 November 2021 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ Collins, Judith (26 September 2024).

"Building a stronger weather forecasting system" .

Bee .

New Zealand Government .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 22 October 2024 .

^ Smith, Sam (26 September 2024).

"Niwa set to acquire MetService after 'compelling' case for change" .

Stuff . Archived from the original on 30 September 2024 . Retrieved 22 October 2024 .

External links [ edit ] MetService - Te Ratonga Tirorangi MetraWeather v t e State-owned enterprises of New Zealand Part of the public sector organisations in New Zealand Airways Corporation Animal Control Products AsureQuality Electricity Corporation of New Zealand KiwiRail Kordia Landcorp MetService New Zealand Railways Corporation NZ Post Quotable Value Transpower v t e National meteorological organizations Africa Algeria Ghana Mozambique South Africa Americas Argentina Bermuda Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Ecuador Guatemala Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Asia Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan China Hong Kong (PRC) India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan North Korea South Korea Macau (PRC) Malaysia Pakistan Palestine Philippines Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Taiwan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Vietnam Europe Austria Belgium Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Ukraine Oceania Australia Fiji New Zealand Réunion (France) Tonga Tuvalu Regional: Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts European Severe Storms Laboratory Global: World Meteorological Organization Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States 2 Israel People Trove Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MetService&oldid=1303836800 " Categories : 1992 establishments in New Zealand Government-owned companies of New Zealand Governmental meteorological agencies in Oceania Climate of New Zealand Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Articles needing additional references from April 2022 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from February 2017 Articles containing Māori-language text Coordinates not on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 09:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents MetService 7 languages Add topic

