Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology Toggle Etymology subsection 1.1 Other names 2 Nativity 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Early and medieval era 3.2 17th and 18th centuries 3.3 19th century 3.4 20th and 21st centuries 4 Observance and traditions Toggle Observance and traditions subsection 4.1 Church attendance 4.2 Decorations 4.3 Nativity play 4.4 Music and carols 4.5 Traditional cuisine 4.6 Cards 4.7 Commemorative stamps 4.8 Christmas seals 4.9 Gift giving 4.9.1 Gift-bearing figures 4.10 Sport 4.11 Christmas in China 4.12 Scandinavia and the Nordics 5 Choice of date Toggle Choice of date subsection 5.1 Theories 5.2 Date according to Julian calendar 5.3 Table of dates 6 Economy 7 Controversies 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Christmas 232 languages Адыгэбзэ Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni Gungbe 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiatun Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Ikinyarwanda Ikirundi Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кырык мары Ladin Ladino Лакку ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Li Niha Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Мокшень မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch Pangcah پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Pinayuanan Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Romani čhib Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Thuɔŋjäŋ Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ ತುಳು Türkçe Türkmençe Tyap Тыва дыл Українська اردو Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Toba Betawi Kadazandusun Fɔ̀ngbè Jaku Iban IsiNdebele seSewula ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian holiday, usually December 25 "Christmas Day" redirects here. For other uses, see Christmas Day (disambiguation) and Christmas (disambiguation) .

Christmas Nativity scene depicted using Christmas lights Also called Noël, Nativity, Koleda , Xmas , Boro Din Observed by Christians , Alawites , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] many other communities [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Type Christian, cultural, international Significance Commemoration of the nativity of Jesus Celebrations Gift-giving, family and other social gatherings, symbolic decoration, feasting Observances Church services Date December 25 ( Western Christianity and part of the Eastern churches) January 6 ( Armenian Apostolic Church and the Armenian Evangelical Church ) January 7 ( O.S.

December 25) (most Oriental Orthodox and part of the Eastern Orthodox churches) January 19 (O.S. January 6) ( Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem ) Related to Christmastide , Christmas Eve , Advent , Annunciation , Epiphany , Baptism of the Lord , Nativity Fast , Nativity of Christ , Old Christmas , Yule , Saint Stephen's Day , Boxing Day Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Baptism Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation Universalism History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine Ignatius East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations (full list) Nicene Catholic Latin Eastern Old Catholic Palmarian Catholic Independent Catholic Sedevacantism Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Free Evangelical Lutheran Methodist Moravian [Hussite] Pentecostal Plymouth Brethren Quaker Reformed United Protestant Waldensian Non-denominational Christianity Restorationist Christadelphians Iglesia ni Cristo Irvingians Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Members Church of God International The New Church (Swedenborgian) Unitarians and Universalists Related topics Civilization Criticism Culture Ecumenism Glossary Index Liturgy Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship Glossary Index Outline Christianity portal v t e Christmas is an annual festival commemorating the birth of Jesus Christ , observed primarily on December 25 [ a ] as a religious and cultural celebration among billions of people around the world . A liturgical feast central to Christianity , Christmas preparation begins on the First Sunday of Advent and it is followed by Christmastide , which historically in the West lasts twelve days and culminates on Twelfth Night . Christmas Day is a public holiday in many countries , is observed religiously by a majority of Christians , as well as celebrated culturally by many non-Christians, and forms an integral part of the annual holiday season .

The traditional Christmas narrative recounted in the New Testament , known as the Nativity of Jesus , says that Jesus was born in Bethlehem , in accordance with messianic prophecies . When Joseph and Mary arrived in the city, the inn had no room, and so they were offered a stable where the Christ Child was soon born, with angels proclaiming this news to shepherds , who then spread the word.

There are different hypotheses regarding the date of Jesus's birth . In the early fourth century, the church fixed the date as December 25, the date of the winter solstice in the Roman Empire. It is nine months after Annunciation on March 25, also the Roman date of the spring equinox. Most Christians celebrate on December 25 in the Gregorian calendar , which has been adopted almost universally in the civil calendars used in countries throughout the world. However, part of the Eastern Christian Churches celebrate Christmas on December 25 of the older Julian calendar , which currently corresponds to January 7 in the Gregorian calendar. For Christians, celebrating that God came into the world in the form of man to atone for the sins of humanity is more important than knowing Jesus's exact birth date.

The customs associated with Christmas in various countries have a mix of pre-Christian , Christian, and secular themes and origins. Popular holiday traditions include gift giving ; completing an Advent calendar or Advent wreath ; Christmas music and caroling ; watching Christmas movies ; viewing a Nativity play ; an exchange of Christmas cards ; attending church services ; a special meal ; and displaying various Christmas decorations , including Christmas trees , Christmas lights , nativity scenes , poinsettias , garlands , wreaths , mistletoe , and holly . Additionally, several related and often interchangeable figures, known as Santa Claus , Father Christmas , Saint Nicholas , and Christkind , are associated with bringing gifts to children during the Christmas season and have their own body of traditions and lore. Because gift-giving and many other aspects of the Christmas festival involve heightened economic activity, the holiday has become a significant event and a key sales period for retailers and businesses. Over the past few centuries, Christmas has had a steadily growing economic effect in many regions of the world.

Etymology See also: Christ (title) The English word Christmas is a shortened form of 'Christ's Mass '.

[ 5 ] The word is recorded as Crīstesmæsse in 1038 and Cristes-messe in 1131.

[ 6 ] Crīst ( genitive Crīstes ) is from the Greek Χριστός ( Khrīstos , 'Christ'), a translation of the Hebrew מָשִׁיחַ ‎ ( Māšîaḥ , ' Messiah '), meaning 'anointed'; [ 7 ] [ 8 ] and mæsse is from the Latin missa , the celebration of the Eucharist .

[ 9 ] The form Christenmas was also used during some periods, but is now considered archaic and dialectal.

[ 10 ] The term derives from Middle English Cristenmasse , meaning 'Christian mass'.

[ 11 ] Xmas is an abbreviation of Christmas found particularly in print, based on the initial letter chi (Χ) in the Greek Χριστός (Christ) , although some style guides discourage its use.

[ 12 ] This abbreviation has a precedent in Middle English Χρ̄es masse (where Χρ̄ is another abbreviation of the Greek word).

[ 11 ] Other names The holiday has had various other English names throughout its history. The Anglo-Saxons referred to the feast as "midwinter", [ 13 ] [ 14 ] or, more rarely, as Nātiuiteð (from the Latin nātīvitās below).

[ 13 ] [ 15 ] Nativity , meaning 'birth', is from the Latin nātīvitās .

[ 16 ] In Old English , Gēola (' Yule ') referred to the period corresponding to December and January, which was eventually equated with Christian Christmas.

[ 17 ] 'Noel' (also 'Nowel' or 'Nowell', as in " The First Nowell ") entered English in the late 14th century and is from the Old French noël or naël , itself ultimately from the Latin nātālis (diēs) meaning 'birth (day)'.

[ 18 ] Koleda is the traditional Slavic name for Christmas and the period from Christmas to Epiphany or, more generally, to Slavic Christmas-related rituals, some dating to pre-Christian times.

[ 19 ] Nativity Main article: Nativity of Jesus Adoration of the Shepherds by Dutch painter Matthias Stomer , 1632 The gospels of Luke and Matthew describe Jesus as being born in Bethlehem to the Virgin Mary . In the Gospel of Luke, Joseph and Mary travel from Nazareth to Bethlehem in order to be counted for a census, and Jesus is born there and placed in a manger .

[ 20 ] Angels proclaim him a savior for all people, and three shepherds come to adore him. In the Gospel of Matthew, by contrast, three magi follow a star to Bethlehem to bring gifts to Jesus, born the king of the Jews .

King Herod orders the massacre of all the boys less than two years old in Bethlehem, but the family flees to Egypt and later returns to Nazareth.

[ 21 ] History Early and medieval era Nativity of Christ , medieval illustration from the Hortus deliciarum of Herrad of Landsberg , 12th century In the 2nd century, the "earliest church records" indicate that "Christians were remembering and celebrating the birth of the Lord", an "observance [that] sprang up organically from the authentic devotion of ordinary believers"; although "they did not agree upon a set date".

[ 22 ] The earliest document to place Jesus's birthday on December 25 is the Chronograph of 354 (also called the Calendar of Filocalus), which also names it as the birthday of Sol Invictus (the 'Invincible Sun').

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Liturgical historians generally agree that this part of the text was written in Rome in AD 336.

[ 24 ] This is consistent with the assertion that the date was formally set by Pope Julius I , bishop of Rome from 337 to 352.

[ 27 ] Though Christmas did not appear on the lists of festivals given by the early Christian writers Irenaeus and Tertullian , [ 6 ] the early Church Fathers John Chrysostom , Augustine of Hippo , and Jerome attested to December 25 as the date of Christmas toward the end of the fourth century.

[ 22 ] December 25 was the traditional date of the winter solstice in the Roman Empire, [ 28 ] where most Christians lived, and the Roman festival Dies Natalis Solis Invicti (birthday of Sol Invictus) had been held on this date since 274 AD.

[ 29 ] In the East , the birth of Jesus was celebrated in connection with the Epiphany on January 6.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] This holiday was not primarily about Christ's birth, but rather his baptism .

[ 32 ] Christmas was promoted in the East as part of the revival of Orthodox Christianity that followed the death of the pro- Arian Emperor Valens at the Battle of Adrianople in 378. The feast was introduced in Constantinople in 379, in Antioch by John Chrysostom towards the end of the fourth century, [ 31 ] probably in 388, and in Alexandria in the following century.

[ 33 ] The Georgian Iadgari demonstrates that Christmas was celebrated in Jerusalem by the sixth century .

[ 34 ] The Nativity , from a 14th-century missal , a liturgical book containing texts and music necessary for the celebration of Mass throughout the year In the Early Middle Ages , Christmas Day was overshadowed by Epiphany, which in western Christianity focused on the visit of the magi . However, the medieval calendar was dominated by Christmas-related holidays. The forty days before Christmas became the "forty days of St. Martin" (which began on November 11, the feast of St. Martin of Tours ), now known as Advent.

[ 35 ] In Italy, former Saturnalian traditions were attached to Advent.

[ 35 ] Around the 12th century, these traditions transferred again to the Twelve Days of Christmas (December 25 – January 5); a time that appears in the liturgical calendars as Christmastide or Twelve Holy Days.

[ 35 ] In 567, the Council of Tours put in place the season of Christmastide , proclaiming "the twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany as a sacred and festive season, and established the duty of Advent fasting in preparation for the feast".

[ 36 ] This was done in order to solve the "administrative problem for the Roman Empire as it tried to coordinate the solar Julian calendar with the lunar calendars of its provinces in the east".

[ 37 ] The prominence of Christmas Day increased gradually after Charlemagne was crowned Emperor on Christmas Day in 800.

[ 38 ] King Edmund the Martyr was anointed on Christmas in 855 and King William I of England was crowned on Christmas Day 1066.

[ 39 ] The coronation of Charlemagne on Christmas of 800 helped promote the popularity of the holiday.

By the High Middle Ages , the holiday had become so prominent that chroniclers routinely noted where various magnates celebrated Christmas.

King Richard II of England hosted a Christmas feast in 1377 at which 28 oxen and 300 sheep were eaten.

[ 35 ] The Yule boar was a common feature of medieval Christmas feasts.

Caroling also became popular, and was originally performed by a group of dancers who sang. The group was composed of a lead singer and a ring of dancers that provided the chorus. Various writers of the time condemned caroling as lewd, indicating that the unruly traditions of Saturnalia and Yule may have continued in this form.

[ 35 ] " Misrule "—drunkenness, promiscuity, gambling—was also an important aspect of the festival. In England, gifts were exchanged on New Year's Day ( a custom at the royal court ), and there was special Christmas ale.

[ 35 ] Christmas during the Middle Ages was a public festival that incorporated ivy , holly , and other evergreens.

[ 40 ] Christmas gift-giving during the Middle Ages was usually between people with legal relationships, such as tenant and landlord.

[ 40 ] The annual indulgence in eating, dancing, singing, sporting, and card playing escalated in England, and by the 17th century the Christmas season featured lavish dinners, elaborate masques, and pageants. In 1607, King James I insisted that a play be acted on Christmas night and that the court indulge in games.

[ 41 ] It was during the Reformation in 16th–17th-century Europe that many Protestants changed the gift bringer to the Christ Child or Christkindl , and the date of giving gifts changed from December 6 to Christmas Eve.

[ 42 ] 17th and 18th centuries Martin Luther played a role in the emergence of the Christmas tree and in the tradition of presents on Christmas Eve .

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Following the Protestant Reformation , many of the new denominations, including the Anglican Church and Lutheran Church , continued to celebrate Christmas.

[ 45 ] In 1629, the Anglican poet John Milton penned On the Morning of Christ's Nativity , a poem that has since been read by many during Christmastide.

[ 46 ] Donald Heinz, a professor at California State University, Chico , states that Martin Luther "inaugurated a period in which Germany would produce a unique culture of Christmas, much copied in North America".

[ 47 ] Among the congregations of the Dutch Reformed Church , Christmas was celebrated as one of the principal evangelical feasts .

[ 48 ] However, in 17th century England, some groups such as the Puritans strongly condemned the celebration of Christmas, considering it a Catholic invention and the "trappings of popery " or the "rags of the Beast ".

[ 49 ] In contrast, the established Anglican Church "pressed for a more elaborate observance of feasts, penitential seasons, and saints' days. The calendar reform became a major point of tension between the Anglican party and the Puritan party".

[ 50 ] The Catholic Church also responded, promoting the festival in a more religiously oriented form. King Charles I of England directed his noblemen and gentry to return to their landed estates in midwinter to keep up their old-style Christmas generosity.

[ 41 ] Following the Parliamentarian victory over Charles I during the English Civil War , England's Puritan rulers banned Christmas in 1647.

[ 49 ] [ 51 ] Protests followed as pro-Christmas rioting broke out in several cities and for weeks Canterbury was controlled by the rioters, who decorated doorways with holly and shouted royalist slogans.

[ 49 ] Football, among the sports the Puritans banned on a Sunday, was also used as a rebellious force: when Puritans outlawed Christmas in England in December 1647 the crowd brought out footballs as a symbol of festive misrule.

[ 52 ] The book, The Vindication of Christmas (London, 1652), argued against the Puritans, and makes note of Old English Christmas traditions, dinner, roast apples on the fire, card playing, dances with "plow-boys" and "maidservants", old Father Christmas and carol singing.

[ 53 ] During the ban, semi-clandestine religious services marking Christ's birth continued to be held, and people sang carols in secret.

[ 54 ] The Examination and Tryal of Old Father Christmas , (1686), published after Christmas was reinstated as a holy day in England Christmas was restored as a legal holiday in England with the Restoration of King Charles II in 1660 when Puritan legislation was declared null and void, with Christmas again freely celebrated in England.

[ 54 ] Many Calvinist clergymen disapproved of Christmas celebrations. As such, in Scotland, the Presbyterian Church of Scotland discouraged the observance of Christmas, and though James VI commanded its celebration in 1618, attendance at church was scant.

[ 55 ] The Parliament of Scotland officially abolished the observance of Christmas in 1640, claiming that the church had been "purged of all superstitious observation of days".

[ 56 ] Whereas in England, Wales and Ireland Christmas Day is a common law holiday, having been a customary holiday since time immemorial , it was not until 1871 that it was designated a bank holiday in Scotland.

[ 57 ] Following the Restoration of Charles II, Poor Robin's Almanack contained the lines: "Now thanks to God for Charles return, / Whose absence made old Christmas mourn. / For then we scarcely did it know, / Whether it Christmas were or no".

[ 58 ] The diary of James Woodforde, from the latter half of the 18th century, details the observance of Christmas and celebrations associated with the season over a number of years.

[ 59 ] As in England, Puritans in Colonial America staunchly opposed the observation of Christmas.

[ 60 ] The Pilgrims of New England pointedly spent their first December 25 in the New World working normally.

[ 60 ] Puritans such as Cotton Mather condemned Christmas both because scripture did not mention its observance and because Christmas celebrations of the day often involved boisterous behavior.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Many non-Puritans in New England deplored the loss of the holidays enjoyed by the laboring classes in England.

[ 63 ] Christmas observance was outlawed in Boston in 1659.

[ 60 ] The ban on Christmas observance was revoked in 1681 by English governor Edmund Andros , but it was not until the mid-19th century that celebrating Christmas became fashionable in the Boston region.

[ 64 ] At the same time, Christian residents of Virginia and New York observed the holiday freely.

Pennsylvania Dutch settlers, predominantly Moravian settlers of Bethlehem , Nazareth , and Lititz in Pennsylvania and the Wachovia settlements in North Carolina, were enthusiastic celebrators of Christmas. The Moravians in Bethlehem had the first Christmas trees in America as well as the first Nativity Scenes.

[ 65 ] Christmas fell out of favor in the United States after the American Revolution , when it was considered an English custom.

[ 66 ] George Washington attacked Hessian (German) mercenaries on the day after Christmas during the Battle of Trenton on December 26, 1776, Christmas being much more popular in Germany than in America at this time.

With the atheistic Cult of Reason in power during the era of Revolutionary France , Christian Christmas religious services were banned and the three kings cake was renamed the "equality cake" under anticlerical government policies .

[ 67 ] 19th century Ebenezer Scrooge and the Ghost of Christmas Present , from Charles Dickens 's A Christmas Carol , 1843 In the early 19th century, Christmas festivities and services gradually spread with the rise of the Oxford Movement in the Church of England that emphasized the centrality of Christmas in Christianity and charity to the poor, [ 68 ] along with Washington Irving , Charles Dickens , and other authors emphasizing family, children, kind-heartedness, gift-giving, and Santa Claus (for Irving), [ 68 ] or Father Christmas (for Dickens).

[ 69 ] An indication this increased recognition of Christmas was slow, however, is seen in the fact that "in twenty of the years between 1790 and 1835, The Times did not mention Christmas at all." [ 70 ] In the early-19th century, writers imagined Tudor -period Christmas as a time of heartfelt celebration. In 1835, Thomas Hervey and Robert Seymour published The Christmas Book in which they introduced what has been called a "national Christmas narrative." [ 71 ] In his book, Hervey asserted: "the revels of merry England are fast subsiding into silence, and her many customs wearing gradually away." [ 72 ] In 1843, Charles Dickens wrote the novel A Christmas Carol , which helped revive the "spirit" of Christmas and seasonal merriment.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Its instant popularity played a major role in portraying Christmas as a holiday emphasizing family, goodwill, and compassion.

[ 68 ] Dickens sought to construct Christmas as a family-centered festival of generosity, linking "worship and feasting, within a context of social reconciliation".

[ 75 ] Superimposing his humanitarian vision of the holiday, in what has been termed "Carol Philosophy", [ 76 ] Dickens influenced many aspects of Christmas that are celebrated today in Western culture, such as family gatherings, seasonal food and drink, dancing, games, and a festive generosity of spirit.

[ 77 ] It has been said that Dickens' breakthrough with A Christmas Carol was his "ingenious pairing of seasonal fiction and seasonal [book] sales." [ 78 ] A prominent phrase from the tale, "Merry Christmas" , was popularized following the appearance of the story.

[ 79 ] This coincided with the appearance of the Oxford Movement and the growth of Anglo-Catholicism , which led a revival in traditional rituals and religious observances.

[ 80 ] 19th-century lithograph showing the Christkindlesmarkt (Christmas market) in Nuremberg , Germany The term Scrooge became a synonym for miser , with the phrase "Bah! Humbug!" becoming emblematic of a dismissive attitude of the festive spirit.

[ 81 ] In 1843, the first commercial Christmas card was produced by Sir Henry Cole .

[ 82 ] The revival of the Christmas Carol began with William Sandys 's Christmas Carols Ancient and Modern (1833), with the first appearance in print of " The First Noel ", " I Saw Three Ships ", " Hark the Herald Angels Sing " and " God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen ", popularized in Dickens's A Christmas Carol .

The Queen's Christmas tree at Windsor Castle , published in the Illustrated London News , 1848 In Britain, the Christmas tree was introduced in the early 19th century by the German-born Queen Charlotte . In 1832, the future Queen Victoria wrote about her delight at having a Christmas tree, hung with lights , ornaments , and presents placed round it.

[ 83 ] After her marriage to her German cousin Prince Albert , by 1841 the custom became more widespread throughout Britain.

[ 84 ] An image of the British royal family with their Christmas tree at Windsor Castle created a sensation when it was published in the Illustrated London News in 1848. A modified version of this image was published in Godey's Lady's Book , Philadelphia in 1850.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] By the 1870s, putting up a Christmas tree had become common in America.

[ 85 ] In America, interest in Christmas had been revived in the 1820s by several short stories by Washington Irving which appear in his The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.

and "Old Christmas". Irving's stories depicted harmonious warm-hearted English Christmas festivities he experienced while staying in Aston Hall , Birmingham, England, that had largely been abandoned, [ 87 ] and he used the tract Vindication of Christmas (1652) of Old English Christmas traditions, that he had transcribed into his journal as a format for his stories.

[ 41 ] A Norwegian Christmas, 1846 painting by Adolph Tidemand In 1822, Clement Clarke Moore wrote the poem A Visit From St. Nicholas (popularly known by its first line: Twas the Night Before Christmas ).

[ 88 ] The poem helped popularize the tradition of exchanging gifts, and seasonal Christmas shopping began to assume economic importance.

[ 89 ] This also started the cultural conflict between the holiday's spiritual significance and its associated commercialism that some see as corrupting the holiday. In her 1850 book The First Christmas in New England , Harriet Beecher Stowe includes a character who complains that the true meaning of Christmas was lost in a shopping spree.

[ 90 ] While the celebration of Christmas was not yet customary in some regions in the U.S., Henry Wadsworth Longfellow detected "a transition state about Christmas here in New England" in 1856. "The old puritan feeling prevents it from being a cheerful, hearty holiday; though every year makes it more so".

[ 91 ] In Reading, Pennsylvania , a newspaper remarked in 1861, "Even our presbyterian friends who have hitherto steadfastly ignored Christmas—threw open their church doors and assembled in force to celebrate the anniversary of the Savior's birth." [ 91 ] The First Congregational Church of Rockford, Illinois , "although of genuine Puritan stock", was 'preparing for a grand Christmas jubilee', a news correspondent reported in 1864.

[ 91 ] By 1860, fourteen states including several from New England had adopted Christmas as a legal holiday.

[ 92 ] In 1875, Louis Prang introduced the Christmas card to Americans. He has been called the "father of the American Christmas card".

[ 93 ] On June 28, 1870, Christmas was formally declared a United States federal holiday .

[ 94 ] 20th and 21st centuries The Christmas Visit. Postcard, c.

1910 During the First World War and particularly (but not exclusively) in 1914, [ 95 ] a series of informal truces took place for Christmas between opposing armies. The truces, which were organised spontaneously by fighting men, ranged from promises not to shoot (shouted at a distance in order to ease the pressure of war for the day) to friendly socializing, gift giving and even sport between enemies.

[ 96 ] These incidents became a well known and semi-mythologised part of popular memory.

[ 97 ] They have been described as a symbol of common humanity even in the darkest of situations and used to demonstrate to children the ideals of Christmas.

[ 98 ] Under the state atheism of the Soviet Union, after its foundation in 1917, Christmas celebrations—along with other Christian holidays—were prohibited in public.

[ 99 ] During the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s, the League of Militant Atheists encouraged school pupils to campaign against Christmas traditions, such as the Christmas tree, as well as other Christian holidays, including Easter; the League established an antireligious holiday to be the 31st of each month as a replacement.

[ 100 ] At the height of this persecution, in 1929, on Christmas Day, children in Moscow were encouraged to spit on crucifixes as a protest against the holiday.

[ 101 ] Instead, the importance of the holiday and all its trappings, such as the Christmas tree and gift-giving, was transferred to the New Year.

[ 102 ] It was not until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 that the persecution ended and Orthodox Christmas became a state holiday again for the first time in Russia after seven decades.

[ 103 ] Mount Ingino Christmas Tree in Gubbio , Italy, the tallest Christmas tree in the world, 2014 [ 104 ] In 1991, the Gubbio Christmas Tree , in Italy, 650 meters high and decorated with over 700 lights, entered the Guinness Book of Records as the tallest Christmas tree in the world.

[ 104 ] European History Professor Joseph Perry wrote that likewise, in Nazi Germany , "because Nazi ideologues saw organized religion as an enemy of the totalitarian state, propagandists sought to deemphasize—or eliminate altogether—the Christian aspects of the holiday" and that "Propagandists tirelessly promoted numerous Nazified Christmas songs, which replaced Christian themes with the regime's racial ideologies".

[ 105 ] As Christmas celebrations began to spread globally even outside traditional Christian cultures , several Muslim-majority countries began to ban the observance of Christmas, claiming it undermined Islam .

[ 106 ] In 2023, public Christmas celebrations were cancelled in Bethlehem , the city synonymous with the birth of Jesus.

Palestinian leaders of various Christian denominations cited the ongoing Israel–Gaza war in their unanimous decision to cancel celebrations.

[ 107 ] Observance and traditions Further information: Christmas traditions and Observance of Christmas by country Christmas at the Annunciation Church in Nazareth, 1965 Dark brown – countries that do not recognize Christmas on December 25 or January 7 as a public holiday. Light brown – countries that do not recognize Christmas as a public holiday, but the holiday is given observance Many Christians attend church services to celebrate the birth of Jesus Christ [ 108 ] Christmas Day is celebrated as a major festival and public holiday in countries around the world, including many whose populations are mostly non-Christian. In some non-Christian areas, periods of former colonial rule introduced the celebration (e.g. Hong Kong); in others, Christian minorities or foreign cultural influences have led populations to observe the holiday. Countries such as Japan, where Christmas is popular despite there being only a small number of Christians, have adopted many of the cultural aspects of Christmas, such as gift-giving, decorations, and Christmas trees. A similar example is in Turkey , being Muslim-majority and with a small number of Christians, where Christmas trees and decorations tend to line public streets during the festival.

[ citation needed ] Many popular customs associated with Christmas developed independently of the commemoration of Jesus's birth, with some claiming that certain elements are Christianized and have origins in pre-Christian festivals that were celebrated by pagan populations who were later converted to Christianity ; other scholars reject these claims and affirm that Christmas customs largely developed in a Christian context.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] The prevailing atmosphere of Christmas has also continually evolved since the holiday's inception, ranging from a sometimes raucous, drunken, carnival -like state in the Middle Ages , [ 35 ] to a tamer family-oriented and children-centered theme introduced in a 19th-century transformation.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] The celebration of Christmas was banned on more than one occasion within certain groups, such as the Puritans and Jehovah's Witnesses (who do not celebrate birthdays in general), due to concerns that it was too unbiblical.

[ 49 ] [ 60 ] [ 111 ] Celtic winter herbs such as mistletoe and ivy , and the custom of kissing under a mistletoe, are common in modern Christmas celebrations in the English-speaking countries.

[ 112 ] The pre-Christian Germanic peoples —including the Anglo-Saxons and the Norse—celebrated a winter festival called Yule , held in the late December to early January period, yielding modern English yule , today used as a synonym for Christmas .

[ 113 ] In Germanic language-speaking areas, numerous elements of modern Christmas folk custom and iconography may have originated from Yule, including the Yule log , Yule boar , and the Yule goat .

[ 114 ] [ 113 ] Often leading a ghostly procession through the sky (the Wild Hunt ), the long-bearded god Odin is referred to as "the Yule one" and "Yule father" in Old Norse texts, while other gods are referred to as "Yule beings".

[ 115 ] On the other hand, as there are no reliable existing references to a Christmas log prior to the 16th century, the burning of the Christmas block may have been an early modern invention by Christians unrelated to the pagan practice.

[ 116 ] Among countries with a strong Christian tradition , a variety of Christmas celebrations have developed that incorporate regional and local cultures. For example, in eastern Europe Christmas celebrations incorporated pre-Christian traditions such as the Koleda , [ 117 ] which shares parallels with the Christmas carol .

Church attendance Christmas Day (inclusive of its vigil , Christmas Eve), is a Festival in the Lutheran Churches , a solemnity in the Roman Catholic Church , and a Principal Feast of the Anglican Communion . Other Christian denominations do not rank their feast days but nevertheless place importance on Christmas Eve/Christmas Day, as with other Christian feasts like Easter, Ascension Day, and Pentecost.

[ 118 ] As such, for Christians, attending a Christmas Eve or Christmas Day church service plays an important part in the recognition of the Christmas season . Christmas, along with Easter, is the period of the highest annual church attendance. A 2010 survey by LifeWay Christian Resources found that six in ten Americans attend church services during this time.

[ 119 ] In the United Kingdom, the Church of England reported an estimated attendance of 2.5 million people at Christmas services in 2015.

[ 120 ] Decorations Main article: Christmas decoration Further information: Hanging of the greens Neapolitan presepio at the Carnegie Museum of Art in Pittsburgh Nativity scenes are known from 10th-century Rome. They were popularised by Saint Francis of Assisi from 1223, quickly spreading across Europe.

[ 121 ] Different types of decorations developed across the Christian world, dependent on local tradition and available resources, and can vary from simple representations of the crib to far more elaborate sets – renowned manger scene traditions include the colourful Kraków szopka in Poland, [ 122 ] which imitate Kraków 's historical buildings as settings, the elaborate Italian presepi ( Neapolitan [ it ] , Genoese [ it ] and Bolognese [ it ] ), [ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] or the Provençal crèches in southern France, using hand-painted terracotta figurines called santons .

[ 127 ] In certain parts of the world, notably Sicily , living nativity scenes following the tradition of Saint Francis are a popular alternative to static crèches.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] The first commercially produced decorations appeared in Germany in the 1860s, inspired by paper chains made by children.

[ 131 ] In countries where a representation of the Nativity scene is very popular, people are encouraged to compete and create the most original or realistic ones. Within some families, the pieces used to make the representation are considered a valuable family heirloom .

[ 132 ] The traditional colors of Christmas decorations are red, green, and gold.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] Red symbolizes the blood of Jesus, which was shed in his crucifixion ; green symbolizes eternal life, and in particular the evergreen tree, which does not lose its leaves in the winter; and gold is the first color associated with Christmas, as one of the three gifts of the Magi , symbolizing royalty.

[ 135 ] The official White House Christmas tree for 1962, displayed in the Entrance Hall and presented by John F. Kennedy and his wife Jackie The Christmas tree was first used by German Lutherans in the 16th century, with records indicating that a Christmas tree was placed in the Cathedral of Strassburg in 1539, under the leadership of the Protestant Reformer , Martin Bucer .

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] In the United States, these "German Lutherans brought the decorated Christmas tree with them; the Moravians put lighted candles on those trees".

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] When decorating the Christmas tree, many individuals place a star at the top of the tree symbolizing the Star of Bethlehem , a fact recorded by The School Journal in 1897.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] Professor David Albert Jones of Oxford University writes that in the 19th century, it became popular for people to also use an angel to top the Christmas tree in order to symbolize the angels mentioned in the accounts of the Nativity of Jesus .

[ 142 ] Additionally, in the context of a Christian celebration of Christmas, the Christmas tree, being evergreen in colour, is symbolic of Christ, who offers eternal life; the candles or lights on the tree represent the Light of the World —Jesus—born in Bethlehem.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] Christian services for family use and public worship have been published for the blessing of a Christmas tree, after it has been erected.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] The Christmas tree is considered by some as Christianisation of pagan tradition and ritual surrounding the Winter Solstice , which included the use of evergreen boughs, and an adaptation of pagan tree worship ; [ 147 ] according to eighth-century biographer Æddi Stephanus , Saint Boniface (634–709), who was a missionary in Germany, took an ax to an oak tree dedicated to Thor and pointed out a fir tree , which he stated was a more fitting object of reverence because it pointed to heaven and it had a triangular shape, which he said was symbolic of the Trinity .

[ 148 ] The English language phrase "Christmas tree" is first recorded in 1835 [ 149 ] and represents an importation from the German language.

[ 147 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] An advent wreath as designed by Johann Hinrich Wichern . On Christmas, the Christ Candle in the center of the wreath is traditionally lit in many church services .

Since the 16th century, the poinsettia , a native plant from Mexico, has been associated with Christmas carrying the Christian symbolism of the Star of Bethlehem ; in that country it is known in Spanish as the Flower of the Holy Night .

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] Other popular holiday plants include holly, mistletoe , red amaryllis , and Christmas cactus . Along with a Christmas tree, the interior of a home may be decorated with these plants, along with garlands and evergreen foliage. The display of Christmas villages has also become a tradition in many homes this season. The outside of houses may be decorated with lights and sometimes with illuminated sleighs , snowmen , and other Christmas figures. Mistletoe features prominently in European myth and folklore (for example, the legend of Baldr ); it is an evergreen parasitic plant that grows on trees, especially apples and poplar, and turns golden when it is dried. It is customary to hang a sprig of mistletoe in the house at Christmas, and anyone standing underneath it may be kissed.

Christmas lights in Verona , Italy Other traditional decorations include bells , candles , candy canes , stockings , wreaths , and angels . The wreaths and candles in each window are a more traditional Christmas display. The concentric assortment of leaves, usually from an evergreen , make up Christmas wreaths. Candles in each window are meant to demonstrate that Christians believe that Jesus Christ is the ultimate light of the world.

[ 154 ] Christmas lights and banners may be hung along streets, music played by speakers, and Christmas trees placed in prominent places.

[ 155 ] It is common in many parts of the world for town squares and consumer shopping areas to sponsor and display decorations. Rolls of brightly colored paper with secular or religious Christmas motifs are manufactured to wrap gifts. In some countries, Christmas decorations are traditionally taken down on Twelfth Night .

Nativity play Main article: Nativity play St. Francis at Greccio by Giotto , 1295 The tradition of the Nativity scene comes from Italy. One of the earliest representation in art of the nativity was found in the early Christian Roman catacomb of Saint Valentine .

[ 156 ] It dates to about AD 380.

[ 157 ] Another, of similar date, is beneath the pulpit in Sant'Ambrogio, Milan .

For the Christian celebration of Christmas, the viewing of the Nativity play is one of the oldest Christmastime traditions, with the first reenactment of the Nativity of Jesus taking place in A.D. 1223 in the Italian town of Greccio .

[ 158 ] In that year, Francis of Assisi assembled a Nativity scene outside of his church in Italy and children sang Christmas carols celebrating the birth of Jesus.

[ 158 ] Each year, this grew larger, and people travelled from afar to see Francis' depiction of the Nativity of Jesus that came to feature drama and music.

[ 158 ] Nativity plays eventually spread throughout all of Europe, where they remained popular. Christmas Eve and Christmas Day church services often came to feature Nativity plays, as did schools and theatres.

[ 158 ] In France, Germany, Mexico, and Spain, Nativity plays are often reenacted outdoors in the streets.

[ 158 ] Music and carols Main article: Christmas music Christmas carolers in Jersey The earliest extant specifically Christmas hymns appear in fourth-century Rome . Latin hymns such as " Veni redemptor gentium " , written by Ambrose , Archbishop of Milan, were austere statements of the theological doctrine of the Incarnation in opposition to Arianism .

" Corde natus ex Parentis " ("Of the Father's love begotten") by the Spanish poet Prudentius ( died 413) is still sung in some churches today.

[ 159 ] In the 9th and 10th centuries, the Christmas "Sequence" or "Prose" was introduced in North European monasteries, developing under Bernard of Clairvaux into a sequence of rhymed stanzas . In the 12th century the Parisian monk Adam of St. Victor began to derive music from popular songs, introducing something closer to the traditional Christmas carol . Christmas carols in English appear in a 1426 work of John Awdlay who lists twenty five "caroles of Cristemas", probably sung by groups of ' wassailers ', who went from house to house.

[ 160 ] Child singers in Bucharest , 1841 The songs now known specifically as carols were originally communal folk songs sung during celebrations such as "harvest tide" as well as Christmas. It was only later that carols began to be sung in church. Traditionally, carols have often been based on medieval chord patterns, and it is this that gives them their uniquely characteristic musical sound. Some carols like " Personent hodie ", " Good King Wenceslas ", and " In dulci jubilo " can be traced directly back to the Middle Ages . They are among the oldest musical compositions still regularly sung.

" Adeste Fideles " (O Come all ye faithful) appeared in its current form in the mid-18th century.

The singing of carols increased in popularity after the Protestant Reformation in the Lutheran areas of Europe, as the Reformer Martin Luther wrote carols and encouraged their use in worship, in addition to spearheading the practice of caroling outside the Mass .

[ 161 ] The 18th-century English reformer Charles Wesley , a founder of Methodism , understood the importance of music to Christian worship. In addition to setting many psalms to melodies, he wrote texts for at least three Christmas carols. The best known was originally entitled "Hark! How All the Welkin Rings", later renamed " Hark! The Herald Angels Sing ".

[ 162 ] Hark! The Herald Angels Sing Performed by the U.S. Army Band Chorus Problems playing this file? See media help .

Christmas seasonal songs of a secular nature emerged in the late 18th century. The Welsh melody for " Deck the Halls " dates from 1794, with the lyrics added by Scottish musician Thomas Oliphant in 1862, and the American " Jingle Bells " was copyrighted in 1857. Other popular carols include " The First Noel ", " God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen ", " The Holly and the Ivy ", " I Saw Three Ships ", " In the Bleak Midwinter ", " Joy to the World ", " Once in Royal David's City " and " While Shepherds Watched Their Flocks ".

[ 163 ] In the 19th and 20th centuries, African American spirituals and songs about Christmas, based in their tradition of spirituals, became more widely known. An increasing number of seasonal holiday songs were commercially produced in the 20th century, including jazz and blues variations. In addition, there was a revival of interest in early music, from groups singing folk music, such as The Revels, to performers of early medieval and classical music.

One of the most ubiquitous festive songs is " We Wish You a Merry Christmas ", which originates from the West Country of England in the 1930s.

[ 164 ] Radio has covered Christmas music from variety shows from the 1940s and 1950s, as well as modern-day stations that exclusively play Christmas music from late November through December 25.

[ 165 ] Hollywood movies have featured new Christmas music, such as " White Christmas " in Holiday Inn and Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer .

[ 165 ] Traditional carols have also been included in Hollywood films, such as "Hark! The Herald Angels Sing" in It's a Wonderful Life (1946), and " Silent Night " in A Christmas Story .

[ 165 ] Traditional cuisine See also: Christmas food Christmas dinner setting Panettone A special Christmas family meal is traditionally an important part of the holiday's celebration, and the food served varies greatly from country to country. Some regions have special meals for Christmas Eve, such as Sicily , where 12 kinds of fish are served. In the United Kingdom and countries influenced by its traditions, a standard Christmas meal includes turkey, goose or other large bird, gravy, potatoes, vegetables, sometimes bread, and cider. Special desserts are also prepared, such as Christmas pudding , mince pies , fruit cake and Yule log cake .

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] In Poland and Scandinavia, fish is often used for the traditional main course, but richer meat such as lamb is increasingly served. In Sweden, it is common with a special variety of smörgåsbord , where ham, meatballs, and herring play a prominent role. In Germany, France, and Austria, goose and pork are favored. Beef, ham, and chicken in various recipes are popular worldwide. The Maltese traditionally serve Imbuljuta tal-Qastan , [ 168 ] a chocolate and chestnuts beverage, after Midnight Mass and throughout the Christmas season. Slovenes prepare the traditional Christmas bread potica , bûche de Noël in France, panettone in Italy, and elaborate tarts and cakes.

Panettone , an Italian type of sweet bread and fruitcake , originally from Milan , Italy, usually prepared and enjoyed for Christmas and New Year in Western , Southern , and Southeastern Europe , as well as in South America , Eritrea , [ 169 ] Australia and North America.

[ 170 ] The eating of sweets and chocolates has become popular worldwide, and sweeter Christmas delicacies include the German stollen , marzipan cake or candy, and Jamaican rum fruit cake. As one of the few fruits traditionally available to northern countries in winter, oranges have been long associated with special Christmas foods.

Eggnog is a sweetened dairy -based beverage traditionally made with milk, cream, sugar, and whipped eggs (which gives it a frothy texture).

Spirits such as brandy, rum, or bourbon are often added. The finished serving is often garnished with a sprinkling of ground cinnamon or nutmeg.

Cards Main article: Christmas card A 1907 Christmas card with Santa and some of his reindeer Christmas cards are illustrated messages of greeting exchanged between friends and family members during the weeks preceding Christmas Day. The traditional greeting reads "wishing you a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year", much like that of the first commercial Christmas card , produced by Sir Henry Cole in London in 1843.

[ 171 ] The custom of sending them has become popular among a wide cross-section of people with the emergence of the modern trend towards exchanging E-cards .

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] Christmas cards are purchased in considerable quantities and feature artwork, commercially designed and relevant to the season. The content of the design might relate directly to the Christmas narrative , with depictions of the Nativity of Jesus , or Christian symbols such as the Star of Bethlehem , or a white dove , which can represent both the Holy Spirit and Peace on Earth. Other Christmas cards are more secular and can depict Christmas traditions , figures such as Santa Claus, objects directly associated with Christmas such as candles, holly, and baubles, or a variety of images associated with the season, such as Christmastide activities, snow scenes, and the wildlife of the northern winter.

[ 174 ] Commemorative stamps Main article: Christmas stamp A number of nations have issued commemorative stamps at Christmastide.

[ 175 ] Postal customers will often use these stamps to mail Christmas cards , and they are popular with philatelists .

[ 176 ] These stamps are regular postage stamps, unlike Christmas seals , and are valid for postage year-round. They usually go on sale sometime between early October and early December and are printed in considerable quantities.

Christmas seals Main article: Christmas seals Christmas seals were first issued to raise funding to fight and bring awareness to tuberculosis . The first Christmas seal was issued in Denmark in 1904, and since then other countries have issued their own Christmas seals.

[ 177 ] Gift giving Main article: Christmas gift Christmas gifts under a Christmas tree The exchanging of gifts is one of the core aspects of the modern Christmas celebration, making it the most profitable time of year for retailers and businesses throughout the world. On Christmas, people exchange gifts based on the Christian tradition associated with Saint Nicholas , [ 178 ] and the gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh which were given to the baby Jesus by the Magi .

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] The practice of gift giving in the Roman celebration of Saturnalia may have influenced Christian customs, but on the other hand the Christian "core dogma of the Incarnation , however, solidly established the giving and receiving of gifts as the structural principle of that recurrent yet unique event", because it was the Biblical Magi, "together with all their fellow men, who received the gift of God through man's renewed participation in the divine life".

[ 181 ] However, Thomas J. Talley holds that the Roman Emperor Aurelian placed the alternate festival on December 25 in order to compete with the growing rate of the Christian Church, which had already been celebrating Christmas on that date first.

[ 182 ] Gift-bearing figures Main article: List of Christmas and winter gift-bringers by country A number of figures are associated with Christmas and the seasonal giving of gifts. Among these are Father Christmas , also known as Santa Claus (derived from the Dutch for Saint Nicholas), Père Noël, and the Weihnachtsmann ; Saint Nicholas or Sinterklaas ; the Christkind ; Kris Kringle; Joulupukki ; tomte/nisse ; Babbo Natale; Saint Basil ; and Ded Moroz . The Scandinavian tomte (also called nisse) is sometimes depicted as a gnome instead of Santa Claus.

Saint Nicholas , known as Sinterklaas in the Netherlands, is considered by many to be the original Santa Claus .

[ 183 ] The best known of these figures today is the red-dressed Santa Claus, of diverse origins. The name 'Santa Claus' can be traced back to the Dutch Sinterklaas ('Saint Nicholas'). Nicholas was a 4th-century Greek bishop of Myra , a city in the Roman province of Lycia , whose ruins are 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) from modern Demre in southwest Turkey.

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] Among other saintly attributes, he was noted for the care of children, generosity, and the giving of gifts. His feast day, December 6, came to be celebrated in many countries with the giving of gifts.

[ 42 ] Saint Nicholas traditionally appeared in bishop's attire, accompanied by helpers, inquiring about the behaviour of children during the past year before deciding whether they deserved a gift or not. By the 13th century, Saint Nicholas was well known in the Netherlands, and the practice of gift-giving in his name spread to other parts of central and southern Europe. At the Reformation in 16th- and 17th-century Europe, many Protestants changed the gift bringer to the Christ Child or Christkindl , corrupted in English to 'Kris Kringle', and the date of giving gifts changed from December 6 to Christmas Eve.

[ 42 ] The modern popular image of Santa Claus, however, was created in the United States, and in particular in New York. The transformation was accomplished with the aid of notable contributors including Washington Irving and the German-American cartoonist Thomas Nast (1840–1902). Following the American Revolutionary War , some of the inhabitants of New York City sought out symbols of the city's non-English past. New York had originally been established as the Dutch colonial town of New Amsterdam and the Dutch Sinterklaas tradition was reinvented as Saint Nicholas.

[ 186 ] Current tradition in several Latin American countries (such as Venezuela and Colombia) holds that while Santa makes the toys, he then gives them to the Baby Jesus, who is the one who actually delivers them to the children's homes, a reconciliation between traditional religious beliefs and the iconography of Santa Claus imported from the United States.

Christkind , Munich , Germany In Italy's South Tyrol , Austria, the Czech Republic, Southern Germany, Hungary, Liechtenstein, Slovakia, and Switzerland, the Christkind ( Ježíšek in Czech, Jézuska in Hungarian and Ježiško in Slovak) brings the presents. Greek children get their presents from Saint Basil on New Year's Eve, the eve of that saint's liturgical feast.

[ 187 ] The German St. Nikolaus is not identical with the Weihnachtsmann (who is the German version of Santa Claus / Father Christmas). St. Nikolaus wears a bishop's dress and still brings small gifts (usually candies, nuts, and fruits) on December 6 and is accompanied by Knecht Ruprecht . Although many parents around the world routinely teach their children about Santa Claus and other gift bringers, some have come to reject this practice, considering it deceptive .

[ 188 ] Multiple gift-giver figures exist in Poland, varying between regions and individual families. St Nicholas ( Święty Mikołaj ) dominates Central and North-East areas, the Starman ( Gwiazdor ) is most common in Greater Poland , Baby Jesus ( Dzieciątko ) is unique to Upper Silesia , with the Little Star ( Gwiazdka ) and the Little Angel ( Aniołek ) being common in the South and the South-East. Grandfather Frost ( Dziadek Mróz ) is less commonly accepted in some areas of Eastern Poland.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] It is worth noting that across all of Poland, St Nicholas is the gift giver on Saint Nicholas Day on December 6.

Sport Christmas during the Middle Ages was a public festival with annual indulgences included the sporting.

[ 42 ] When Puritans outlawed Christmas in England in December 1647 the crowd brought out footballs as a symbol of festive misrule.

[ 52 ] The Orkney Christmas Day Ba' tradition continues.

[ 191 ] In the former top tier of English football , home and away Christmas Day and Boxing Day double headers were often played guaranteeing football clubs large crowds by allowing many working people their only chance to watch a game.

[ 192 ] Champions Preston North End faced Aston Villa on Christmas Day 1889 [ 193 ] and the last December 25 fixture was in 1965 in England , Blackpool beating Blackburn Rovers 4–2.

[ 192 ] One of the most memorable images of the Christmas truce during World War I was the games of football played between the opposing sides on Christmas Day 1914.

[ 194 ] More recently, in the United States, both NFL and NBA have held fixtures on Christmas Day.

[ 195 ] Christmas in China During the late Qing dynasty , the Shanghai News referred to Christmas by a variety of terms. In 1872, it initially called Christmas "Jesus' birthday" ( Chinese : 耶穌誕日 ; pinyin : yēsū dànrì ), but from 1873 to 1881 it used terms such as "Western countries' Winter Solstice" ( Chinese : 西國冬至 ; pinyin : xīguó dōngzhì ) and "Western peoples' Winter Solstice" ( Chinese : 西人冬節 ; pinyin : xīrén dōngjiē ), before finally settling on "Foreign Winter Solstice" ( Chinese : 外國冬至 ; pinyin : wàiguó dōngzhì ) from 1882 onwards. This term was gradually replaced by the now standard term "Festival of the birth of the Holy One" ( Chinese : 聖誕節 ; pinyin : shèngdàn jiē ) during the early years of the twentieth century.

[ 196 ] Scandinavia and the Nordics Main articles: Yule and Christmas in Denmark , Christmas in Norway , and Christmas in Sweden This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Scandinavia— Denmark , Norway , Sweden —where Lutheranism is dominant, Christmas ( jul ) is celebrated on 24 December. In Sweden, it is traditional for companies to host a Christmas buffet lunch (julbord or jullunch) for their employees a week before Christmas. To prevent food poisoning during the holiday season, Swedish newspapers annually publish reports and laboratory tests warning the public to avoid leaving cold cuts, mayonnaise, and other perishable foods at room temperature to prevent spoilage. Christmas in Sweden is a time to indulge in festive meals, with roasted ham being the centerpiece of the feast. However, the exact day for enjoying this treat varies across regions, with each area having its own traditions. Another well-established custom in Sweden is tuning in to watch a special Disney television program at precisely 3 p.m. on December 24.

In Norway, the Christmas feast is held on December 24, with each region offering its own special dishes for Christmas dinner. After the meal, "Julenissen" (where "jule" means Christmas and "nissen" refers to a mythical elf in Norwegian folklore) brings gifts to well-behaved children. Following a quiet family gathering on December 25, another grand celebration takes place on Boxing Day, December 26, where children go door-to-door visiting neighbors and receiving treats.

Choice of date A mosaic dated to around 300 AD in the Tomb of the Julii , an apparently Christian tomb in the Vatican Necropolis . Most scholars believe it depicts Jesus as the sun god Sol / Helios .

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] Theories Main article: Date of the birth of Jesus § Day of birth There are several theories as to why December 25 was chosen as the date for Christmas. However, theology professor Susan Roll notes that "no liturgical historian [...] goes so far as to deny that it has any sort of relation with the sun, the winter solstice and the popularity of solar worship in the later Roman Empire".

[ 199 ] The early Church linked Jesus Christ to the Sun and referred to him as the 'Sun of Righteousness' ( Sol Justitiae ) prophesied by Malachi .

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] In the early fifth century, Augustine of Hippo and Maximus of Turin preached that it was fitting to celebrate Christ's birth at the winter solstice, because it marked the point when the hours of daylight begin to grow.

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] The 'history of religions' or 'substitution' theory suggests that the Church chose December 25 as Christ's birthday ( dies Natalis Christi ) [ 204 ] to appropriate the Roman winter solstice festival dies Natalis Solis Invicti (birthday of Sol Invictus , the 'Invincible Sun'), held on this date since 274 AD; before the earliest evidence of Christmas on that date.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Gary Forsythe, Professor of Ancient History, says that the Natalis Solis Invicti followed "the seven-day period of the Saturnalia (December 17–23), Rome's most joyous holiday season since Republican times , characterized by parties, banquets, and exchanges of gifts".

[ 28 ] Roll says that "the specific nature of the relation" between Christmas and the Natalis Solis Invicti has not yet been "conclusively proven from extant texts".

[ 199 ] The 'calculation theory' [ 29 ] suggests that December 25 was calculated as nine months after a date chosen for Jesus's conception : 25 March, the Roman date of the spring equinox , which later became the Feast of the Annunciation .

[ 29 ] [ 205 ] Date according to Julian calendar Some jurisdictions of the Eastern Orthodox Church , including those of Russia , Georgia , North Macedonia , Montenegro , Serbia , and Jerusalem , mark feasts using the older Julian calendar . Since Christmas 1899 until Christmas 2099 inclusive, there is a difference of 13 days between the Julian calendar and the modern Gregorian calendar . As a result, December 25 on the Julian calendar currently corresponds to January 7 on the calendar used by most governments and people in everyday life. Therefore, the aforementioned Orthodox Christians mark December 25 (and thus Christmas) on the day that is internationally considered to be January 7.

[ 206 ] However, following the Council of Constantinople in 1923 , [ 207 ] other Orthodox Christians, such as those belonging to the jurisdictions of Constantinople , Bulgaria , Greece , Romania , Antioch , Alexandria , Albania , Cyprus , Finland , and the Orthodox Church in America , among others, began using the Revised Julian calendar , which at present corresponds exactly to the Gregorian calendar.

[ 208 ] Therefore, these Orthodox Christians mark December 25 (and thus Christmas) on the same day that is internationally considered to be December 25.

A further complication is added by the fact that the Armenian Apostolic Church continues the original ancient Eastern Christian practice of celebrating the birth of Christ not as a separate holiday, but on the same day as the celebration of his baptism ( Theophany ), which is on January 6. This is a public holiday in Armenia, and it is held on the same day that is internationally considered to be January 6, because since 1923 the Armenian Church in Armenia has used the Gregorian calendar.

[ 209 ] However, there is also a small Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem , which maintains the traditional Armenian custom of celebrating the birth of Christ on the same day as Theophany (January 6), but uses the Julian calendar for the determination of that date. As a result, this church celebrates "Christmas" (more properly called Theophany) on the day that is considered January 19 on the Gregorian calendar in use by the majority of the world.

[ 210 ] Following the 2022 invasion of its territory by Russia , Ukraine officially moved its Christmas date from January 7 to December 25, to distance itself from the Russian Orthodox Church that had supported Russia's invasion.

[ 211 ] [ 212 ] This followed the Orthodox Church of Ukraine formally adopting the Revised Julian calendar for fixed feasts and solemnities.

[ 213 ] Table of dates There are four different dates used by different Christian groups to mark the birth of Christ, given in the table below.

Church or section Calendar Date Gregorian date Note Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem Julian calendar January 6 January 19 Correspondence between Julian January 6 and Gregorian January 19 holds until 2100; in the following century the difference will be one day more.

Armenian Apostolic Church , Armenian Evangelical Church Gregorian calendar January 6 January 6 Eastern Orthodox Church jurisdictions, including those of Constantinople , Bulgaria , Ukraine [ 214 ] (state holiday, Orthodox and Greek Catholic ), Greece , Romania , Moldova ( Metropolis of Bessarabia ), Antioch , Alexandria , Albania , Cyprus , Finland , the Orthodox Church in America .

Also, the Ancient Church of the East , Syriac Orthodox Church , Indian Orthodox Church .

Revised Julian calendar December 25 December 25 Revised Julian calendar was agreed at the 1923 Council of Constantinople.

[ 207 ] Although it follows the Julian calendar, the Ancient Church of the East decided on 2010 to celebrate Christmas according to the Gregorian calendar date.

Other Eastern Orthodox: Russia , Georgia , Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) , North Macedonia , Belarus , Moldova ( Metropolis of Chișinău and All Moldova ), Montenegro, Serbia and Jerusalem .

Also, some Byzantine Rite Catholics and Byzantine Rite Lutherans .

Julian calendar December 25 January 7 Correspondence between Julian December 25 and Gregorian January 7 of the following year holds until 2100; from 2101 to 2199 the difference will be one day more.

[ citation needed ] Coptic Orthodox Church Coptic calendar Koiak 29 or 28 (December 25) January 7 After the Coptic insertion of a leap day in what for the Julian calendar is August (September in Gregorian), Christmas is celebrated on Koiak 28 in order to maintain the exact interval of nine 30-day months and 5 days of the child's gestation.

[ citation needed ] Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church (sole date), Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church (sole date), and P'ent'ay (Ethiopian-Eritrean Evangelical) Churches (primary date) Ethiopian calendar Tahsas 29 or 28 (December 25) January 7 Further information: Ethiopian Christmas After the Ethiopian and Eritrean insertion of a leap day in what for the Julian calendar is August (September in Gregorian), Christmas (also called Liddet or Gena, also Ledet or Genna) [ 215 ] is celebrated on Tahsas 28 in order to maintain the exact interval of nine 30-day months and 5 days of the child's gestation.

[ 216 ] Most Protestants ( P'ent'ay /Evangelicals) in the diaspora have the option of choosing the Ethiopian calendar ( Tahsas 29/January 7) or the Gregorian calendar (December 25) for religious holidays, with this option being used when the corresponding eastern celebration is not a public holiday in the western world (with most diaspora Protestants celebrating both days).

[ citation needed ] Most Western Christian churches , most Eastern Catholic churches and civil calendars; also the Assyrian Church of the East .

Gregorian calendar December 25 December 25 The Assyrian Church of the East adopted the Gregorian calendar in 1964.

Economy Main article: Economics of Christmas Christmas is typically a peak selling season for retailers in many nations around the world; sales increase dramatically during this time as people purchase gifts, decorations, and supplies to celebrate. In the United States, the "Christmas shopping season" starts as early as October.

[ 217 ] In Canada, merchants begin advertising campaigns before Halloween (October 31) and step up their marketing following Remembrance Day on November 11. In the UK and Ireland, the Christmas shopping season starts from mid-November, around the time when high street Christmas lights are turned on.

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] A concept devised by retail entrepreneur David Lewis , the first Christmas grotto opened in Lewis's department store in Liverpool, England in 1879.

[ 220 ] In the United States, it has been calculated that a quarter of all personal spending takes place during the Christmas/holiday shopping season.

[ 221 ] Figures from the US Census Bureau reveal that expenditure in department stores nationwide rose from $20.8 billion in November 2004 to $31.9 billion in December 2004, an increase of 54 percent. In other sectors, the pre-Christmas increase in spending was even greater, there being a November–December buying surge of 100 percent in bookstores and 170 percent in jewelry stores. In the same year employment in American retail stores rose from 1.6 million to 1.8 million in the two months leading up to Christmas.

[ 222 ] Industries completely dependent on Christmas include Christmas cards , of which 1.9 billion are sent in the United States each year, and live Christmas trees, of which 20.8 million were cut in the US in 2002.

[ 223 ] In the UK in 2010, up to £8 billion was expected to be spent online at Christmas, approximately a quarter of total retail festive sales.

[ 219 ] In most Western nations, Christmas Day is the least active day of the year for business and commerce; almost all retail, commercial and institutional businesses are closed, and almost all industries cease activity (more than any other day of the year), whether laws require such or not. In England and Wales , the Christmas Day (Trading) Act 2004 prevents all large shops from trading on Christmas Day. Similar legislation was approved in Scotland in 2007.

Film studios release many high-budget movies during the holiday season, including Christmas films, fantasy movies or high-tone dramas with high production values to hopes of maximizing the chance of nominations for the Academy Awards .

[ 224 ] One economist's analysis calculates that despite increased overall spending, Christmas is a deadweight loss under orthodox microeconomic theory , because of the effect of gift-giving. This loss is calculated as the difference between what the gift giver spent on the item and what the gift receiver would have paid for the item. It is estimated that in 2001, Christmas resulted in a $4 billion deadweight loss in the US alone.

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] Because of complicating factors, this analysis is sometimes used to discuss possible flaws in current microeconomic theory. Other deadweight losses include the effects of Christmas on the environment and the fact that material gifts are often perceived as white elephants , imposing cost for upkeep and storage and contributing to clutter.

[ 227 ] Christmas decorations at the Galeries Lafayette department store in Paris, France. The Christmas season is the busiest trading period for retailers.

Christmas market in Jena , Germany Each year (most notably 2000) money supply in US banks is increased for Christmas shopping.

Controversies Main article: Christmas controversies Further information: Persecution of Christians in the Soviet Union , Kirchenkampf , and Antireligious campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party A 1931 edition of the Soviet magazine Bezbozhnik , published by the League of Militant Atheists , depicting an Orthodox Christian priest being forbidden to take home a tree for the celebration of Christmastide , which was banned under the Marxist–Leninist doctrine of state atheism [ 228 ] Christmas has been the subject of controversy and attacks from various sources, both Christian and non-Christian. Historically, it was prohibited by Puritans during their ascendency in the Commonwealth of England (1647–1660) and in Colonial New England where the Puritans outlawed the celebration of Christmas in 1659 on the grounds that Christmas was not mentioned in Scripture and therefore violated the Reformed regulative principle of worship .

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] The Parliament of Scotland , which was dominated by Presbyterians , passed a series of acts outlawing the observance of Christmas between 1637 and 1690; Christmas Day did not become a public holiday in Scotland until 1871.

[ 57 ] [ 231 ] [ 232 ] Today, some conservative Reformed denominations such as the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland and the Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America likewise reject the celebration of Christmas based on the regulative principle and what they see as its non-Scriptural origin.

[ 233 ] [ 234 ] Celebrating Christmas is banned in the Jehovah's Witnesses , as the Governing Body believes that Christmas is originally pagan and again that it is without basis in Scripture.

[ 235 ] Christmas celebrations have also been prohibited by atheist states such as the Soviet Union [ 236 ] and more recently majority Muslim states such as Somalia , Tajikistan and Brunei .

[ 237 ] Some Christians and organizations such as Pat Robertson 's American Center for Law and Justice cite alleged attacks on Christmas (dubbing them a "war on Christmas").

[ 238 ] Such groups claim that any specific mention of the term "Christmas" or its religious aspects is being increasingly censored , avoided, or discouraged by a number of advertisers, retailers, government (prominently schools), and other public and private organizations. One controversy is the occurrence of Christmas trees being renamed Holiday trees.

[ 239 ] In the U.S. there has been a tendency to replace the greeting Merry Christmas with Happy Holidays , which is considered inclusive at the time of the Jewish celebration of Hanukkah .

[ 240 ] In the U.S., and Canada, where the use of the term "Holidays" is most prevalent, opponents have denounced its usage and avoidance of using the term "Christmas" as being politically correct .

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] [ 243 ] In 1984, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Lynch v. Donnelly that a Christmas display (which included a Nativity scene) owned and displayed by the city of Pawtucket, Rhode Island , did not violate the First Amendment.

[ 244 ] American Muslim scholar Abdul Malik Mujahid has said that Muslims must treat Christmas with respect, even if they disagree with it.

[ 245 ] The government of the People's Republic of China officially espouses state atheism, [ 246 ] and has conducted antireligious campaigns to this end.

[ 247 ] In December 2018, officials raided Christian churches prior to Christmastide and coerced them to close; Christmas trees and Santa Clauses were also forcibly removed.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] See also Christianity portal Holidays portal Apollo 8 Genesis reading from lunar orbit, December 24, 1968 Christmas by medium – Christmas represented in different media Christmas in July – Second Christmas celebration Christmas Peace – Finnish tradition Christmas Sunday – Sunday after Christmas List of Christmas films List of Christmas novels – Christmas as depicted in literature Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Little Christmas – Alternative title for 6 January Mithraism in comparison with other belief systems#25th of December Nochebuena – Evening or day before Christmas Day Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Notes ^ Several branches of Eastern Christianity that use the Julian calendar also celebrate on December 25 according to that calendar, which is now January 7 on the Gregorian calendar . Armenian Churches observed the nativity on January 6 even before the Gregorian calendar originated. Most Armenian Christians use the Gregorian calendar, still celebrating Christmas Day on January 6. Some Armenian churches use the Julian calendar, thus celebrating Christmas Day on January 19 on the Gregorian calendar, with January 18 being Christmas Eve. Some regions also celebrate primarily on December 24, rather than December 25.

References ^ Abdel Bari Atwan (2015).

Islamic State: The Digital Caliphate . Oakland, California, USA: University of California. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-520-28928-4 .

The Alawites celebrate the Christian festivals of Christmas, Easter, and Epiphany and believe in reincarnation (though not for women).

^ "Alawite | Definition, Sect, Syria, & Assad Dynasty | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . January 16, 2025 . Retrieved February 10, 2025 .

^ "Christmas as a Multi-Faith Festival" (PDF) .

BBC Learning English . December 29, 2005.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 1, 2008 . Retrieved September 30, 2008 .

^ "In the U.S., Christmas Not Just for Christians" . Gallup, Inc. December 24, 2008. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012 . Retrieved December 16, 2012 .

^ "Christmas" . Online Etymology Dictionary. December 20, 2020.

^ a b Martindale, Cyril Charles (1908). "Christmas".

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Schoenborn, Christoph (1994).

God's human face: the Christ-icon . Ignatius Press. p. 154.

ISBN 978-0-89870-514-0 .

^ Galey, John (1986).

Sinai and the Monastery of St. Catherine . American University in Cairo Press. p. 92.

ISBN 978-977-424-118-5 .

^ "Christmas | Origin, Definition, Traditions, History, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved December 22, 2021 .

^ Christenmas, n.

, Oxford English Dictionary . Retrieved December 12.

^ a b "Christmas" in the Middle English Dictionary.

Archived January 5, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Griffiths, Emma (December 22, 2004).

"Why get cross about Xmas?" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2011 . Retrieved December 12, 2011 .

^ a b Hutton, Ronald (2001).

The Stations of the Sun: A History of the Ritual Year in Britain . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-285448-3 .

^ "Midwinter" in Bosworth & Toller.

Archived January 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Serjeantson, Mary Sidney (1968).

A History of Foreign Words in English .

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

Archived from the original on January 13, 2012 . Retrieved December 13, 2011 .

^ Yule Archived January 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved December 12.

^ Online Etymology Dictionary, Noel Archived January 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , accessed January 3, 2022 ^ "Толковый словарь Даля онлайн" .

slovardalja.net (in Russian) . Retrieved December 25, 2022 .

^ Rees, Neil (December 10, 2023).

"Christmas – the original story" .

Christian Today . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ Piñero, Antonio (December 16, 2021).

"Biblical stories of Jesus' birth reveal intriguing clues about his times" .

National Geographic . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ a b English, Adam C. (October 14, 2016).

Christmas: Theological Anticipations .

Wipf and Stock Publishers . pp.

70– 71.

ISBN 978-1-4982-3933-2 .

^ The manuscript reads, VIII kal. Ian. natus Christus in Betleem Iudeae.

(" The Chronography of 354 AD. Part 12: Commemorations of the Martyrs Archived November 22, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ", The Tertullian Project . 2006.) ^ a b Bradshaw, Paul (2020). "The Dating of Christmas". In Larsen, Timothy (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Christmas . Oxford University Press. pp.

7– 10.

^ Roll, Susan (1995).

Toward the Origins of Christmas . Kok Pharos Publishing. p. 83.

^ "Christmas and its cycle".

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 3 (2nd ed.). Catholic University of America Press. 2002. pp.

550– 557.

^ Mackenzie, Edward; Walcott, Charles (1868).

Sacred Archaeology: A Popular Dictionary of Ecclesiastical Art and Institutions, from Primitive to Modern Times . Reeve. p. 153 . Retrieved December 3, 2024 .

^ a b c Forsythe, Gary (2012).

Time in Roman Religion: One Thousand Years of Religious History . Routledge. pp. 113, 123, 141.

^ a b c d Bradshaw, Paul (2020). "The Dating of Christmas". In Larsen, Timothy (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Christmas . Oxford University Press. pp.

4– 10.

^ Johnson, Maxwell E. (2005).

"The Apostolic Tradition" . In Wainwright, Geoffrey ; Westerfield Tucker, Karen Beth (eds.).

The Oxford History of Christian Worship . Oxford University Press. p. 65.

ISBN 978-0-19-513886-3 . Retrieved February 3, 2012 .

^ a b Roy, Christian (2005).

Traditional Festivals: A Multicultural Encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 146.

ISBN 978-1-57607-089-5 .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2014 . Retrieved February 3, 2012 .

^ Pokhilko, Hieromonk Nicholas.

"History of Epiphany" .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2016 . Retrieved December 27, 2017 .

^ Hastings, James; Selbie, John A., eds. (2003).

Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics . Vol. 6. Kessinger Publishing Company. pp.

603– 604.

ISBN 978-0-7661-3676-2 .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2018 . Retrieved February 3, 2012 .

^ Frøyshov, Stig Simeon (October 23, 2013).

"[Hymnography of the] Rite of Jerusalem" .

Canterbury Dictionary of Hymnology .

^ a b c d e f g Murray, Alexander, "Medieval Christmas" Archived December 13, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , History Today , December 1986, 36 (12), pp. 31–39.

^ Forbes, Bruce David (October 1, 2008).

Christmas: A Candid History .

University of California Press . p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-520-25802-0 .

^ Hill, Christopher (2003).

Holidays and Holy Nights: Celebrating Twelve Seasonal Festivals of the Christian Year . Quest Books. p. 91.

ISBN 9780835608107 .

^ "Who was Charlemagne? The unlikely king who became an emperor" .

National Geographic . Retrieved November 30, 2023 .

^ "William the Conqueror: Crowned at Christmas" .

The History Press . Retrieved November 30, 2023 .

^ a b McGreevy, Patrick. "Place in the American Christmas", ( JSTOR Archived December 15, 2018, at the Wayback Machine ), Geographical Review , Vol. 80, No. 1. January 1990, pp. 32–42. Retrieved September 10, 2007.

^ a b c Restad, Penne L. (1995).

Christmas in America: a History . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-510980-1 .

^ a b c d Forbes, Bruce David, Christmas: a candid history , University of California Press, 2007, ISBN 0-520-25104-0 , pp. 68–79.

^ "History of Christmas Trees" .

History .

Archived from the original on December 25, 2012 . Retrieved December 15, 2012 .

^ Karkan, Betsy (December 2, 2016).

"Lutheran Advent Traditions" .

Lutheran Reformation . Retrieved December 12, 2024 .

^ Lowe, Scott C. (January 11, 2011).

Christmas . John Wiley & Sons. p. 226.

ISBN 978-1-4443-4145-4 .

^ Shawcross, John T. (January 1, 1993).

John Milton . University Press of Kentucky. p. 249.

ISBN 978-0-8131-7014-5 .

^ Heinz, Donald (2010).

Christmas: Festival of Incarnation . Fortress Press. p. 94.

ISBN 978-1-4514-0695-5 .

^ Old, Hughes Oliphant (2002).

Worship: Reformed According to Scripture . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-664-22579-7 .

^ a b c d Durston, Chris (December 1985).

"Lords of Misrule: The Puritan War on Christmas 1642–60" .

History Today . Vol. 35, no. 12. pp.

7– 14. Archived from the original on March 10, 2007.

^ Old, Hughes Oliphant (2002).

Worship: Reformed According to Scripture . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-664-22579-7 .

^ Carl Philipp Emanuel Nothaft (October 2011). "From Sukkot to Saturnalia: The Attack on Christmas in Sixteenth-Century Chronological Scholarship".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

72 (4): 504– 505.

JSTOR 41337151 .

^ a b "Historian Reveals that Cromwellian Christmas Football Rebels Ran Riot" (Press release). University of Warwick. December 17, 2003.

Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved August 25, 2023 .

^ Sandys, William (1852).

Christmastide: its history, festivities and carols . London: John Russell Smith. pp.

119– 120.

^ a b "When Christmas carols were banned" . BBC . Retrieved March 11, 2022 .

^ Chambers, Robert (1885).

Domestic Annals of Scotland , p. 211.

^ "Act dischairging the Yule vacance" .

The Records of the Parliaments of Scotland to 1707 . (in Middle Scots ). St Andrews: University of St Andrews and National Archives of Scotland. Archived from the original on May 19, 2012 . Retrieved February 29, 2012 .

^ a b Anon (May 22, 2007).

"Bank Holiday Fact File" (PDF) .

TUC press release . TUC. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 3, 2013 . Retrieved January 12, 2010 .

^ Miall, Anthony & Peter (1978).

The Victorian Christmas Book . Dent. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0-460-12039-5 .

^ Woodforde, James (1978).

The Diary of a Country Parson 1758–1802 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-281241-4 .

^ a b c d Barnett, James Harwood (1984).

The American Christmas: A Study in National Culture . Ayer Publishing. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-405-07671-8 .

^ Mather, Cotton (December 25, 1712).

Grace defended. A censure on the ungodliness, by which the glorious grace of God, is too commonly abused. A sermon preached on the twenty fifth day of December, 1712. Containing some seasonable admonitions of piety. And concluded, with a brief dissertation on that case, whether the penitent thief on the cross, be an example of one repenting at the last hour, and on such a repentance received unto mercy?

(Speech). Boston, Massachusetts: B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish . Retrieved August 12, 2022 .

^ Stephen W. Nissenbaum, " Christmas in Early New England, 1620–1820: Puritanism, Popular Culture, and the Printed Word ", Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society 106 :1: p79-164 (January 1, 1996). Retrieved December 25, 2023.

^ Innes, Stephen (1995).

Creating the Commonwealth: The Economic Culture of Puritan New England .

W.W. Norton & Company . p. 145.

ISBN 978-0-393-03584-1 .

^ Marling, Karal Ann (2000).

Merry Christmas!: Celebrating America's Greatest Holiday . Harvard University Press. p. 44.

ISBN 978-0-674-00318-7 .

^ Smith Thomas, Nancy (2007).

Moravian Christmas in the South . Old Salem Museums & Gardens. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-8078-3181-6 .

^ Andrews, Peter (1975).

Christmas in Colonial and Early America . United States: World Book Encyclopedia, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-7166-2001-3 .

^ Christmas in France .

World Book Encyclopedia . 1996. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-7166-0876-9 .

^ a b c Rowell, Geoffrey (December 1993).

"Dickens and the Construction of Christmas" .

History Today .

43 (12).

Archived from the original on December 29, 2016 . Retrieved December 28, 2016 .

^ Ledger, Sally; Furneaux, Holly, eds. (2011).

Charles Dickens in Context . Cambridge University Press. p. 178.

ISBN 978-0-19-513886-3 . Retrieved December 25, 2020 .

^ John Storey, "The Invention of the English Christmas," in Christmas, Ideology, and Popular Culture, Sheila Whiteley, ed., pp.17, 19 (2008).

^ Tara Moore, Victorian Christmas in Print (2009).

^ Id.

^ a b Standiford, Les (2008).

The Man Who Invented Christmas: How Charles Dickens's A Christmas Carol Rescued His Career and Revived Our Holiday Spirits . Crown.

ISBN 978-0-307-40578-4 .

^ a b Minzesheimer, Bob (December 22, 2008).

"Dickens' classic 'Christmas Carol' still sings to us" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2009 . Retrieved April 30, 2010 .

^ Hutton, Ronald (February 15, 2001).

The Stations of the Sun: A History of the Ritual Year in Britain . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-157842-7 .

^ Forbes, Bruce David (October 1, 2008).

Christmas: A Candid History . --University of California Press. p. 62.

ISBN 978-0-520-25802-0 .

^ Kelly, Richard Michael, ed. (2003).

A Christmas Carol . Broadview Press. pp. 9, 12.

ISBN 978-1-55111-476-7 .

^ Moore, n.73 above at p.18.

^ Cochrane, Robertson.

Wordplay: origins, meanings, and usage of the English language . University of Toronto Press, 1996, p. 126, ISBN 0-8020-7752-8 .

^ Hutton, Ronald, The Stations of the Sun: The Ritual Year in England . 1996. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 113.

ISBN 0-19-285448-8 .

^ Joe L. Wheeler.

Christmas in My Heart , Volume 10, p. 97. Review and Herald Pub Assoc, 2001.

ISBN 0-8280-1622-4 .

^ Earnshaw, Iris (November 2003).

"The History of Christmas Cards" . Inverloch Historical Society Inc.

Archived from the original on May 26, 2016 . Retrieved July 25, 2008 .

^ The Girlhood of Queen Victoria: a selection from Her Majesty's diaries , p. 61. Longmans, Green & Co., 1912. University of Wisconsin. Retrieved December 25, 2023.

^ Lejeune, Marie Claire .

Compendium of symbolic and ritual plants in Europe , p.550. University of Michigan ISBN 90-77135-04-9 .

^ a b Shoemaker, Alfred Lewis. (1959) Christmas in Pennsylvania: a folk-cultural study.

Edition 40. pp. 52, 53. Stackpole Books 1999.

ISBN 0-8117-0328-2 .

^ Godey's Lady's Book , 1850.

Godey's copied it exactly, except he removed the Queen's tiara, and Prince Albert's moustache, to remake the engraving into an American scene.

^ Kelly, Richard Michael (ed.) (2003), A Christmas Carol , p. 20. Broadview Literary Texts, New York: Broadview Press, ISBN 1-55111-476-3 .

^ Moore's poem transferred the genuine old Dutch traditions celebrated at New Year in New York, including the exchange of gifts, family feasting, and tales of "sinterklass" (a derivation in Dutch from "Saint Nicholas", from whence comes the modern "Santa Claus") to Christmas.

The history of Christmas: Christmas history in America Archived April 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , 2006.

^ "Americans Celebrate Christmas in Diverse Ways" Archived December 10, 2006, at the Wayback Machine , Usinfo.state.gov, November 26, 2006.

^ First Presbyterian Church of Watertown "Oh ... and one more thing" December 11, 2005 Archived February 25, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c Restad, Penne L. (1995), Christmas in America: a History , Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 96.

ISBN 0-19-510980-5 .

^ "Christian church of God – history of Christmas" . Christianchurchofgod.com. Archived from the original on December 19, 2010 . Retrieved February 24, 2011 .

^ Meggs, Philip B. A History of Graphic Design. 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. p 148 ISBN 0-471-29198-6 .

^ Jacob R. Straus (November 16, 2012).

"Federal Holidays: Evolution and Current Practices" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 3, 2014 . Retrieved January 2, 2014 .

^ Crossland, David (December 22, 2021).

"Truces weren't just for 1914 Christmas" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved December 24, 2021 .

^ Baxter, Keven (December 24, 2021).

"Peace for a day: How soccer brought a brief truce to World War I on Christmas Day 1914" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved December 24, 2021 .

^ "The Real Story of the Christmas Truce" .

Imperial War Museums . Retrieved December 24, 2021 .

^ "Christmas Truce 1914" .

BBC School Radio . Retrieved December 24, 2021 .

^ Connelly, Mark (2000).

Christmas at the Movies: Images of Christmas in American, British and European Cinema . I.B.Tauris. p. 186.

ISBN 978-1-86064-397-2 .

^ Ramet, Sabrina Petra (November 10, 2005).

Religious Policy in the Soviet Union .

Cambridge University Press . p. 138.

ISBN 978-0-521-02230-9 .

^ Zugger, Christopher Lawrence (2001).

Catholics of the Soviet Empire from Lenin Through Stalin .

Syracuse University Press . p. 210.

ISBN 978-0-8156-0679-6 .

^ Tamkin, Emily (December 30, 2016).

"How Soviets Came to Celebrate New Year's Like Christmas (and Why Russians Still Do)" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved January 6, 2022 .

^ Goldberg, Carey (January 7, 1991).

"A Russian Christmas—Better Late Than Never: Soviet Union: Orthodox Church celebration is the first under Communists. But, as with most of Yeltsin's pronouncements, the holiday stirs a controversy" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2015 . Retrieved November 22, 2014 .

^ a b "Celebrate Christmas Italian Styles at These City Events" .

TripSavvy . Retrieved January 26, 2021 .

^ Perry, Joseph (December 24, 2015).

"How the Nazis co-opted Christmas: A history of propaganda" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 11, 2016 .

^ "Somalia joins Brunei by banning Christmas celebrations 'to protect Islam' " .

The Daily Telegraph . December 24, 2015.

Archived from the original on May 29, 2018 . Retrieved April 4, 2018 .

^ Neuman, Scott (December 16, 2023).

"There's no Christmas in Bethlehem this year. With war in Gaza, festivities are off" .

NPR . Retrieved December 23, 2023 .

^ Jespersen, Knud J. V. (June 21, 2011).

A History of Denmark . Macmillan International Higher Education. p. 91.

ISBN 978-0-230-34417-4 .

^ McGrath, Alister E. (January 27, 2015).

Christianity: An Introduction . John Wiley & Sons. p. 239.

ISBN 978-1-118-46565-3 .

^ Huckabee, Tyler (December 9, 2021).

"No, Christmas Trees Don't Have 'Pagan' Roots" . Relevant Magazine . Retrieved December 9, 2022 .

^ Neal, Daniel (1822).

The History of the Puritans . William Baynes and Son. p. 193 . Retrieved December 25, 2023 .

(page 133 in the link above) ^ NEWS, SA (December 24, 2022).

"Christmas Day 2022: Facts, Story & Quotes About Merry Christmas" .

SA News Channel . Retrieved December 26, 2022 .

^ a b Simek (2007:379).

^ Coffman, Elesha.

"Why December 25?" Archived September 19, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Christian History & Biography , Christianity Today , 2000.

^ Simek (2010:180, 379–380).

^ Weiser, Franz Xaver (1958).

Handbook of Christian Feasts and Customs .

Harcourt .

^ "Koliada" . Encyclopediaofukraine.com . Retrieved November 19, 2012 .

^ "2018 Worship and Music Planning Calendar" .

The United Methodist Church . 2018 . Retrieved December 9, 2018 .

^ Stetzer, Ed (December 14, 2015).

"What Is Church Attendance Like During Christmastime? New Data From LifeWay Research" .

Christianity Today .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2018 . Retrieved December 9, 2018 .

^ Bingham, John (October 27, 2016).

"British families only attend church at Christmas, new figures suggest" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2017 . Retrieved December 24, 2017 .

^ Collins, Ace, Stories Behind the Great Traditions of Christmas , Zondervan, (2003), ISBN 0-310-24880-9 p.47.

^ Internet Archive Susan Topp Weber, Nativities of the World , Gibbs Smith, 2013 ^ "Alla scoperta dei cinque presepi più belli di Bologna | Nuok" . Nuok.it. January 24, 2013. Archived from the original on December 27, 2013 . Retrieved December 25, 2013 .

^ "Presepi in Liguria: provincia di Genova, Tigullio -sito di Paolino" . Digilander.libero.it.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2013 . Retrieved December 25, 2013 .

^ "Holidays at the Museums: Carnegie Museum of Natural History" . Carnegiemnh.org. November 26, 2013. Archived from the original on December 27, 2013 . Retrieved December 25, 2013 .

^ Bershad, David; Carolina Mangone, The Christian Travelers Guide to Italy Archived December 25, 2022, at the Wayback Machine , Zondervan, 2001.

^ "The Provençal Nativity Scene" . Simplytreasures.com. Archived from the original on September 14, 2012 . Retrieved December 25, 2013 .

^ Seaburg, Carl, Celebrating Christmas: An Anthology Archived December 25, 2022, at the Wayback Machine , iUniverse, 2003.

^ Bowler, Gerry, The World Encyclopedia of Christmas Archived December 25, 2022, at the Wayback Machine , Random House LLC, 2012.

^ Carol King (December 24, 2012).

"A Christmas Living Nativity Scene in Sicily" .

Italy Magazine . Archived from the original on December 26, 2013 . Retrieved December 25, 2013 .

^ Collins p. 83.

^ These Strange German Ways . Edelweiss Publishing Company. 1989. p. 122.

^ Nowak, Claire (December 23, 2019).

"The Real Reason Why Christmas Colors Are Green and Red" .

Reader's Digest . Retrieved December 18, 2020 .

^ Norris, Rebecca (October 29, 2019).

"Here's the History Behind Why Red and Green Are the Traditional Christmas Colors" .

Country Living . Retrieved December 18, 2020 .

^ Collins, Ace (April 1, 2010).

Stories Behind the Great Traditions of Christmas .

Zondervan .

ISBN 978-0-310-87388-4 . Retrieved December 2, 2010 .

^ Senn, Frank C. (2012).

Introduction to Christian Liturgy . Fortress Press. p. 118.

ISBN 978-1-4514-2433-1 .

^ "The Christmas Tree".

Lutheran Spokesman .

29– 32. 1936.

^ Kelly, Joseph F. (2010).

The Feast of Christmas . Liturgical Press. p. 94.

ISBN 978-0-8146-3932-0 .

^ Blainey, Geoffrey (October 24, 2013).

A Short History of Christianity .

Rowman & Littlefield Publishers . p. 418.

ISBN 978-1-4422-2590-9 .

^ Mandryk, DeeAnn (October 25, 2005).

Canadian Christmas Traditions . James Lorimer & Company. p.

67 .

ISBN 978-1-55439-098-4 .

^ Wells, Dorothy (1897).

"Christmas in Other Lands" .

The School Journal .

55 : 697– 8.

^ Jones, David Albert (October 27, 2011).

Angels .

Oxford University Press . p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-19-161491-0 .

^ Becker, Udo (January 1, 2000).

The Continuum Encyclopedia of Symbols .

A & C Black . p. 60.

ISBN 978-0-8264-1221-8 .

^ Crump, William D. (2006).

The Christmas Encyclopedia . McFarland & Company. p. 67.

ISBN 978-0-7864-2293-7 .

^ Socias, James (June 24, 2020).

Handbook of Prayers . Midwest Theological Forum.

ISBN 978-1-936045-54-9 .

^ Kitch, Anne E. (2004).

The Anglican Family Prayer Book . Morehouse Publishing. p. 125.

^ a b van Renterghem, Tony.

When Santa was a shaman.

St. Paul: Llewellyn Publications , 1995.

ISBN 1-56718-765-X .

^ Fritz Allhoff, Scott C. Lowe (2010).

Christmas .

John Wiley & Sons .

^ Harper, Douglas, Christ Archived May 9, 2006, at the Wayback Machine , Online Etymology Dictionary , 2001.

^ "The Chronological History of the Christmas Tree" . The Christmas Archives. Archived from the original on December 21, 2007 . Retrieved December 18, 2007 .

^ "Christmas Tradition – The Christmas Tree Custom" . Fashion Era.

Archived from the original on December 18, 2007 . Retrieved December 18, 2007 .

^ Hewitson, Carolyn (2013).

Festivals . Routledge.

ISBN 9781135057060 .

It is said to resemble the star of Bethlehem. The Mexicans call it the flower of the Holy Night, but usually it is called poinsettia after the man who introduced it to America, Dr Joel Poinsett.

^ "The Legends and Traditions of Holiday Plants" .

www.ipm.iastate.edu .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2016 . Retrieved February 17, 2016 .

^ "Liturgical Year : Symbolic Lights and Fires of Christmas (Activity)" . Catholic Culture.

Archived from the original on January 13, 2012 . Retrieved December 10, 2011 .

^ Murray, Brian.

"Christmas lights and community building in America," History Matters , Spring 2006.

Archived June 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Osborne, John (May 31, 2020).

Rome in the Eighth Century: A History in Art .

Cambridge University Press . p. 31.

ISBN 978-1-108-87372-7 .

^ Tuleja, Thaddeus F. (1999).

Curious Customs: The Stories Behind More Than 300 Popular American Rituals . BBS Publishing Corporation.

ISBN 978-1-57866-070-4 .

Francis Weiser (1952) says that the first known depiction of the nativity scene, found in the catacombs of Rome, dates from AD 380.

^ a b c d e Collins, Ace (2010).

Stories Behind the Great Traditions of Christmas . Zondervan. pp.

139– 141.

ISBN 9780310873884 .

^ Miles, Clement, Christmas customs and traditions , Courier Dover Publications, 1976, ISBN 0-486-23354-5 , p. 32.

^ Miles, Clement, Christmas customs and traditions , Courier Dover Publications, 1976, pp. 47–48 ^ Clancy, Ronald M. (2008).

Sacred Christmas Music: The Stories Behind the Most Beloved Songs of Devotion . Sterling Publishing Company. p. 40.

ISBN 978-1-4027-5811-9 .

^ Dudley-Smith, Timothy (1987).

A Flame of Love . London: Triangle/SPCK.

ISBN 978-0-281-04300-2 .

^ Thomas, John; Talhaiarn; Thomas Oliphant (1862).

Welsh melodies: with Welsh and English poetry . London: Addison, Hollier and Lucas. p. 139.

OCLC 63015609 .

^ Byrne, Eugene (December 24, 2019).

"Arguably most famous Christmas song was written by a Bristolian" .

BristolLive . Retrieved November 6, 2020 .

^ a b c Smolko, Joanna (February 4, 2012).

"Christmas music" .

Grove Music Online .

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.A2227990 .

^ Broomfield, Andrea (2007), Food and Cooking in Victorian England: A History , Greenwood Publishing Group, 2007, pp. 149–150.

^ Muir, Frank (1977), Christmas customs & traditions , Taplinger Pub. Co., 1977, p. 58.

^ "Imbuljuta" . Schoolnet.gov.mt. Archived from the original on January 22, 2012 . Retrieved February 3, 2012 .

^ "Christmas in Eritrea" .

^ "Negli Usa tutti pazzi per il panettone, è boom vendite" .

Ansa (in Italian). December 4, 2017.

^ "Christmas card sold for record price" Archived February 5, 2006, at the Wayback Machine , BBC News. Retrieved October 28, 2011.

^ Schaverien, Anna (June 19, 2021).

"E-Cards Are Back, Thanks to the Pandemic" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved November 13, 2021 .

^ "It's time to mail your holiday cards – if you can find any" .

NBC News . November 2, 2021 . Retrieved November 13, 2021 .

^ "History of Christmas – Part 2" .

The Note Pad | Stationery & Party Etiquette Blog by American Stationery . November 28, 2012 . Retrieved December 22, 2021 .

^ "In pictures: Christmas stamps" . BBC . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ "The First Christmas Stamps" . American Philatelic Society . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ Loytved, G. (2006).

"[Christmas seals]" .

Pneumologie (Stuttgart, Germany) .

60 (11): 701– 710.

doi : 10.1055/s-2006-944325 .

ISSN 0934-8387 .

PMID 17109268 .

^ Collins, Ace (April 20, 2010).

Stories Behind the Great Traditions of Christmas . Zondervan. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-310-87388-4 . Retrieved April 10, 2012 .

^ Trexler, Richard (May 23, 1997).

The Journey of the Magi: Meanings in History of a Christian Story .

Princeton University Press . p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-691-01126-4 .

Archived from the original on December 31, 2015 . Retrieved April 10, 2012 .

^ Collins, Ace (April 20, 2010).

Stories Behind the Great Traditions of Christmas . Zondervan. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-310-87388-4 . Retrieved April 10, 2012 .

^ Berking, Helmuth (March 30, 1999).

Sociology of Giving . SAGE Publications. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-85702-613-2 .

^ Talley, Thomas J. (1991).

The Origins of the Liturgical Year . Liturgical Press. pp.

88– 91.

ISBN 978-0-8146-6075-1 . Retrieved December 27, 2016 .

^ Seward, Pat; Lal, Sunandini Arora (2006).

Netherlands . Marshall Cavendish. p.

116 .

ISBN 978-0-7614-2052-1 .

^ Domenico, Roy Palmer (2002).

The regions of Italy: a reference guide to history and culture . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 21.

ISBN 978-0-313-30733-1 .

^ Collins, Ace (2009).

Stories Behind Men of Faith . Zondervan. p.

121 .

ISBN 978-0-310-56456-0 . Retrieved June 20, 2015 .

^ Jona Lendering (November 20, 2008).

"Saint Nicholas, Sinterklaas, Santa Claus" . Livius.org.

Archived from the original on May 13, 2011 . Retrieved February 24, 2011 .

^ "St. Basil (330–379)" . Skiathosbooks.com. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012 . Retrieved February 3, 2012 .

^ Matera, Mariane.

"Santa: The First Great Lie" Archived September 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Citybeat , Issue 304.

^ "Kto przynosi Wam prezenty? Św. Mikołaj, Gwiazdor, Aniołek, Dzieciątko czy może Dziadek Mróz?" .

Bezprawnik (in Polish). December 22, 2016. Archived from the original on December 24, 2017 . Retrieved December 24, 2017 .

^ "Nie tylko Mikołaj, czyli kto według tradycji rozdaje prezenty w różnych regionach Polski?" .

gazeta.pl (in Polish). December 21, 2015.

Archived from the original on December 24, 2017 . Retrieved December 24, 2017 .

^ "Christmas Day Ba' 2023" .

Orkney.com .

^ a b "Why football at Christmas is a very British tradition" .

BBC Bitesize .

^ "The Last Time Football Was Played on Christmas Day in England" .

90min.com . December 25, 2020.

^ John Woodcock (November 17, 2013).

"England v Germany: when rivals staged beautiful game on the Somme" Archived June 12, 2020, at the Wayback Machine , The Daily Telegraph .

^ "The sports games that don't stop for Christmas Day" . December 22, 2017 – via www.bbc.co.uk.

^ "从"外国冬至"到"圣诞节"：耶稣诞辰在近代中国的节日化" . Archived from the original on December 24, 2017 . Retrieved December 24, 2017 .

^ Hijmans(2009), p. 570: "To explain the presence of Sol in a Christian mausoleum, scholars suggested that in this case he was not Sol, but Christ depicted in the guise of Sol as the New Light and the Sun of Justice. In the words of Lawrence: 'This is the Sun God, Sol Invictus, but also Christ the light of the world' ... Sol in mausoleum M has become the image of choice to illustrate the gradual ascendency of Christianity in the third century AD and in particular of its appropriation of Roman imagery for Christian purposes. ... While Perler, Wallraff, and others differ on details of the meaning of this Sol-Christ, all agree on the basic Christian interpretation and the identity of Sol as Christ".

^ Jensen, Robin Margaret (2000).

Understanding Early Christian Art . Routledge. p. 42.

^ a b Roll, Susan K.

Toward the Origins of Christmas . Peeters Publishers, 1995, p. 107.

^ Hijmans, S.E., Sol: The Sun in the Art and Religions of Rome, 2009, p. 584.

^ Malachi 4:2 ^ Roll, p.160 ^ St Augustune, Sermon 192, in St Augustine: Sermons on the Liturgical Seasons , translated by Sr Mary Sarah Muldowney.

Catholic University of America Press , 1984, p.34 ^ Kelly, Joseph F., The Origins of Christmas , Liturgical Press, p.80 ^ Melton, J. Gordon (2011).

Religious Celebrations: An Encyclopedia of Holidays, Festivals, Solemn Observances, and Spiritual Commemorations [2 volumes]: An Encyclopedia of Holidays, Festivals, Solemn Observances, and Spiritual Commemorations .

ABC-CLIO . p. 39.

ISBN 978-1-59884-206-7 .

^ Ramzy, John.

"The Glorious Feast of Nativity: 7 January? 29 Kiahk? 25 December?" . Coptic Orthodox Church Network.

Archived from the original on December 28, 2010 . Retrieved January 17, 2011 .

^ a b Blakemore, Erin (December 26, 2019).

"Why some people celebrate Christmas in January" .

www.nationalgeographic.com . National Geographic Partners LLC. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved July 26, 2022 .

^ "Christmas in Bethlehem" .

www.sacred-destinations.com .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2010 . Retrieved June 12, 2010 .

^ "Why Do Armenians Celebrate Christmas on January 6th?" .

armenianchurch.org . Retrieved August 13, 2022 .

^ "Christmas is here- yet again!" .

Jerusalem Post . Retrieved August 13, 2022 .

^ Lukiv, Jaroslav (July 28, 2023).

"Ukraine moves Christmas Day in snub to Russia" .

BBC News . British Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ "Ukraine moves official Christmas Day holiday to Dec. 25, denouncing Russian-imposed traditions" .

AP News . July 29, 2023 . Retrieved July 31, 2023 .

^ RFE/RL.

"Orthodox Church Of Ukraine Approves Calendar Switch In Widening Diversion From Russia" .

RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty . Retrieved June 18, 2023 .

^ Lukiv, Jaroslav (July 28, 2023).

"Ukraine moves Christmas Day in snub to Russia" .

BBC News . Retrieved July 28, 2023 .

^ The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church Faith and Order - Religious Holidays and Calendar Archived October 29, 2021, at the Wayback Machine > ^ Siegbert Uhlig, Encyclopaedia Aethiopica He-N, p. 538 ^ Varga, Melody.

About:Retail Industry .

"Archived copy" . Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved December 7, 2006 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "South Molton and Brook Street Christmas Lights" Archived November 19, 2010, at the Wayback Machine (November 16, 2010), View London.co.uk .

^ a b Kollewe, Julia, (November 29, 2010), "West End spree worth £250m marks start of Christmas shopping season" Archived December 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , The Guardian .

^ "Liverpool's record breaking Christmas grotto beloved by generations" .

Liverpool Echo . Retrieved April 15, 2024 .

^ Gwen Outen (December 3, 2004).

"Economics Report – Holiday Shopping Season in the U.S." Voice of America. Archived from the original on March 3, 2009.

^ US Census Bureau.

"Facts. The Holiday Season" December 19, 2005. (accessed November 30, 2009) Archived copy at the Library of Congress (May 7, 2010).

^ US Census 2005.

^ Zauzmer, Ben (January 31, 2020).

"Oscar Seasons: The Intersection of Data and the Academy Awards" .

Harvard Data Science Review .

2 (1).

doi : 10.1162/99608f92.6230ce9f .

S2CID 213681214 . Retrieved November 15, 2021 .

^ Joel Waldfogel " The Deadweight Loss of Christmas " (PDF), American Economic Review , December 1993, 83 (5). Retrieved December 25, 2023.

^ "Is Santa a deadweight loss?" ( Archived December 21, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ).

The Economist December 20, 2001.

^ Reuters.

"Christmas is Damaging the Environment, Report Says" Archived March 12, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , December 16, 2005.

^ Harper, Timothy (1999).

Moscow Madness: Crime, Corruption, and One Man's Pursuit of Profit in the New Russia . McGraw-Hill. p.

72 .

ISBN 978-0-07-026700-8 .

^ "Marta Patiño, The Puritan Ban on Christmas" . Timetravel-britain.com. Archived from the original on March 1, 2011 . Retrieved February 24, 2011 .

^ Christmas in the Colonies Archived December 25, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Time . Retrieved December 25, 2011.

^ Daniels, Bruce Colin (1995). Puritans at Play: Leisure and Recreation in Colonial New England. Macmillan, p. 89, ISBN 978-0-312-16124-8 ^ Roark, James; Johnson, Michael; Cohen, Patricia; Stage, Sarah; Lawson, Alan; Hartmann, Susan (2011).

Understanding the American Promise: A History, Volume I: To 1877 . Bedford/St. Martin's. p. 91.

^ "Should Christians Celebrate Christmas?" . Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland . Retrieved February 3, 2025 .

^ Minutes of Session of 1905 . Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America. 1905. p. 130 . Retrieved December 25, 2023 .

^ "Witnesses: Jehovah's Witnesses at a glance" .

BBC . September 29, 2009 . Retrieved December 3, 2024 .

^ Goldberg, Carey (January 7, 1991).

"A Russian Christmas—Better Late Than Never: Soviet Union: Orthodox Church Celebration Is the First Under Communists. But, as with Most of Yeltsin's Pronouncements, the Holiday Stirs a Controversy" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2015 . Retrieved August 11, 2016 .

^ Woolf, Nicky (December 24, 2015).

"Christmas celebrations banned in Somalia, Tajikistan and Brunei" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2016 . Retrieved August 10, 2016 .

^ "ACLJ, Christmas laws" .

American Center for Law and Justice . Aclj.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2013 . Retrieved December 25, 2013 .

^ Aliweiwi, Jehad (November 28, 2005).

"A Christmas Tree or a Holiday Tree?" .

Muslim Canadian Congress . Archived from the original on December 31, 2005 . Retrieved December 25, 2023 .

(previous title: "Christmas controversy article") ^ Feder, Don, "In the culture, Christmas morphs into holiday" Archived April 12, 2010, at the Wayback Machine , Jewish World Review , December 13, 2000.

^ "The Brits Have It Right: Forget Happy Holidays, Just Wish People Merry Christmas" .

The Guardian . London. August 11, 2016.

Archived from the original on December 21, 2016 . Retrieved December 11, 2016 .

^ Jankowski, Paul (August 11, 2016).

"Is Saying 'Merry Christmas' Politically Correct? Who Cares?" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on August 7, 2017 . Retrieved August 22, 2017 .

^ Taylor, Christopher Stuart (August 11, 2016).

"If We Can't Say 'Merry Christmas' in Canada, Multiculturalism Failed" .

HuffPost . Archived from the original on September 29, 2016 . Retrieved August 11, 2016 .

^ "Lynch vs. Donnelly" .

Belcher Foundation . 1984.

Archived from the original on February 16, 2006 . Retrieved April 12, 2006 .

^ Mujahid, Abdul Malik. " Treating Christmas with respect ", Sound Vision .

Archived April 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Dillon, Michael (2001).

Religious Minorities and China (PDF) . Minority Rights Group International . Retrieved December 25, 2023 .

^ Buang, Sa'eda; Chew, Phyllis Ghim-Lian (May 9, 2014).

Muslim Education in the 21st Century: Asian Perspectives . Routledge. p. 75.

ISBN 978-1-317-81500-6 .

^ "Alarm over China's Church crackdown" .

BBC . December 18, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 5, 2019 . Retrieved January 11, 2019 .

^ "Santa Claus won't be coming to this town, as Chinese officials ban Christmas" .

South China Morning Post . December 18, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 12, 2019 . Retrieved January 11, 2019 .

Further reading Bowler, Gerry, The World Encyclopedia of Christmas (October 2004: McClelland & Stewart).

ISBN 978-0-7710-1535-9 .

Bowler, Gerry, Santa Claus: A Biography (November 2007: McClelland & Stewart).

ISBN 978-0-7710-1668-4 .

Comfort, David, Just Say Noel: A History of Christmas from the Nativity to the Nineties (November 1995: Fireside).

ISBN 978-0-684-80057-8 .

Count, Earl W., 4000 Years of Christmas: A Gift from the Ages (November 1997: Ulysses Press).

ISBN 978-1-56975-087-2 .

Federer, William J., There Really Is a Santa Claus: The History of St. Nicholas & Christmas Holiday Traditions ; Archived December 25, 2022, at the Wayback Machine (December 2002: Amerisearch).

ISBN 978-0-9653557-4-2 .

Kelly, Joseph F., The Origins of Christmas ; Archived December 25, 2022, at the Wayback Machine (August 2004: Liturgical Press).

ISBN 978-0-8146-2984-0 .

Martindale, Cyril (1908).

"Christmas" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Miles, Clement A., Christmas Customs and Traditions ; Archived December 25, 2022, at the Wayback Machine (1976: Dover Publications).

ISBN 978-0-486-23354-3 .

Nissenbaum, Stephen, The Battle for Christmas (1996; New York: Vintage Books, 1997).

ISBN 0-679-74038-4 .

Restad, Penne L. (1995).

Christmas in America: A History . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-509300-1 .

Rosenthal, Jim, St. Nicholas: A Closer Look at Christmas (July 2006: Nelson Reference).

ISBN 1-4185-0407-6 .

Sammons, Peter (May 2006).

The Birth of Christ . Glory to Glory Publications (UK).

ISBN 978-0-9551790-1-3 .

"Christmas" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

293– 294.

External links Christmas at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata Christmas collection at the Smithsonian National Museum of American History Christmas: Its Origin and Associations , by William Francis Dawson, 1902, from Project Gutenberg Christmas: its origin, celebration and significance as related in prose and verse , by Robert Haven Schauffler , 1907 v t e Christmas Blue Christmas Boxing Day Children's Day Christmas Eve Saint Nicholas Day Saint Stephen's Day Sol Invictus Yule In Christianity Holy Family Jesus Christ Child Mary Joseph Biblical Magi Adoration of the Magi Adoration of the Shepherds Advent Angel Gabriel Annunciation Annunciation to the shepherds Bethlehem Christmastide Epiphany Herod the Great Massacre of the Innocents flight into Egypt Nativity Fast Nativity of Jesus in art in later culture Nativity scene Neapolitan Star of Bethlehem Twelfth Night In folklore Badalisc Caganer Christkind Grýla Jack Frost Korvatunturi Kallikantzaros Legend of the Christmas Spider Mari Lwyd Miner's figure Nisse North Pole Old Man Winter Perchta Santa's workshop Tió de Nadal Turoń Vertep Wenceslaus Yule cat Gift-bringers Saint Nicholas folklore Santa Claus Befana Ded Moroz Father Christmas Grandpa Indian Joulupukki Julemanden Noel Baba Olentzero Père Noël Sinterklaas Others Companions of Saint Nicholas Belsnickel Elves Knecht Ruprecht Krampus Mrs. Claus Père Fouettard Sack Man Santa Claus' daughter Santa's reindeer Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer Snegurochka Zwarte Piet Traditions Advent calendar Advent candle Advent wreath Boar's Head Feast Candle arches Chalking the door Cards Carols by Candlelight Cavalcade of Magi Christingle Christmas jumper Christmas Peace Crackers Decorations Didukh The Elf on the Shelf Feast of the Seven Fishes Flying Santa Gifts Google Santa Tracker Hampers Las Posadas Letters Lights Lord of Misrule Markets Midnight Mass Moravian star Mummers' play Nine Lessons and Carols NORAD Tracks Santa Nutcrackers dolls Ornaments Parades list Piñatas Poinsettia Pyramids Räuchermann Christmas seals Secret Santa Spanbaum Szopka Stamps Stockings Tree Twelve Days Wassailing Windows Yule goat Yule log By country Australia Bangladesh Colombia Denmark Ethiopia Finland France Germany Nazi Germany Hungary Iceland folklore Indonesia Ireland Italy Mexico New Zealand Norway Philippines Poland Romania Russia Scotland Serbia Sweden Ukraine United States American Civil War Hawaii New Mexico Music Carols list Operas Hit singles in the UK Hit singles in the US Music charts ( Billboard ) Music books Carols for Choirs The Oxford Book of Carols The New Oxford Book of Carols Piae Cantiones Other media In literature A Christmas Carol Films Santa Claus in film Christmas horror Poetry " Old Santeclaus with Much Delight " " A Visit from St. Nicholas " " Christmas Day in the Workhouse " " Journey of the Magi " " Tomten " Christmas television specials United States Yule Log Apollo 8 Genesis reading In modern society Advent Conspiracy Black Friday (partying) Black Friday (shopping) Bronner's Christmas Wonderland Christmas and holiday season Christmas club Christmas creep Christmas Day (Trading) Act 2004 Christmas jumpers Christmas Lectures Christmasland in New Taipei City Christmas Mountains Christmas seals Christmas truce Controversies Cyber Monday Economics GivingTuesday Grinch El Gordo Jews and Christmas In July In August NBA games NFL games Pikkujoulu SantaCon Santa's Candy Castle Santa Claus Village Scrooge Small Business Saturday Super Saturday Virginia O'Hanlon (" Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Claus ") White Christmas Xmas Food and drink Dinner Joulupöytä Julbord Julebord Kūčios Réveillon Thirteen desserts Twelve-dish supper Wigilia Sweets Baked Alaska Candy cane Cake Cookie Cozonac Fruitcake Gingerbread Kutia Makówki Melomakarono Mince pie Pampushka Panettone Pavlova Pecan pie Poppy seed roll Pudding Pumpkin pie Qurabiya Red velvet cake Sugar plum Stollen Szaloncukor Turrón Yule log Soup Menudo Borscht Sauces Bread sauce Cranberry sauce Redcurrant sauce Beverages Apple cider Champurrado Eggnog Hot chocolate Kissel Mulled wine Smoking bishop Ponche crema Snowball Dumplings Hallaca Pierogi Tamale Meat and fish Carp Gefilte fish Ham Pickled herring Roast goose Romeritos Stuffing Tourtière Turkey Category v t e Nativity of Jesus People Holy Family Christ Child ( Jesus ) Mary Joseph Magi Melchior Caspar Balthazar Others Shepherds Herod the Great Place Bethlehem Gifts of the Magi Gold Frankincense Myrrh Narratives Gospel of Matthew Matthew 1 Matthew 1:18 Matthew 1:19 Matthew 1:20 Matthew 1:21 Matthew 1:22 Matthew 1:23 Matthew 1:24 Matthew 1:25 Matthew 2:11 Adoration of the Magi ( In art ) Gospel of Luke Luke 2 Annunciation to the shepherds Related Date Manger Star of Bethlehem Virgin birth of Jesus Saint Joseph's dreams Flight into Egypt In culture In art In film Batlejka Chalking the door Christmas village Szopka Nativity displays theft Nativity play Vertep Serbian Others Remembrances Advent Christmas Church of the Nativity Nativity Fast v t e Jesus Outline List of topics Chronology of Jesus's life Annunciation Nativity Virgin birth Date of birth Flight into Egypt Infancy (apocryphal) Christ Child Unknown years Baptism Temptation Apostles Selecting Ministry Disciples Sermon on the Mount / Plain Beatitudes Prayers Lord's Prayer Parables Miracles Transfiguration Homelessness Great Commandment Olivet Discourse Anointing Passion instruments Entry into Jerusalem Last Supper Farewell Discourse Agony in the Garden Betrayal Arrest Trial Crucifixion Sayings on the cross Instrument used True Cross Burial Tomb Resurrection Great Commission Ascension New Testament Gospels Matthew Mark Luke John Five Discourses of Matthew Gospel harmony Oral gospel traditions Historical background of the New Testament New Testament places associated with Jesus Names and titles of Jesus in the New Testament Historical Jesus Quest for the historical Jesus Historicity Sources Josephus Tacitus Mara bar Serapion Gospels Christ myth theory Depictions Bibliography Life of Christ in art Life of Christ Museum Statues Transfiguration Christianity Christ Christianity 1st century Christology Incarnation Person of Christ Pre-existence "I am" Relics Second Coming Session of Christ Son of God Cosmic Christ In other faiths Jesuism In comparative mythology Judaism In the Talmud Islam Ahmadiyya Baháʼí Faith Manichaeism Jesus the Splendour Mandaeism Master Jesus Family Genealogies Mary (mother) Joseph (legal father) Holy Family God the Father (alleged father) Panthera (alleged father) Brothers of Jesus Holy Kinship Anne (traditional maternal grandmother) Joachim (traditional maternal grandfather) Heli (paternal grandfather per Luke) Jacob (paternal grandfather per Matthew) Descendants Clopas (traditional uncle) Related Language of Jesus Interactions with women Mary Magdalene Mary, sister of Martha Christmas Easter Rejection of Jesus Criticism Mental health Race and appearance Sexuality and marital status Church of the Nativity Church of the Holy Sepulchre The Garden Tomb Shroud of Turin Category v t e Mary, mother of Jesus Family Joseph (husband) Jesus (son) Joachim (father) Anne (mother) Elizabeth Brothers of Jesus Life Tradition : early life Immaculate Conception Birth Presentation Marriage to Joseph Perpetual virginity In the Bible Annunciation Virginal motherhood Visitation Nativity of Jesus Presentation of Jesus Flight into Egypt Return to Nazareth Finding of Jesus in the Temple Miracle at the Wedding at Cana Passion of Jesus Crucifixion Deposition Resurrection Pentecost Tradition : later life Bilocation to Saint James Dormition Tomb Assumption Coronation Queenship Woman of the Apocalypse Apocryphal Protoevangelium of James Mariology Christian Anglican Catholic history papal Orthodox Protestant Lutheran Other Islamic Veneration Apparitions list Catholic churches Christmas Devotions month of May Feast days Patronage Shrines Veneration of Mary in the Catholic Church Titles Christotokos Coredemptrix Help of Christians Immaculate Heart Life-giving Spring Mediatrix ( of all graces ) New Eve Panagia Our Lady of Navigators Our Lady of Sorrows Our Lady of Victory Star of the Sea Seat of Wisdom Theotokos Prayers Angelus Antiphons Alma Redemptoris Mater Ave Regina caelorum Salve Regina Regina caeli Ave Maria Fátima prayers Hymns Akathist Ave maris stella Sub tuum praesidium Litany Loreto Magnificat Maria mater gratiae Memorare Rosary Three Hail Marys Art West Assumption Black Madonna Golden Madonna of Essen The Golden Virgin Pietà Queen of Heaven Stabat Mater East Agiosoritissa Madonna del Rosario Derzhavnaya Eleusa Theotokos of Smolensk Theotokos of Vladimir Hodegetria Related Life of the Virgin Saint Luke painting the Virgin Category Saints Portal Links to related articles v t e Liturgical year of the Catholic Church Ordinary Form of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church ( 1969 Calendar ) Advent Sundays 1st 2nd 3rd 4th Immaculate Conception December 17 to 23 Christmas Season Christmas Christmas Eve Midnight Mass Holy Family Mary, Mother of God Epiphany Baptism of the Lord Ordinary Time Presentation of the Lord Lent Ash Wednesday Sundays 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Saint Joseph Annunciation Palm Sunday Holy Week Paschal Triduum Holy Thursday Chrism Mass Mass of the Lord's Supper Good Friday Holy Saturday Easter Vigil Easter Season Easter Sunday Octave Sundays 2nd Divine Mercy Sunday 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th Ascension Pentecost Ordinary Time Trinity Sunday Corpus Christi Sacred Heart Visitation Nativity of John the Baptist Saints Peter and Paul Transfiguration Assumption Nativity of Mary Exaltation of the Cross All Saints' Day / All Hallows' Day All Saints' Eve / All Hallows' Eve All Souls' Day Presentation of Mary Christ the King Tridentine Mass of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church ( 1960 Calendar ) Advent Sundays 1st 2nd 3rd 4th Rorate Mass Immaculate Conception Greater Ferias Winter Ember Days Christmas Season Christmas Christmas Eve Octave Day of Christmas Holy Name of Jesus Epiphany Season Epiphany Holy Family Baptism of the Lord Purification of Mary P Lent Pre-Lent Septuagesima Sexagesima Quinquagesima Lent Ash Wednesday Sundays 1st 2nd 3rd 4th Spring Ember Days Saint Joseph Annunciation Passiontide Passion Sunday Palm Sunday P Holy Week P Paschal Triduum Tenebrae Holy Thursday Chrism Mass Mass of the Lord's Supper Good Friday Holy Saturday Easter Vigil Easter Season Easter Sunday P Octave Sundays after Easter 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th Rogation Days P Ascension P Pentecost Season Pentecost Summer Ember Days Trinity Sunday Corpus Christi P Sacred Heart Saint John the Baptist Saints Peter and Paul Precious Blood Visitation Transfiguration Assumption Nativity of Mary Exaltation of the Cross P Autumn Ember Days Maternity of Mary Christ the King All Saints' Day / All Hallows' Day All Saints' Eve / All Hallows' Eve All Souls' Day Presentation of Mary Legend P = Ordinary Procession according to the Roman Ritual Legend Italic font marks the 10 holy days of obligation in the universal calendar which do not normally fall on a Sunday.

Older calendars 1955 pre-1955 Tridentine Liturgical colours Ranking Computus Easter cycle Catholic Church portal v t e Holidays, observances, and celebrations in Algeria January New Year's Day (1) Yennayer (12) February Valentine's Day (14) Tafsut (28) March International Women's Day (8) Victory Day (19) World Water Day (22) Maghrebi Blood Donation Day (30) Spring vacation (2 last weeks) April April Fools' Day (1) Knowledge Day (16) Berber Spring (20) Earth Day (22) Election Day (Thursday) May International Workers' Day (1) World Press Freedom Day (3) Mother's Day (last Sunday) June–July–August Summer vacation (varies) June Children's Day (1) Father's Day (21) July Independence Day (5) September International Day of Peace (21) October International Day of Non-Violence (2) Halloween (31) November Revolution Day (1) December Christmas Eve (24) Christmas (25) New Year's Eve (31) Winter vacation (2 last weeks) Varies (year round) Hijri New Year's Day (Muharram 1) Ashura (Muharram 10) Ashura in Algeria Mawlid (Rabi' al-Awwal 12) Mawlid in Algeria Ramadan (Ramadan 1) Laylat al-Qadr (Ramadan 27) Eid al-Fitr (Shawwal 1) Day of Arafah (Dhu al-Hijjah 9) Eid al-Adha (Dhu al-Hijjah 10) Bold indicates major holidays commonly celebrated in Algeria, which often represent the major celebrations of the month.

See also: Lists of holidays .

v t e Public holidays in Australia New Year's Day Australia Day Good Friday Easter Saturday Easter Monday Anzac Day King's Birthday Labour Day Christmas Day Boxing Day v t e Public holidays in Canada Nationwide statutory holidays New Year's Day Good Friday Canada Day Labour Day Christmas Day Statutory holidays for federal employees Easter Monday Victoria Day National Day for Truth and Reconciliation Thanksgiving Remembrance Day Boxing Day Indigenous holidays National Indigenous Peoples Day National Day for Truth and Reconciliation Anishinaabe Giizhigad Goose Break Hobiyee Pestie'wa'taqetimk Quviasukvik Other common holidays April Fools' Day August Civic Holiday Commonwealth Day Earth Day Emancipation Day Father's Day Flag Day Grandparents' Day Groundhog Day/Daks Day Halloween International Women's Day Mother's Day National Family Week National Peacekeepers' Day Saint Patrick's Day Tartan Day Valentine's Day White Ribbon Day Alberta Family Day British Columbia Family Day Manitoba Louis Riel Day New Brunswick Family Day Loyalist Day Newfoundland & Labrador Discovery Day Memorial Day Orangemen's Day Saint George's Day Nova Scotia Davis Day Heritage Day Natal Day Nunavut Nunavut Day Ontario Family Day Loyalist Day Prince Edward Island Gold Cup Parade Day Islander Day Québec Construction Holiday Goose Break National Patriots' Day Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day Saskatchewan Family Day Yukon Discovery Day v t e Public holidays in Hong Kong New Year's Day Lunar New Year (first 3 days of the period) Ching Ming Festival Good Friday Holy Saturday Easter Monday Buddha's Birthday Labour Day Tuen Ng Festival Hong Kong SAR Establishment Day Mid-Autumn Festival PRC National Day Anniversary of the Xinhai Revolution Chung Yeung Festival Christmas Day Boxing Day Cancelled Queen's Birthday Liberation Day Double Ten Day Remembrance Day v t e Public holidays in Indonesia Joint holiday New Year's Day Chinese New Year Nyepi Good Friday Easter Labour Day Ascension Day Vesak Pancasila Day Independence Day Christmas Islamic New Year Mawlid Isra' and Mi'raj Eid al-Fitr Eid al-Adha v t e Public holidays in Ireland New Year's Day Saint Brigid's Day Saint Patrick's Day Easter Monday May Day June Holiday August Holiday October Holiday Christmas Day Saint Stephen's Day v t e Public holidays in Malaysia National holidays Chinese New Year Labour Day Wesak Day Eid al-Fitr Eid al-Adha Islamic New Year Merdeka Day Muharram Agong's Birthday Malaysia Day Muhammad's Birthday Christmas State holidays (differ by states) New Year's Day Yang di-Pertua Negeri Sembilan's Birthday Sultan of Kedah's Birthday Thaipusam Federal Territory Day Anniversary of Installation of the Sultan of Terengganu Sultan of Johor's Birthday Isra and Mi'raj Declaration of Malacca City as Historical City Good Friday Sultan of Terengganu's Birthday First Day of Ramadan Day of Nuzul Al-Quran Tadau Kaamatan Gawai Dayak Declaration of George Town as World Heritage Site Penang State Governor's Birthday Raja of Perlis's Birthday Sarawak Day Hol Day of Sultan Iskandar of Johor Sabah State Governor's Birthday Malacca State Governor's Birthday Sarawak State Governor's Birthday Sultan of Pahang's Birthday Deepavali Sultan of Perak's Birthday Sultan of Kelantan's Birthday Sultan of Selangor's Birthday Christmas Eve v t e Public holidays in Mexico Statutory holidays Año Nuevo Día de la Constitución Natalicio de Benito Juárez Día del Trabajo Día de Independencia Día de la Revolución Transmisión del Poder Ejecutivo Federal Navidad Civic holidays Día del Ejército Día de la Bandera Aniversario de la Expropiación petrolera Heroica Defensa de Veracruz Cinco de Mayo Natalicio de Miguel Hidalgo Día de la Marina Grito de Dolores Día de los Niños Héroes Consumación de la Independencia Natalicio de José Ma. Morelos y Pavón Descubrimiento de América Festivities Día de los Santos Reyes Día de San Valentín Día del Niño Día de las Madres Día del Maestro Día del estudiante Día del Padre Día de Todos los Santos Día de los Fieles Difuntos Día de la Virgen de Guadalupe Las Posadas Nochebuena Dia de los Santos Inocentes v t e Public holidays in Myanmar National holidays New Year's Day Independence Day Union Day Peasants' Day Full Moon Day of Tabaung Armed Forces Day Thingyan Labour Day Full Moon Day of Kason Martyrs' Day Full Moon Day of Kason Full Moon Day of Thadingyut Full Moon Day of Tazaungmon National Day Christmas Eid al-Adha Diwali Myanmar portal v t e Public holidays in New Zealand New Year's Day January 2 Waitangi Day Good Friday Easter Sunday Easter Monday Anzac Day King's Birthday Matariki Labour Day Christmas Day Boxing Day v t e Public holidays in the Philippines Regular holidays New Year's Day Maundy Thursday Good Friday Day of Valor Labor Day Independence Day Eid'l Fitr National Heroes Day Eid'l Adha Bonifacio Day Christmas Rizal Day Special non-working days Chinese New Year EDSA Revolution Anniversary Black Saturday Ninoy Aquino Day All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day Feast of the Immaculate Conception Christmas Eve Last day of the year Italicized : Movable holiday See also: Holiday economics v t e Public holidays in South Africa New Year's Day Human Rights Day Good Friday Family Day Freedom Day Workers' Day Youth Day National Women's Day Heritage Day Day of Reconciliation Christmas Day Day of Goodwill v t e Public holidays in Sri Lanka Jan–Mar Thai Pongal Duruthu Poya Day Independence Day Navam Poya Day Maha Shivratri Madin Poya Day Apr–Jun Sinhala and Tamil New Year Day eve Sinhalese New Year / Tamil New Year Bak Poya Day Good Friday May Day Vesak Poya Day Day following Vesak Poya Day Id-Ul-Fitr (Ramazan Festival Day) Poson Jul–Sep Esala Poya Day Id-Ul-Alha (Hadji Festival Day) Nikini Poya Day Binara Poya Day Oct–Dec Vap Poya Day Deepavali Festival Day Milad-Un-Nabi (Holy Prophet’s Birthday) Ill Poya Day Unduvap Poya Day Christmas Day v t e Public holidays in Thailand National holidays New Year's Day Magha Puja Chakri Memorial Day Songkran Labour Day Royal Ploughing Ceremony and Farmer's Day Vesak King Vajiralongkorn's Birthday Asalha Puja Vassa Queen Sirikit's Birthday King Bhumibol Adulyadej's Memorial Day King Chulalongkorn Day King Bhumibol Adulyadej's Birthday Constitution Day New Year's Eve Region-based holidays Chinese New Year Eid al-Fitr Eid al-Adha Christmas v t e Public holidays in Ukraine New Year's Day (1 January) International Women's Day (8 March) Orthodox Easter (moveable) Orthodox Pentecost (moveable) Labour Day (1 May) Day of Remembrance and Victory over Nazism in World War II (8 May) Constitution Day (28 June) Statehood Day (15 July) Independence Day (24 August) Defenders of Ukraine Day (1 October) Christmas (25 December) v t e Public holidays in the United Kingdom All regions New Year's Day May Bank Holiday Summer Bank Holiday Christmas Day Boxing Day England and Wales Good Friday Easter Monday Spring Bank Holiday Northern Ireland Saint Patrick's Day Easter Monday Easter Tuesday Spring Bank Holiday Battle of the Boyne (Orangemen's Day) Scotland 2nd January Good Friday St Andrew's Day (optional) v t e Federal holidays in the United States Current New Year's Day Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr.

Washington's Birthday Memorial Day Juneteenth Independence Day Labor Day Columbus Day Veterans Day Thanksgiving Day Christmas Day Proposed VE Day (1945) Victory Day (1950) Flag Day (1950) Election Day/Democracy Day (1993, 2005, 2014) Malcolm X Day (1993–1994) Cesar Chavez Day (2008) Susan B. Anthony Day (2011) Native American Day (2013) Patriot Day (2021) Rosa Parks Day (2021) Related Uniform Monday Holiday Act v t e Holidays, observances, and celebrations in the United States January New Year's Day (federal) Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr.

(federal) Birthday of Eugenio María de Hostos (PR) Confederate Heroes Day (TX) Eve of Three Kings' Day (PR, religious) Feast of Epiphany / Feast of Theophany (religious) Fred Korematsu Day (AZ, CA, FL, HI, VA) Idaho Human Rights Day (ID) Inauguration Day (federal quadrennial) Kansas Day (KS) Makar Sankranti / Pongal (religious) Robert E. Lee Day (FL) Stephen Foster Memorial Day (36) The Eighth (LA) Three Kings' Day (PR, VI, religious) World Religion Day (religious) January–February Chinese New Year / Lunar New Year (NY, cultural, religious) Vasant Panchami (religious) February American Heart Month Black History Month Washington's Birthday (federal) Valentine's Day Birthday of Luis Muñoz Marín (PR) Candlemas (religious) Charles Darwin Day / Darwin Day (CA, DE) Day of Remembrance (CA, OR, WA, cultural) Georgia Day (GA) Groundhog Day Imbolc (religious) Lincoln's Birthday (CA, CT, IL, IN, MO, NY, WV) National Girls and Women in Sports Day National Freedom Day (36) Nirvana Day (religious) Presentation of Our Lord to the Temple (religious) Promised Reformer Day (religious) Ronald Reagan Day (CA) Rosa Parks Day (CA, MO) Saviours' Day (religious) Susan B. Anthony Day (CA, FL, NY, WI, WV, proposed federal) Tu B’shvat (religious) February–March Mardi Gras Ash Wednesday (PR, religious) Carnival (PR, VI, religious) Clean Monday (religious) Courir de Mardi Gras (religious) Intercalary Days (religious) Mahashivaratri (religious) Purim (religious) Shrove Tuesday (religious) Super Tuesday March Irish-American Heritage Month Colon Cancer Awareness Month Women's History Month Saint Patrick's Day (ethnic) Spring break (week) Annunciation of the Virgin Mary / Annunciation of the Theotokos (religious) Casimir Pulaski Day (IL) Cesar Chavez Day (CA, CO, TX, proposed federal) Emancipation Day in Puerto Rico (PR, cultural) Evacuation Day (Suffolk County, MA) Harriet Tubman Day (NY) Hola Mohalla (religious) Holi (NY, religious) Lailat al-Mi'raj (religious) Liberation and Freedom Day (Charlottesville, VA, cultural) Mardi Gras (AL (in two counties), LA) Maryland Day (MD) Medal of Honor Day National Poison Prevention Week (week) Nowruz (cultural, religious) Ostara (religious) Pi Day Prince Jonah Kūhiō Kalanianaʻole Day (HI) Promised Messiah Day (religious) Saint Joseph's Day (religious) Seward's Day (AK) Texas Independence Day (TX) Town Meeting Day (VT) Transfer Day (VI) U.S. Hostage and Wrongful Detainee Day (36) Trans Day of Visibility (cultural) March–April Easter (religious) Good Friday (CT, NC, PR, NJ, VI, religious) Hanuman Jayanti (religious) Holy Thursday (PR, VI, religious) Holy Week (PR, religious, week) Lazarus Saturday (religious) Mahavir Janma Kalyanak (religious) Mesha Sankranti / Hindu New Year (religious) Palm Sunday (PR, religious) Passover (religious, week) Easter Monday / Bright Monday (VI, religious) Ramnavami (religious) Chandramana Uugadi / Souramana Uugadi (religious) April Arab American Heritage Month Confederate History Month 420 April Fools' Day Arbor Day Birthday of José de Diego (PR) Confederate Memorial Day (AL, MS) Days of Remembrance of the Victims of the Holocaust (week) DNA Day Earth Day Emancipation Day (cultural) Thomas Jefferson's Birthday (AL) Lag B’Omer (religious) Last Friday of Great Lent (religious) National First Ladies Day Pascua Florida (FL) Patriots' Day (MA, ME) Ridván (religious) San Jacinto Day (TX) Siblings Day Walpurgis Night (religious) Yom Ha'atzmaut (cultural, religious) May Asian American and Pacific Islander Heritage Month Jewish American Heritage Month Military Appreciation Month Memorial Day (federal) Mother's Day (36) Cinco de Mayo Ascension of Baháʼu'lláh (religious) Ascension of Our Lord (religious) Caliphate Day (religious) Declaration of the Bab (religious) Harvey Milk Day (CA) International Workers' Day / May Day (CA, unofficial, proposed state) Law Day (36) Loyalty Day (36) Malcolm X Day (CA, IL, proposed federal) Military Spouse Day National Day of Prayer (36) National Day of Reason National Defense Transportation Day (36) National Maritime Day (36) Peace Officers Memorial Day (36) Pentecost (religious) Shavuot (religious) Truman Day (MO) Vesak / Buddha's Birthday (religious) June Pride Month Juneteenth (federal, cultural) Father's Day (36) Bunker Hill Day (Suffolk County, MA) Carolina Day (SC) Don Young Day (AK) Fast of the Holy Apostles (religious) Flag Day (36, proposed federal) Helen Keller Day (PA) Honor America Days (3 weeks) Jefferson Davis Day (AL, FL) Kamehameha Day (HI) Litha (religious) Martyrdom of Guru Arjan Dev Sahib (religious) Odunde Festival (Philadelphia, PA, cultural) Senior Week (week) Saint John's Day (PR, religious) West Virginia Day (WV) July Independence Day (federal) Asalha Puja Day (religious) Birthday of Don Luis Muñoz Rivera (PR) Birthday of Dr. José Celso Barbosa (PR) Emancipation Day in the U.S. Virgin Islands (VI, cultural) Guru Purnima (religious) Khordad Sal (religious) Lā Hoʻihoʻi Ea (HI, unofficial, cultural) Martyrdom of the Báb (religious) Parents' Day (36) Pioneer Day (UT) Puerto Rico Constitution Day (PR) July–August Summer vacation Tisha B'Av (religious) August American Family Day (AZ) Barack Obama Day in Illinois (IL) Bennington Battle Day (VT) Dormition of the Theotokos (religious) Eid-e-Ghadeer (religious) Fast in Honor of the Holy Mother of Lord Jesus (religious) Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary (religious) Hawaii Admission Day / Statehood Day (HI) Krishna Janmashtami (religious) Lammas (religious) Lyndon Baines Johnson Day (TX) Naga Panchami (religious) National Aviation Day (36) Paryushana (religious) Raksha Bandhan (religious) Transfiguration of the Lord (religious) Victory Day (RI) Women's Equality Day (36) September Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Childhood Cancer Awareness Month Gospel Music Heritage Month Labor Day (federal) Brazilian Day (NY, cultural) California Admission Day (CA) Carl Garner Federal Lands Cleanup Day (36) Constitution Day and Citizenship Day (36) Constitution Week Defenders Day (MD) Elevation of the Holy Cross (religious) Feast of San Gennaro (NY, cultural, religious) Ganesh Chaturthi (religious) Gold Star Mother's Day (36) His Holiness Sakya Trizin's Birthday (religious) Mabon (religious) National Grandparents Day (36) National Payroll Week (week) Nativity of Mary / Nativity of the Theotokos (religious) Native American Day (proposed federal) Patriot Day (36) Von Steuben Day September–October Hispanic Heritage Month Chehlum Imam Hussain (religious) Oktoberfest Pitri Paksha (religious) Rosh Hashanah / Feast of Trumpets (TX, NY, religious) Shemini Atzeret (religious) Simchat Torah (religious) Vijaya Dashami (religious) Yom Kippur / Day of Atonement (TX, NY, religious) October Breast Cancer Awareness Month Disability Employment Awareness Month Italian-American Heritage and Culture Month Filipino American History Month LGBT History Month Columbus Day (federal) Halloween Alaska Day (AK) Child Health Day (36) General Pulaski Memorial Day German-American Day Indigenous Peoples' Day International Day of Non-Violence Leif Erikson Day (36) Missouri Day (MO) Nanomonestotse (cultural) National School Lunch Week (week) Native American Day in South Dakota (SD) Nevada Day (NV) Spirit Day (cultural) Sweetest Day Sukkot / Feast of Tabernacles (religious, week) Virgin Islands–Puerto Rico Friendship Day (PR, VI) White Cane Safety Day (36) October–November Birth of the Báb (religious) Birth of Baháʼu'lláh (religious) Day of the Dead (VI) Diwali (NY, religious) Mawlid al-Nabi (religious) November Native American Indian Heritage Month Veterans Day (federal) Thanksgiving (federal) Ascension of ‘Abdu’l Baha (religious) All Saints' Day (religious) Beginning of the Nativity Fast (religious) Beltane / Samhain (religious) Barack Obama Day in Alabama (Perry County, AL) D. Hamilton Jackson Day (VI) Day after Thanksgiving (24) Day of the Covenant (religious) Discovery of Puerto Rico Day (PR) Election Day (CA, DE, HI, KY, MT, NJ, NY, OH, PR, VA, WV, proposed federal) Family Day (NV) Friendsgiving Guru Nanak Gurpurab (religious) Hanukkah (religious) Lā Kūʻokoʻa (HI, unofficial, cultural) Martyrdom of Guru Tegh Bahadur (religious) Native American Heritage Day (MD, WA, cultural) Presentation of the Theotokos to the Temple (religious) Trans Day of Remembrance (cultural) Unthanksgiving Day (cultural) December Christmas (religious, federal) New Year's Eve Advent Sunday (religious) Alabama Day (AL) Birthday of Guru Gobind Singh Sahib (religious) Bodhi Day (religious) Chalica (religious) Christmas Eve (KY, NC, SC, PR, VI) Day after Christmas (KY, NC, SC, TX, VI) Festivus HumanLight Hanukkah (religious, week) Immaculate Conception (religious) Indiana Day (IN) Kwanzaa (cultural, week) Milad Syedna Mohammed Burhanuddin (religious) National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day (36) Nativity of Jesus (religious) Old Year's Night (VI) Pan American Aviation Day (36) Pancha Ganapati (religious, week) Rosa Parks Day (OH, OR) Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God (religious) Wright Brothers Day (36) Yule (religious) Zartosht No-Diso (religious) Varies (year round) Eid al-Adha (NY, religious) Eid al-Fitr (NY, religious) Islamic New Year (religious) Yawm al-Arafa (religious) Hajj (religious) Laylat al-Qadr (religious) Navaratri (religious, four times a year) Obon (religious) Onam (religious) Ramadan (religious, month) Ghost Festival (religious) Yawm Aashura (religious) Legend: (federal) = federal holidays, (abbreviation) = state/territorial holidays, (religious) = religious holidays, (cultural) = holiday related to a specific racial/ethnic group or sexual minority , (week) = week-long holidays, (month) = month-long holidays, (36) = Title 36 Observances and Ceremonies See also: Lists of holidays , Hallmark holidays , Public holidays in the United States , Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands .

v t e Winter solstice and midwinter festivals Africa Goru : Mali ( Dogon ) Dzon'ku Nu † : West Africa ( Papaws ) Americas Inti Raymi °: Peru ( Inca † ) Jonkonnu °: Caribbean ° (African American) Soyal : US ( Zuni , Hopi ) We Tripantu : Chile ( Mapuche ) Asia Amaterasu † : Japan Choimus Deygān, Maidyarem °: ( Zoroastrian ) Dōngzhì, Tōji : ( East Asian ) Lohri , Pongal , Makar Sankranti °: India ( Hindu ) Sanghamitta Day : Sri Lanka ( Buddhist ) Şeva Zistanê : ( Kurdish ) Yalda : Iran ( Persian ) Europe Beiwe : ( Saami ) Brumalia † : Ancient Greece Christmas : Roman Empire° ( Christian ) Dies Natalis Solis Invicti † : Roman Empire Hogmanay °: Scotland Korochun °: ( Slavs ) Mōdraniht † : England ( Anglo-Saxon ) Montol Festival , Mummer's Day °: Cornwall ( Celts ) Saturnalia † : Rome Wren's Day °: Ireland, Isle of Man, Wales ( Celts ) Yule °: ( Germanic ) Ziemassvētki : Baltic ( Romuva ) Oceania Matariki °: New Zealand ( Māori ) † dagger indicates extinction. ° degree symbol indicates changes in date, name or location. ( ) indicate demographic v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Sweden Israel Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA İslâm Ansiklopedisi Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qbjlx
Cached time: 20250817043642
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.748 seconds
Real time usage: 3.109 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 21108/1000000
Revision size: 157471/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1061154/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 214460/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 49/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1043737/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.513/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21313834/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2344.640      1 -total
 48.25% 1131.353      2 Template:Reflist
 19.76%  463.371     79 Template:Cite_book
 12.86%  301.424     63 Template:Cite_web
  8.85%  207.413      1 Template:Navboxes
  8.34%  195.524     33 Template:Navbox
  6.20%  145.257     43 Template:Lang
  4.79%  112.231     27 Template:Cite_news
  3.43%   80.435      1 Template:Christianity_sidebar
  3.03%   71.097      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6237:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043642 and revision id 1305913425. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christmas&oldid=1305913425 " Categories : Christmas Birthdays of religious leaders December observances Feasts of Jesus Christ Quarter days Christian festivals and holy days Alawite traditions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1: long volume value CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use mdy dates from January 2024 Infobox holiday (other) Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Biblical Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles with hAudio microformats Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 20:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christmas 232 languages Add topic

