Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The concept of Africa 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Traditional oral historiography and early written history 2.2 Colonial historiography 2.3 Postcolonial historiography 2.4 Contemporary historiography 2.5 Pathing the future 3 Periodisation 4 Oral tradition 5 Auxiliary sciences Toggle Auxiliary sciences subsection 5.1 Archaeology 5.2 Historical linguistics 5.3 Anthropology 5.4 Geography 6 Nationalist historiography 7 Liberal historiography 8 Marxist historiography 9 Postcolonialism and postmodernism 10 Social history Toggle Social history subsection 10.1 Migration historiography 10.2 Women's history 10.3 Urban history 10.4 Art history 11 Economic history 12 Military history 13 Environmental history Toggle Environmental history subsection 13.1 Animal history 14 Afrocentrism 15 See also 16 Notes 17 References 18 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 18.1 Regions Toggle the table of contents African historiography 5 languages العربية Français Kiswahili Português Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia African historiography is a branch of historiography involving the study of the theories, methods, sources, and interpretations used by scholars to construct histories of Africa . Most African societies recorded their history via oral tradition , resulting in a lack of written records documenting events before European colonialism . African historiography has therefore lent itself to contemporary methods of historiographical study, the utilisation of oral sources, and the incorporation of evidence derived from various auxiliary disciplines , differentiating it from other continental areas of historiography due to its multidisciplinary nature.

Traditional oral historiography utilised various sources from the community in crafting a socially-consolidated history. Early written history about Africa was largely undertaken by outsiders, each of which had their own biases. Colonial historiography was Eurocentric and propagated racist theories such as the Hamitic hypothesis . African historiography became organised in the mid 20th century, and initially involved the refutation of degrading colonial narratives.

Nationalist histories sought to generate patriotism and sustain the multi-ethnic nation states , and African historiography saw a movement towards utilising oral sources in a multidisciplinary approach alongside archaeology and historical linguistics . Following growing pessimism about the fate of the continent, Marxist thought became popular, and contributed to a more critical study of colonialism.  From 1981 UNESCO began publishing the General History of Africa , edited by specialists from across the continent.

Contemporary historians are still tasked with building the institutional frameworks, incorporating African epistemologies , establishing a continental periodisation , and representing an African perspective.

The concept of Africa [ edit ] There are vast amounts of ecological , cultural , linguistical , and religious diversity in Africa.

Valentin Mudimbe notes that the idea of Africa was first made and used by non-Africans, particularly Europeans. The concept was appropriated by diasporic Africans during abolitionist movements in the 19th century as intellectuals sought an "African homeland", with their removal from the continent enabling them to view it as a whole. This planted the roots of pan-Africanist thought, however for most it was the shared experience of colonial rule and resistance to it that fostered a unified African identity.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Traditional oral historiography and early written history [ edit ] In Africa, historiography has traditionally been undertaken by oral historians , either specialists such as the griots of West Africa, "men of memory", or elders .

[ 2 ] In accordance with African cosmology , African historical consciousness viewed historical change and continuity, order and purpose within the framework of human and their environment, the gods, and their ancestors.

[ 3 ] In African societies, the historical process is largely a communal one, with eyewitness accounts, hearsay , reminiscences, and occasionally visions , dreams, and hallucinations crafted into narrative oral traditions which are performed, sometimes accompanied by music, and transmitted through generations.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] : 12 : 48 In oral tradition, time is sometimes mythical and social, and ancestors were considered historical actors.

[ a ] [ 5 ] : 43–53 Origin myths serve multiple purposes, helping to define a group's identity and forge sociocultural alliances, and provide the fulcrum on which a group's religious ideology rests.

[ 6 ] : xix Traditions offer a socially consolidated version of the past, and often include the origins of institutions, embedding political authority. In stateless societies , clan histories predominated.

[ 7 ] Some African writing systems have been developed or adapted in ancient and recent history. One of the most notable ancient languages were the hieroglyphs of Ancient Egypt , which are attested to have been used for historical records from c.

1580 BCE .

[ 8 ] Following the discovery of the Rosetta Stone in 1799, historians were able to decipher hieroglyphs and access a new field of Ancient Egyptian history, [ 9 ] however this field was undertaken predominantly by European historians. Some ancient external sources include Periplus of the Erythraean Sea ( c.

230 CE ) and Ptolemy 's Geography ( c.

140 CE ).

[ 10 ] : 637 In Abyssinia , during the Aksumite period ( c.

100 – c.

960 CE) histories were inscribed in Geʽez on stelae , thrones , and obelisks , and recounted a ruler's reign, recording various historical events such as military campaigns, diplomatic missions, and acts of philanthropy .

[ 11 ] : 14–15 From the 13th century, written imperial chronicles predominated, such as the Chronicles of the Wars of Amda Sion (14th c.).

[ 12 ] : 230 [ 13 ] : 28 Following the spread of Islam, there are also plenty of written records in Arabic from Islamic scholars such as al-Masudi , al-Idrisi , Leo Africanus , al-Bakri , Ibn Battuta , and Ibn Furtu . They included observations of local societies, and sometimes utilised oral sources, embodying bias towards Muslim rulers while denigrating non-believers.

[ 7 ] In West Africa and the Swahili coast Africans used Arabic or adapted the Arabic script into Ajami for their languages, and works were written in Akan , Fula , Yoruba , Hausa , and Swahili . Some were chronicles which literarily recorded oral tradition, such as the Kilwa Chronicle (16th c.), Timbuktu Chronicles (17th c.), Kitab Gonja (18th c.), Funj Chronicle (early 19th c.), and Kano Chronicle ( c.

1880s ).

[ 14 ] : 626 [ 10 ] : 640 European written records about the coastal regions proliferated during their exploration of Africa from the 15th century. They portrayed an exotic image of   Africa, primitive and often at war with itself.

[ 15 ] Most 16th-century records were written in Portuguese , which the Portuguese strictly censored so as to protect their monopoly on African business from trading rivals, meaning few have survived. Records through the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries were mostly written in English , French , Dutch , and later, German . Authors aimed to promote trade, and so included information on trade goods, routes , markets, control of trade, sources of supply and production techniques etc. (important for economic history ). Some historical works include Job Ludolf 's Historia aethiopica (1681), Silva Corrêa 's Historia de Angola (1782), and Archibald Dalzel 's History of Dahomy (1793).

[ 13 ] : 29–30 There are also sources from European Christian missionaries , especially in the 19th century. However reporting on traditional African religions was poor, and authors often sought to "expose" perceived "errors" and "barbarisms". A minority of authors learnt African languages and made meaningful records important for social history .

[ 10 ] : 639 Amid the Enlightenment in the 18th century, European attitudes towards other cultures began to change.

Hegel 's now infamous statements in his Lectures on the Philosophy of World History (1837) encapsulated 19th-century orthodox European thought about African history.

[ 16 ] [ 13 ] : 30–31 Colonial historiography [ edit ] Since most African societies used oral tradition to record their history , there was little written history of the continent prior to the colonial period. Colonial histories focussed on the exploits of soldiers, colonial administrators, and "colonial figures", using limited sources and written from an entirely European perspective , ignoring the viewpoint of the colonised under the pretence of white supremacism .

[ 17 ] Colonial historians considered Africans racially inferior , uncivilised , exotic , and historically static, [ 14 ] : 627 viewing their colonial conquest as proof of Europe's claims to superiority, reinforced by social Darwinist principles. The topic was initially left to ex-members of colonial regimes, however imperial/colonial history later entered into the fringe of the profession.

[ 13 ] : 32-33, 36 Some works include Charles Lucas 's The Partition & Colonization of Africa (1922) and Gabriel Hanotaux 's Histoire des Colonies Françaises et de l'Expansion de la France dans le Monde (1930).

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 13 ] : 33 The most widespread genre of colonial narrative involved the Hamitic hypothesis , which claimed the inherent superiority of light-skinned people over dark-skinned people. Colonisers considered only " Hamitic Africans" to be "civilised", and by extension all major advances and innovations in Africa were thought to derive from them. Oral sources were deprecated and dismissed by most historians, who claimed that Africa had no history other than that of Europeans in Africa.

[ 14 ] : 627 Some colonisers took interest in the other viewpoint and attempted to produce a more detailed history of Africa using oral sources and archaeology,  however they received little recognition at the time.

[ 17 ] The liberal tradition , championed by figures such as William Miller Macmillan , sought to criticise colonialism and racial segregation.

[ 20 ] The 1940s and '50s saw the study of African history split from colonial history, as institutions were set up such as the School of Oriental and African Studies by the University of London , producing a new generation of Africanists.

[ 21 ] Some indigenous works of this period include Carl Christian Reindorf 's The History of the Gold Coast and Asante (1895), Samuel Johnson 's History of the Yorubas (1897), Apollo Kaggwa 's The Kings of Buganda (1901), Jacob Egharevba 's A Short History of Benin (1934) , Akiga Sai 's History of the Tiv (1935), Paul Mbuya 's Luo kitgi gi timbegi (1938), Samuel Josia Ntara 's Mbiri ya Achewa (1944/5), and John Nyakatura 's Kings of Bunyoro-Kitara (1947).

[ 7 ] [ 14 ] : 627–628 In North Africa, the 1930s saw indigenous schools of historians established in light of growing nationalist and modernist Islamic movements.

[ 13 ] : 25 The Uganda Society founded The Uganda Journal in 1934 which aimed to increase knowledge about Uganda and preserve oral traditions.

[ 22 ] There were various proto-nationalist historians who fiercely combatted notions of European superiority, such as A. B. Horton , E. W. Blyden , J. W. Sarbah , J. E. Casely-Hayford , and J. B. Danquah , however their works resembled propaganda and today hold less authority than some of those already mentioned.

[ 13 ] : 38–39 Postcolonial historiography [ edit ] See also: Postcolonialism , General History of Africa § Phase One , and Ancient Egyptian race controversy Oil portrait of Kenneth Dike , sometimes called the "father of modern African historiography" [ 23 ] The struggles for independence in the 1950s and '60s were mirrored by a movement towards decolonising African history. The new African elite now had the daunting task of achieving in the historical field what they had done in the political one.

[ 14 ] : 629 Historians' post-colonial works were characterised by their nationalism and Afrocentrism , aiming to reverse colonial thought and refute colonial narratives which degraded their culture.

[ 24 ] At the time, many did not think African history was possible and it was common for enthusiasm to be dismissed. The period saw a methodological revolution regarding the unprecedented widespread use of oral sources, alongside auxiliary disciplines .

[ 21 ] In the mid-20th century, members of the Ibadan School of History in Nigeria, led by Kenneth Dike and Jacob Ade Ajayi , pioneered a new methodology of reconstructing African history using archives supplemented with oral traditions , destabilising the notion that Africa's history was essentially its interactions with Europeans.

[ 7 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] : 212 Other influential schools on the continent included the Legon School in Ghana which published on Akan history , and the Senegambian Dakar School where Cheikh Anta Diop instigated an intellectual revolution against French Egyptologists by linking Ancient Egypt to " Black Africa ", while the Dar es Salaam School in Tanzania succeeded in showing modern nation states as continuations of the African past.

[ 26 ] [ 7 ] [ 27 ] Africanists such as Basil Davidson , Terence Ranger , Roland Oliver , and Catherine Coquery-Vidrovitch also made important contributions. National Historical Associations were founded along with journals such as Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeria , Afrika Zamani , and Kenya Historical Review , accompanying the European journals Journal of African History and Cahiers d'Études Africaines .

[ 7 ] [ 28 ] Works through the 1960s and '70s relied upon a wealth of data to conclusively prove that Africans possessed historical consciousnesses and conceptualised, preserved, and transmitted their history through oral tradition.

[ 20 ] [ 14 ] : 628–632 The International Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a General History of Africa in Paris, 1977 In 1961, Jan Vansina published Oral tradition in which he made the case for the validity of oral sources as historical sources, becoming one of the most influential works written about African history. Oral tradition continued to be heavily utilised in the reconstruction of African history over the next decade, despite a vigorous assault on the validity of oral sources by structuralists and some historians maintaining that African history prior to the 19th century was not possible. While a small number of historians dismissed their concerns, most accounted for them by applying a more critical approach in the analysis of oral sources, and consulted other disciplines such as archaeology and historical linguistics .

[ 29 ] : 171–172 [ 14 ] : 629–630 This movement towards utilising oral sources in a multi-disciplinary approach culminated in UNESCO commissioning the General History of Africa , edited by specialists drawn from across the African continent, publishing from 1981 to the present.

[ 30 ] [ 25 ] [ 31 ] Meanwhile, North African scholars and intellectuals found themselves in an identity crisis, and gravitated towards the Arab/Islamic world . The General History of Africa and The Cambridge History of Africa ' s coverage of Ancient Egypt ensured it was viewed in an African context.

[ 24 ] Despite all this, in the process of refuting European myths about African history, nationalist historiography embraced Western views of what constitutes history, largely focussed on narrow political themes from above, and sometimes underplayed the impacts of colonialism.

[ 14 ] : 628–632 The mid-1960s saw growing pessimism as various socio-political problems such as corruption, economic mismanagement, political instability, social malaise, and neo-colonialism endured, and the failure of African elites to deliver on their promises became apparent. Celebration of African achievement was replaced by fierce critique of the ruling elites and their neo-colonialist collaborators, and the term Africanist gained negative connotations. The dual problem of poverty and dependency bore a new Marxist historiographic ideology focussed on development. In 1972 Walter Rodney , building on previous works, introduced dependency theory to African historiography by publishing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa .

It stated that Africa's natural development had been taken off course by the slave trade and colonialism into one of permanent dependency on outside forces.

[ 32 ] He also attacked modernisation theory , arguing that Africa must reject the international capitalist system in order to develop.

[ 33 ] : 318 This new school which combined Marxist historiography with dependency theory broadened the discipline's domain from nationalist historiography's narrow focus.

[ 21 ] The onset of the "era of disillusionment" in the 1980s saw African universities struggle and fail amid economic and political crises, resulting in the migration of many great scholars. Some nationalist historians accepted responsibility for the model of the nation that they had projected, which supported nationalist regimes and idealised leaders and power rather than production and commoners.

[ 34 ] [ 21 ] Works such as Lucette Valensi 's Tunisian Peasants in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Century (1985), Judith Tucker 's Women in Nineteenth Century Egypt (1985), and Elizabeth Isichei 's A History of African Societies to 1870 (1997) embodied a new impetus to write history from below .

[ 14 ] : 630–631 Contemporary historiography [ edit ] The widespread mood of introspection saw the formulation of postmodernist approaches to African historiography. The most notable work of this school was Valentin Mudimbe 's The Invention of Africa (1988), which argued that African scholars derived their ideas and interpretations from Western academic discourse, and that they ought to reject the Western view of what constitutes scientific knowledge .

[ 14 ] : 632 Several scholars have questioned whether writing history based on Western epistemologies can ever be relevant and meaningful to African communities.

[ 34 ] The 1990s saw the abolishment of apartheid in South Africa, allowing Black students to attend formerly all-White universities and creating a crisis in South African historiography as Afrikaners struggled to come to terms with their history.

[ 12 ] : 239 The collapse of communism and failed socialist experiments in Africa produced revisionist responses from neo-Marxist historians.

[ 14 ] : 633 Local histories of clans, communities, villages, and administrative divisions flourished, often written by amateur historians for a local audience.

[ 15 ] Emphasis on the cultural embedding of knowledge has seen the domain of historical inquiry extend. Conversely, the turn away from material concerns caused the field of economic history to be neglected from the 1980s to early 2000s in spite of its enduring relevance (and is still neglected in African universities between the Sahara and Zambezi ).

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 33 ] : 321, 326 Major challenges persisted, such as "academic labour migration" (particularly to the United States) and overreliance on Western publishers inhibiting the growth of institutions in Africa.

[ 2 ] In the present day, the discipline includes the various schools of thought in a pluralist tradition. The study of history in Africa is critically underfunded, with governments in the search for economic development favouring hard sciences and technology-based disciplines, consolidating brain drain . The new generation of historians are less ideological than their predecessors. In a bid to stay relevant they focus more on contemporary history and emphasise Africans' agency amid economic imperialism , neglecting early history, partly due to the complex and costly methodology required and the rapid dying of oral tradition.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] There has been an increased focus on ethnicity at the expense of social class . An important question to answer is what to do about the Western-derived nation states and institutions.

[ 7 ] The dying of oral tradition as elders and knowledge keepers have been gravely impacted by the Covid-19 and HIV-AIDS epidemics has generated urgency in applying community-based approaches to archaeological research.

[ 38 ] Histories are most often written in English or French, limiting accessibility for local audiences.

[ 7 ] Funso Afolayan writes that African historians ought to write history for Africans rather than just for their Western colleagues.

[ 14 ] : 633 Despite efforts by multiple successive generations, scholars are yet to formulate an African philosophy of history , distinct and autonomous from the Western tradition.

[ 7 ] [ 20 ] [ 15 ] Pathing the future [ edit ] In Decolonizing African History (2024), Toyin Falola writes that Eurocentric education systems, and all Eurocentric institutions for that matter, initially introduced by colonial regimes as foci of cultural and ideological imperialism, must be Africanised , done in part by the incorporation and application of African epistemologies . He emphasises the role played by academia and supranational organisations in achieving this. He says that thought processes and patterns must be derived from African experiences and realities, and research carried out based on the needs and values of respective societies. He argues that oral traditions and early indigenous works should be heavily prioritised in the re-narration of African history. He says that this decolonisation would uncover African solutions to African problems and recover an African identity people can be proud of.

[ 39 ] Periodisation [ edit ] Periodisation of African history was rooted in Eurocentrism , and initially centred around Africa's interactions with outsiders rather than on its internal developments.

[ 30 ] [ 40 ] There is no agreed upon periodisation for African history, with the difference in temporal stages of state formation between parts of the continent generating disagreement.

[ 30 ] [ 24 ] The Eurocentric concepts of the three ages and prehistory have received strong criticism, however they remain in use in African archaeology despite Graham Connah 's effort of a "total history" in his work on Borno .

[ 41 ] Prehistory 's traditional meaning of covering time up to the first written record (based on the old view that history cannot exist without written sources) has been deprecated, and historians now consider history to be based on evidence.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] : 1 Basil Davidson considered Africa's ancient period to be until 1000 CE, [ 24 ] however Corisande Fenwick has posited the time of the Arab conquests (the 7th century) as an endpoint.

[ 44 ] Roland Oliver and Anthony Atmore proposed "Medieval Africa" as from 1250 to 1800 (having revised the start date back from 1400), [ 24 ] [ 45 ] : vii and chose 1800 as the start date for "Modern Africa".

[ 46 ] Despite this, the Eurocentric terms " ancient ", " medieval ", and " modern " have long been criticised as failing to represent African realities and capture its complexity.

[ 47 ] : 25 Oral tradition [ edit ] Main article: Oral tradition § Historiography Oral tradition is a form of human communication in which knowledge, art, ideas and culture are received, preserved, and transmitted orally from one generation to another.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Most African societies used oral tradition to record their history. They generally have a reverence for the oral word, and have been termed oral civilisations , contrasted with literate civilisations which pride the written word.

[ b ] [ 52 ] Oral traditions differ from written texts in that they are more roundly subject to the sensory experience of the listener(s).

[ 53 ] : 202 In African epistemology , the epistemic subject "experiences the epistemic object in a sensuous, emotive, intuitive, abstractive understanding, rather than through abstraction alone, as is the case in Western epistemology " to arrive at a "complete knowledge", and as such oral traditions, music , proverbs , and the like were used in the preservation and transmission of knowledge.

[ 54 ] Historians collect and transcribe oral traditions via fieldwork , a practice that was initially foreign to historians who would usually spend most of their time sifting through archives and libraries.

[ c ] Unfortunately, most of the early tapes and transcriptions weren't submitted to public depositories, gravely impacting verifiability and future critique of interpretation. Researchers are often not fluent in the local language, and employ interpreters to translate questions and answers, harming the communication of meanings and understanding.

[ 29 ] : 170, 173, 177 Individualised interviews tend to be preferred because in group performances, which consist of the narrator and audience sharing and shaping the story, improvisation to entertain may be prioritised over accuracy of the tale. Occasionally, traditions are influenced by written works or incorporate recently acquired information, called feedback .

[ 29 ] : 180, 183 As oral tradition rarely incorporates chronological devices, lists of rulers have been crucial to establishing dates and chronologies.

[ 7 ] This is done via generational averaging, with the most common length chosen for generations being 27 years. In some cases, a ruler or event is mentioned in contemporary written sources of whose dates are known. Some lists have been known to grow over time, harming their credibility.

[ 29 ] : 186 Barbara Cooper emphasises the creativity of the oral poet, and criticises the formulaic approach saying that the meaning sits in the performance, not necessarily captured through analysis of a transcription or interpretation of the words.

Karin Barber said that oral traditions enact struggles and power, not only of historical individuals but also of the oral poet in that the oral 'text' only exists for the speaker and listeners.

[ 53 ] : 200–201 There have been various academic debates surrounding oral tradition. The first in the 1960s involved Jan Vansina and his students developing a rigorous approach to recover the past from oral traditions, counteracting scepticism and outright dismissal of the concept of African history. This was successful, despite not engaging and cooperating with African-American movements around oral history . The second focussed on the argument that oral traditions consisted of faithful memories of past events, which faced criticism from functionalists who argued that oral traditions function to reinforce present-day realities and give relatively little information about the past (called the "presentist critique"), and structuralists who emphasised the mythological and symbolic elements of oral tradition (called the "cosmological critique"). The cosmological critique was answered by Joseph Miller 's The African Past Speaks (1980), in which historians emphasised the need to pay attention to how cultural understanding, political struggle, and memory shape traditions, and explore and analyse discrepancies between traditions which tend to signal problems, shifts, struggles, and loud silences. On the other hand, the presentist critique has proved pertinent and has been harder to dismiss.

[ 53 ] : 193–197 A folklorist critique of Africanist historians emphasised the role of the individual traditional oral historian in the crafting and preservation of oral traditions (and the possibility of infusion of autobiographical or experiential information, necessitating inquiry about the storyteller's life), rather than Africanists' focus on the influence of institutions, and the importance of an emic (insider) approach, rather than an etic (outsider) approach where the traditions are transcribed and interpreted from an outsider/European perspective.

[ 55 ] Auxiliary sciences [ edit ] Main article: Auxiliary sciences of history Due to the lack of written sources, African historiography has often consulted and incorporated evidence from various disciplines, including archaeology , linguistics , anthropology , geography , political science , economics , psychology , and literary studies .

[ 10 ] : 644–645 Confidence in the reconstructions of African history is driven in part by the interplay between disciplinary methods, in how they reinforce or challenge conclusions derived from one another.

[ 56 ] : 191 Historians of Africa aim to acquire basic understandings of these disciplines in order to use evidence from them effectively and critically.

[ 10 ] : 644–645 Archaeology [ edit ] Main article: African archaeology Archaeology is the study of past peoples and cultures through the recovery and analysis of material culture and the interpretation of it.

[ 57 ] Materials uncovered include human remains, tools, weapons, pots, structures, and religious or artistic objects, with interpretation of them seeking to reconstruct what often is a lost culture or civilisation.

African archaeology has contributed the most to African history out of the auxiliary disciplines. Archaeology covers all time periods apart from contemporary times, [ 10 ] : 645–646 and radiocarbon dating has given historians dates going back four millennia.

[ 7 ] There are differing theories on how archaeological study should be undertaken. One is traditional culture history , which aims to describe and classify materials, and has been useful for providing chronological sequences. Another is processual archaeology which seeks to explain and understand cultural and technological change, viewing cultures as complex systems composed of economic, religious, subsistence, and technological subsystems, tailored to their environments and ecosystems . This approach has been particularly valuable for African archaeology with its focus on local factors and developments, rather than external factors. Criticisms of processual archaeology informed the formulation of post-processual archaeology , which views cultures as expressive systems of cognitive meanings, arguing that actions can only be explained by inquiry about ideas and intentions. This approach emphasises cultural organisation in the use of space and production of material culture, noting similarities between related cultures.

Marxist narratives have been particularly influential in historical reconstruction in Eastern and Southern Africa.

[ 58 ] : 52–56 In cases where oral or written records are available, archaeology has helped to fill in the gaps.

[ 10 ] : 645–646 Oral traditions have commonly been used to locate archaeological sites.

[ 56 ] : 171–172 On the flipside, archaeology has also often served to verify and affirm oral sources, such as with the cases of Koumbi Saleh and Lake Kisale .

[ 10 ] : 645–646 Charles Thurstan Shaw and Merrick Posnansky pioneered including community members and oral repositories in archaeological research, which has proved pertinent and grown in popularity as oral traditions are rapidly dying.

[ 38 ] Post-depositional theory argues that information present in the archaeological record is always decreasing, thus advising urgency, which is especially pertinent due to the persistent underfunding and neglect African archaeology receives from governments and non-African specialists.

[ 58 ] : 57, 61 Historical linguistics [ edit ] Main article: Historical linguistics Historical linguistics is the study of how languages develop, involving their rate of change, divergence, borrowing, diffusion, relationships, and classification. It can establish a common origin for languages and the time of their divergence (called a linguistic stratigraphy ), which can be interpreted as the time a united people separated; [ 10 ] : 647 glottochronology in particular has given historians approximate dates going back two millennia.

[ 7 ] Languages are composed of all the necessary words to express knowledge, experience, and cultural practice by its speakers, and this vocabulary is a product of their history. A language's survival depends on its speakers maintaining a group identity or commonality, and so a long-lasting language maps onto a long-lasting societal continuity. Furthermore a history of related languages is the history of related peoples.

[ 59 ] : 86, 90 Historical linguistics provides evidence for cultural contacts, their physical environments, and contents of those cultures through the analysis of diffused features and reconstructed old vocabularies.

[ 10 ] : 647 By comparing the present-day vocabularies and phonetics of related languages, proto-languages can be reconstructed and one can identify meaning shifts which often resulted from historical developments, and loanwords which provide evidence for the nature of interactions between peoples. It can also account for the historical development of the people's traditional knowledge and religious beliefs .

[ 59 ] : 91, 94–95, 97 Historical linguistics has contributed significantly to African history, second to only archaeology, however the vast area of African languages has received little attention from experts. Reconstructions and deductions often attract scepticism and even controversy, and historians tend towards caution when using conclusions derived from them. One prominent case has been reconstruction of the proto-Bantu language and the Bantu expansion .

[ 10 ] : 647 Some works based on linguistic evidence include Jan Vansina 's Paths in the Rainforests (1990), David Schoenbrun 's A Green Place, A Good Place (1998), and Christopher Ehret 's An African Classical Age (1998).

[ 59 ] : 108–109 Anthropology [ edit ] Main article: Anthropology Anthropology is the study of humanity, including human behavior , human biology , cultures , societies , and linguistics , in both the present and past.

[ 60 ] It became a colonial science involving colonisers studying their subjects in order to gain a better understanding for greater control. Anthropology has helped historians better understand social and political relationships, historical events, and peoples' cultures. It can be crucial to understanding early political and economic structures, their evolution, the impact of colonialism, and their modern-day form. Understanding of political, economic, and kinship organisation can contribute to refuting narratives influenced by the Hamitic hypothesis .

[ 10 ] : 647–648 Physical anthropology is the biological study of human and primate evolution , adaptation , and variation .

[ 61 ] It is best known for informing the theory of biological human races ; while this has since been rendered obsolete , the issue of dividing humans into units of analysis remains contentious, with scholars favouring ethnicities or communities. Physical anthropology can provide evidence about health and disease, ways of life, diet, microevolution , and genetic relationships.

[ 62 ] : 113, 116, 131–132 Geography [ edit ] Main article: Geography Geography is the study of the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth .

[ 63 ] It is split into human geography and physical geography , the latter of which has contributed the most to African history. It informs understanding of how a people's environment has influenced them and their social evolution, and environmental factors have been very consequential in shaping the continent's history. For instance, grasslands and woodlands in particular favoured population expansion .

[ 10 ] : 648 Botany is the study of plants , and is important for agricultural history . It can ascertain which plants were domesticated historically, and study human plant use , such as in traditional medicine .

[ 64 ] : 153, 162 Most histories include a preliminary chapter on the "land and people", and include maps which aid understanding and give a real-world impression.

[ 10 ] : 648 Nationalist historiography [ edit ] Main article: Nationalist historiography See also: African nationalism Nationalist historiography infuses historical writing with nationalism . Historical memory shapes nationalist sentiment on the basis of a shared past, creating a cultural identity , which in turn produces and legitimises nations .

[ 65 ] African nationalist historiography's primary mission is to generate patriotism and sustain the nation states. Crucially it aimed to reverse dehumanising colonial thought, especially the notion that Africans had to be divided into tribes and separated in order to be governed, instead promoting unity. Inter-group relations were prioritised, while ethnic rivalries were marginalised. It sought to uncover Africa's contributions to the world, emphasising leadership qualities and institutions in precolonial states, and their integrity and historicity prior to colonisation. It pioneered the use of oral sources, seeking their legitimisation, however largely used archives . In attempting to reverse the colonialist notion that colonisation was the most important phase of African history, which implied a "barbaric past" and "modernising present", nationalist histories often downplayed its impacts.

[ 21 ] The onset of the "era of disillusionment", as economic development struggled in combination with various internal conflicts, brought tough challenges to nationalist historiography and saw it decline amid growing pessimism and nihilism . Some historians accepted responsibility for the model of the nation that they projected, which supported nationalist regimes and idealised leaders and power rather than production and commoners.

[ 21 ] [ 34 ] Globally, nationalist historiography became unpopular within academic circles during the 20th century, with transnational histories more recently gaining in popularity.

[ 65 ] The new generation of African historians are less ideological, however the nationalist paradigm is still in use by some who confront neo-colonialist historians, and nationalist voices are included in the discipline's pluralist tradition.

[ 21 ] Liberal historiography [ edit ] Liberal historiography aimed to help Africans reclaim their history and write history from an African point of view. The liberal tradition was pioneered by William Miller Macmillan throughout the 1920s, seeking to criticise racial segregation policies and include Africans as makers of history, contrary to the dominant white supremacist historical traditions of the time. He also advocated for social history of people's daily lives and concerns. Liberal historiography has been especially influential in South African historiography , with liberal historians often sparring with Marxist/radical historians. They developed the practice of oral history , often asking questions to do with social change .

[ 15 ] South African historiography, due to the country's political situation, lagged behind the rest of the continent in terms of decolonisation.

The Oxford History of South Africa (1969-1971) was a landmark publication for liberal historians as the first comprehensive work on South African history that included Africans as agents of history, however its methodology quickly became outdated and, as was the liberal approach, it focussed on political rather than economic issues.

Leonard Thompson pioneered the application of the multidisciplinary approach to South African history, including oral sources, in his Survival in two worlds: Moshoeshoe of Lesotho (1975). Liberal historiography's goals of African agency and the repudiation of colonialist myths had become outdated by the 1970s, and it declined with the advent of Marxist/radical historiography.

[ 37 ] Marxist historiography [ edit ] Main article: Marxist historiography See also: § Economic history Marxist historiography is the study and interpretation of history through the lens of Marxist theory , and involves analysing historical events in relation to social classes and materialistic phenomena.

[ 66 ] It maintains that history is shaped by the constant struggle of people against their material and social contexts.

[ 67 ] Marxist thought (or "radicalism") has been highly influential in African historiography. Marxist scholars largely focussed on colonial history, and emphasised the agency of Africans.

[ 24 ] Among African scholars, the ideas of Michel Foucault and Antonio Gramsci regarding the ideology of power, particularly the manipulation of cultural norms in the maintenance of power hegemony, were particularly influential.

[ 21 ] [ 14 ] : 631 Marxist historiography greatly affected narrative writing and advanced a "cause and effect" interpretation of events, in contrast to them being viewed as a series of accidents or related to divine will.

[ 67 ] Differing from nationalist histories, radical histories shifted the weight of anti-colonial struggle from the elites to commoners.

[ 7 ] While the school's generalisations led to the recognition of widespread patterns and the reinterpretation of events (such as the Fula jihads and Yoruba Revolutionary Wars ), they sometimes inhibited the study of specific historical situations and often ignored cultural context. Despite this, Marxist approaches have been crucial in the development of a critical and holistic study of colonialism and Africa's relationship with the West .

[ 14 ] : 631 They solidified the point that European conquest and exploitation was the main cause of Africa's underdevelopment.

[ 67 ] The Marxist paradigm illuminated militant resistance to colonialism and mass nationalism, but also subscribed to a universal history of global capitalism . It has struggled to incorporate African thought, and narratives often found themselves at odds with the experiences and perspectives of the public.

[ 20 ] Postcolonialism and postmodernism [ edit ] Main articles: Postcolonialism and Postmodernism § Historiography Post-colonialist historiography studies the relationship between European colonial domination in Africa and the construction of African history, and has its roots in Edward Said 's concept of Orientalism . Western imperialism is viewed as the product of insatiable desire for power over the non-Western world, with this ambition to dominate extending to subjecting cultures to scientific scrutiny. As a result, knowledge produced from this endeavour is invalid as a projection of Western stereotypes and formulations. Another point made is the relativity of true knowledge and its cultural embeddings , discouraging external critique. While Orientalism's characterisation of Western imperialism has come under criticism, themes of relativism have continued in postmodernism .

[ 33 ] : 320 Postmodernist historiography or deconstruction considers the past to be an ideological product of the present, thus reflecting present power relations and realities. The past is considered to be directly unknowable since traces of it are subject to people's perspectives and subjective interpretation, blurring the line between fact and fiction.

[ 14 ] : 631 This approach considers oral tradition to be contemporary ideas about the past.

[ d ] [ 21 ] Deconstruction has faced staunch opposition in African studies , as it is perceived to dangerously depart from problems facing the continent and distract the intellectual agenda.

[ 68 ] Critics argue that this particular movement towards an African alternative results in the disintegration of "African" into a vast multitude of cultural identities, having ramifications for pan-Africanism . Historians are challenged with focussing on cultural context while countering the criticism that subscribing to the European-derived idea of "Africa" might render the whole enterprise of African history worthless to the continent's future.

[ 33 ] : 321 Social history [ edit ] Main article: Social history Social history , sometimes called "history from below", is a field which aims to look at the lived experiences of the past. Oral tradition gives valuable insights to African perspectives and mentalities, which is crucial to social history.

[ 69 ] : 28 [ 14 ] : 632 Oral sources collected via oral history also benefit the study of contemporary history by adding balance to official or canonical narratives from subaltern perspectives.

[ 29 ] : 187 One focus has been on peasant or agricultural history , which emerged in response to its neglect from colonial histories, and largely utilised testimonies . A renowned work is Charles van Onselen 's The Seed is Mine: The Life of Kas Maine, a South African Sharecropper 1894-1985 (1996) .

[ 7 ] Migration historiography [ edit ] Main article: Human migration § Historical theories Migrations are a common theme in African history. They are split into voluntary migrations and forced migrations . The study of African migrations requires a multidisciplinary approach, and there remains big gaps in our knowledge. There has been sparse research into much of Africa's migration history.

Michael McCormick 's Origins of the European Economy: Communications and Commerce AD 300 - 900 (2002) researched cross- Mediterranean migrations, and included research on North Africa, but there has been no comparable study from an African perspective. The Bantu expansion has been debated over by historians, linguists, archaeologists, paleo-environmentalists, and evolutionary geneticists.

[ 70 ] Historiography of the Atlantic slave trade is by far the most developed sub-field on African migrations, however that of trans-Saharan and Indian Ocean migrations are growing.

[ 71 ] Women's history [ edit ] Main article: Women in Africa § Historiography of African women Women's history studies the role women have played in history, with a focus on women of historical significance and on how historical events affected women. It posits that women have been marginalised in the historical record, and attempts to counter this. The three main paradigms in African historiography ( nationalist , Marxist , and dependency theory ) have neglected women's history, and works on general , economic , and even social history have had very little to say about women. Historians used to consider African women naturally inferior and helpless victims.

African women's history has grown rapidly since the 1970s, widening its initial focus from economic production, social agency, and law, and has largely focussed on the colonial and postcolonial periods.

[ 72 ] An initial theory of modernity gradually liberating African women from tradition has since been rejected.

[ 72 ] It has studied urbanisation, informal and formal economic roles, motherhood, sexuality, reproduction, gender meanings, modernity, and public culture among others.

[ 7 ] It also considers the historical development of women's culture, including solidarity networks and autonomous social spaces. Political influence of women, whether as rulers or mothers and wives of rulers, is another focus.

[ 72 ] Works include Kathleen Sheldon 's African Women: Early History to the 21st Century (2017) , Iris Berger and E. Frances White 's Women in Sub-Saharan Africa: Restoring Women to History (1999), Catherine Coquery-Vidrovitch 's African Women: A Modern History (1997), and Cheryl Johnson-Odim 's Women and Gender in the History of Sub-Saharan Africa (2004).

[ 73 ] Urban history [ edit ] Main article: Urban history Urban history studies the history of cities and towns , and examines the process of urbanisation . Scholars generally define African urban history as the study "of cities in Africa" rather than "of African cities", making them comparable to cities elsewhere with their Africanity considered secondary. Colonisers used to claim that Africa was mostly rural and historically absent of cities.

Urban studies is typically very Eurocentric , and Africa has largely been neglected thus far, especially south of the Sahara . Scholars located in Africa are at a disadvantage, and often lack institutional access to the latest publications which tend to be expensive. Periodisation is demarcated into "precolonial", "colonial", and "postcolonial", due to colonisation gravely impacting the urbanisation process. Studies of colonial and postcolonial urban history tend to focus on dysfunctions, segregation, and marginalisation. Colonial cities mimicked those of industrial Europe by introducing capitalist systems of rent and administrative regimes, termed "modern", while pre-existing urban processes and structures, ranging from cosmology and family structure to construction materials, were termed "traditional", however postmodernist thought has largely dismantled this dichotomy . Local terms for settlements in general provide insight into how to approach the study of precolonial history. The widespread phenomenon of historical city-states in Africa requires a different approach to local politics, and favours comparability.

[ 74 ] Art history [ edit ] Main article: Art history See also: African art This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( February 2025 ) Economic history [ edit ] Main article: Economic history See also: Economic history of Africa Economic history is the study of history using methodological tools from economics or with a special attention to economic phenomena. There are three main schools of thought in African economic history : neoclassical , Marxist , and one centred on dependency theory . The leading journal is African Economic History , founded in 1976.

[ 75 ] From the 1980s to early 2000s, Africa rarely appeared in major journals on economic history. Since then, there has been a revival in the study of African economic history, mostly focussed on contemporary history.

[ 36 ] Most African researchers are employed in the West due to a lack of opportunities at home, likely reducing the diversity of views.

[ 75 ] Some Western scholars engage in what A. G. Hopkins calls " neocolonial sholasticism".

[ 75 ] Gareth Austin criticised the sub-discipline for applying concepts predominantly derived from the European experience to African history, and requests more intellectual ambition. He stresses the importance of comparative historical research in testing models proposed as universal, and notes that the immense diversity of the continent makes synthesising research into an "African model" challenging.

[ 76 ] Periodisation is split into four periods: the first is from the earliest hominids, through the Stone and Iron ages, and covers the development of agriculture ; the second begins in the 16th century and revolves around the Atlantic slave trade ; the third begins in the 19th century with the abolition of the slave trade and covers the colonial period ; and the fourth covers postcolonial history from the mid 20th century to the present.

[ 32 ] One debate has been on whether cultural values affect profit-maximising behaviour.

[ 36 ] Modernisation theory , which held that underdeveloped "traditional" societies had to be transformed into "modern" ones, dominated the discipline through the 1950s and '60s. It rapidly fell out of favour due to economic crises in the West and historical research uncovering contradictory evidence, creating a vacuum to be filled by dependency theory where capitalism became seen as the problem rather than the solution. Approaches from the Annales school gained currency in African historiography in the 1980s, however now they have mostly been absorbed into other schools.

[ 75 ] The neoclassical approach emphasises trade and exchange systems in African economies, with early pioneers being Kenneth Dike and A. G. Hopkins. Its initial efforts were to disprove Eurocentric ideas that economic dynamism , markets, and trade did not play important roles in precolonial Africa.

Rational choice theory is central to this approach. The neoclassical school has received criticism for focussing too heavily on exchange and neglecting production.

[ 32 ] The Marxist approach applies Marxist economic theory, specifically the theory of " modes of production ". Leading scholars included Jean Suret-Canale and Catherine Coquery-Vidrovitch . The approach focusses on production, in contrast to dependency theory's emphasis on external trade.

[ 75 ] It considers multiple modes of production able to coexist within an economy and sought to identify indigenous modes of production, with the colonial period characterised by the domination of the colonial mode over precolonial or pre-capitalist modes.

[ 32 ] A. G. Hopkins says that its economic models "fitted awkwardly" if at all, and the class paradigm proved unfruitful.

[ 75 ] Dependency theorists emphasise unequal exchange as a causal factor of underdevelopment , and apply world-systems theory . They posit that Europe created a peripheral form of capitalism geared towards exporting capital rather than cumulative reinvestment, resulting in a rich centre which accumulates wealth to the detriment of a periphery.

[ 36 ] Governmental policies informed by this seek to reduce or cut off relations with the West.

[ 75 ] Leading scholars include Immanuel Wallerstein , Samir Amin , Giovanni Arrighi , and Charles E. Alpers . This approach has been criticised for denying Africans agency .

[ 32 ] New economic history applies econometrics to economic history, and utilises technology able to process large amounts of quantitative data . Prominent scholars include Daron Acemoglu , Simon Johnson , and James Robinson . They advance a "reversal of fortunes" theory, positing that as a result of colonialism, richer regions in 1500 became poorer due to the fashioning of extractivist and exploitative institutions, while poorer and less populated areas grew richer due to settler colonialism . This approach has been criticised for not taking into account historical changes over long periods, and for compressing history by presenting century-old events as causal to the present.

[ 32 ] Military history [ edit ] Main article: Military history See also: Military history of Africa Military history is the study of armed conflict and its impact on societies, cultures and economies, as well as the resulting changes to local and international relationships. Oral traditions rarely give insights into military history.

[ 77 ] African military history was neglected throughout the 20th century, in part due to colonial thought and wariness about embracing militarism amid various contemporary conflicts. Early on, it focussed on military resistance at the time of colonial conquest . In the 1990s social historians began to focus on the lives of soldiers and veterans, improving understanding of the colonial experience. It is only in the last decade that Africanists have begun incorporating this into a separate sub-discipline of military history.

[ 78 ] Michelle Moyd calls the representation of African conflicts as "mindless violence" or "irrational" racist stereotypes, while Charles Thomas and Roy Doron call this "the pernicious myth of anarchic violence". Moyd warns against grand narratives which reinforce these views, such as the trope that Shaka was responsible for the Mfecane .

[ 79 ] Most historians follow Richard Reid in studying "African dynamic[s] in the use of force and violence in the continent's deeper history", which provides insights into state formation, slavery, and conflict with foreign entities. One focus is to study how people became soldiers. The study of slave revolts in the African diaspora can offer insights. The evolution of colonial armies into national armies can be studied to better understand civil-military relations. The incorporation of social history also involves the study of Africans' experiences of violence and conflicts.

Feminist military history contributes to this, and Dahomey offers a rare opportunity to study women warriors . Rather than embracing militarism, historians aim to contribute to containing violence by furthering understanding of its origins, manifestations, and institutional dynamics.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Environmental history [ edit ] Main article: Environmental history Environmental history focusses on the dynamic interaction between the environment (nature) and human societies (cultures), where environmental change is viewed as steps toward physical and mental domestication and conquest. "Declinist" views consider the impact of modernisation on the environment to be too costly and, without intervention, trending towards the death of nature and culture. "Inclinist" views emphasise small-scale development incorporating traditional knowledge and traditional resource management as the key to sustainability . Prior to the 20th century, nature was widely seen as the determiner of the vitality and culture of societies, now called environmental determinism , which was also a common view found in oral traditions. In the 1950s and '60s in Europe, environmental agency fell out of favour as the use of science was considered close to conquering nature, called cultural determinism .

Modernisation theorists viewed scientific knowledge as a mechanism capable of conquering and replacing nature with artificial phenomena.

Marxists considered capitalist market mechanisms destructive to moral economies and ecologies . The idea of a "wild Africa" has been soundly rejected.

[ 80 ] The nature-culture dichotomy has seen strong criticism with some favouring a hybrid view, however it remains popular in African environmental history . Human and culture history originated in Africa and it therefore has unparalleled depth, with the continent having been very hospitable, however this is thought to have changed as the environment became hostile. Scholars consider Africa to have been the first victim of the Great Divergence and its culture to have slowed. Some possible causes include the end of the ice ages , the drying of the Sahara , or the Little Ice Age . The slave trade and its chaotic end , immediately followed by colonisation , the World Wars , and the recent population boom likely contributed. Researchers often attribute famines and epidemics to low domestication of Africa's environment. However Emmanuel Kreike says that domestication is a poor marker for development due to its Eurocentric scientific-evolutionary definition. " Environmental infrastructure " is when the environment is shaped by cooperation between humans and non-humans such that it sustains the life of both, and is more applicable to African history.

Conservation studies emphasises the closure of communal resources for indigenous peoples and power struggle between colonial governments and their subjects.

Postmodernism had a big impact on environmental history, as it encouraged critique of colonial perceptions and the incorporation of ethnohistory and traditional knowledge to inform conceptualisations.

[ 80 ] Animal history [ edit ] Animal history aims to centre historical study on animals. It is very nascent, with regional societies only formed in the early 21st century. Historians of Africa have recognised animals as capable of producing change in human history, but specific focus on animals has been very rare. An early criticism of animal historians was regarding the ventriloquism of the animal, said to reveal more about the author than the animal, which historians now aim to avoid. The terms "animal-sensitive history" or "multi-species history" are preferred by some. The sub-discipline maintains similarities with various movements in African historiography aimed at recognising agency , and is sometimes incorporated into environmental histories .

[ 81 ] Afrocentrism [ edit ] Main articles: Afrocentrism and Afrocentricity Following the early ideological traditions of Pan-Africanism , popularised by Marcus Garvey and W. E. B. Du Bois , and Négritude , advocated by Aimé Césaire and Léopold Sédar Senghor , in the second half of the 20th century African-Americans became closely involved and took greater interest in the study of Africa. They posited that the project of African history ought to be tied to the notion of racial liberation from white domination.

[ 21 ] This led to the formulation of Afrocentrism , which sought to challenge Eurocentric assumptions and attitudes dominant in academia, such as the notion of universality in contradiction of differing ontologies and perspectives more relevant to a particular context. Essentially, it stressed the importance of centring analysis and explanation in African ideas, interests, and presuppositions . Relatedly, Afrocentricity , coined by Molefi Kete Asante , seeks to ground the study of the peoples of Africa and the African diaspora within their own historical, cultural, and sociological contexts.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Afrocentrist histories are rooted in old pan-Africanist visions of racial unity and cultural diffusion, and consider Ancient Egypt as having played a central role in African history.

[ 1 ] Another idea espoused by Asante, building off of the work of Cheikh Anta Diop , is that Africa should use Ancient Egypt as its foundational source of scholarly inspiration, similar to the role Ancient Greece and Rome plays in European scholarship.

[ 14 ] : 632 Afrocentrism is largely marginal to mainstream scholarship, and more closely resembles popular history . Its ideas and the discourse surrounding them have often attracted criticism and controversy. While most scholars recognise the need for African studies to be rooted in African thought, they have warned against usurping discredited notions of white supremacy with discourse of black supremacy . Afrocentrist histories remain popular in the African diaspora in the Americas amid an ongoing struggle for respect, equality, and empowerment in their respective societies, and are influential regarding the popular perception of Africa. They often ignore advances made in African historiography in the last half-century, and rely upon crude generalisations and clichés . Few African scholars have shown interest in the subject, indicating the irrelevance of racial discourse throughout much of the continent in the present day.

[ 1 ] [ 14 ] : 632 See also [ edit ] Africa portal List of historians of Africa Ethiopian historiography History of Africa African studies African philosophy List of kingdoms and empires in African history The Cambridge History of Africa , a multivolume history published 1975–1986 General History of Africa , a multivolume history published by UNESCO from 1981–present Notes [ edit ] ^ In these cases, time's duration is not as it affects the fate of the individual, but the pulse of the social group. It is not a river flowing in one direction from a known source to a known outlet. Generally, traditional African time involves eternity in both directions, unlike Christians who consider eternity to operate in one direction. In African animism , time is an arena where both the group and the individual struggle for their vitality . The goal is to improve their situation, thus being dynamic.

Bygone generations remain contemporary, and as influential as they were during their lifetime, if not more so. In these circumstances causality operates in a forward direction from past to present and from present to future, however direct intervention can operate in any direction.

[ 5 ] : 44, 49 ^ This characterisation has come under criticism by some African scholars, as it implies conflict between the oral and written. They instead contend that in reality, the characterisation is defined by the interaction between three ways of expression and diffusion: the oral, the written, and the printed word.

[ 50 ] Bethwell Allan Ogot notes that images of Africa composed by Western writers have often been in terms of "opposites" and how they differ from "us".

[ 51 ] ^ Tapes are preferred over transcriptions as they include more information about the interviewee's attitudes, such as laughter, hesitations, disagreements etc.

[ 29 ] : 188 ^ Jan Vansina wrote that it is reductive to view oral tradition as a product of only the past or only the present.

[ 52 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Reid, Richard; Parker, John (2013-10-01), Parker, John; Reid, Richard (eds.), "Introduction African Histories: Past, Present, and Future" , The Oxford Handbook of Modern African History , Oxford University Press, p. 0, ISBN 978-0-19-957247-2 , retrieved 2025-01-26 ^ a b Zewde, Bahru (2000).

African Historiography: Past, Present and Future (Report). Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa & Association of African Historians 2000.

^ a b Ajaegbo, D.I. (1990).

"African Historiographical Traditions from the Earliest Times to the Second World War: An Analytical Survey" .

Transafrican Journal of History .

19 : 139– 151.

ISSN 0251-0391 .

JSTOR 24328680 .

^ Vansina, Jan (1985).

Oral tradition as history . Internet Archive. Madison, Wis. : University of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 978-0-299-10214-2 .

^ a b Hama, Boubou; Ki-Zerbo, Joseph (1981). "The place of history in African society".

General History of Africa: Volume 1 . UNESCO Publishing.

^ Aderinto, Saheed (2017).

African Kingdoms: An Encyclopedia of Empires and Civilizations .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Odhiambo, E. S. Atieno (2004).

"The Usages of the past: African historiographies since independence" .

African Research and Documentation .

96 : 3– 61.

doi : 10.1017/S0305862X00014369 .

ISSN 0305-862X .

^ Allen, James P.

Middle Egyptian : an introduction to the language and culture of hieroglyphs .

ISBN 9781107283930 .

OCLC 884615820 .

^ Powell, Barry B. (2009).

Writing : theory and history of the technology of civilization . Chichester, U.K.: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 9781405162562 .

OCLC 269455610 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Anyake, Joseph B. C. (2005).

"History, African: Sources of" . In Shillington, Kevin (ed.).

Encyclopedia of African History .

Fitzroy Dearborn . pp.

636– 650.

ISBN 1-57958-245-1 .

^ Lorenzi, James De (2015).

Guardians of the Tradition: Historians and Historical Writing in Ethiopia and Eritrea . Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-58046-519-9 .

^ a b Iggers, George (2015). "The role of Marxism in Sub-Saharan and South African historiography". In Wang, Q. Edward; Iggers, Georg G. (eds.).

Marxist Historiographies: A Global Perspective . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781315686004 .

ISBN 978-1-315-68600-4 .

^ a b c d e f g Fage, John (1981). "The development of African historiography".

General History of Africa: Volume 1 . UNESCO Publishing.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Afolayan, Funso (2005).

"Historiography of Africa" . In Shillington, Kevin (ed.).

Encyclopedia of African History .

Fitzroy Dearborn . pp.

626– 633.

ISBN 1-57958-245-1 .

^ a b c d Atieno-Odhiambo, E. S. (2017-11-30).

"From African Historiographies to an African Philosophy of History" .

Africanizing Knowledge: African Studies Across the Disciplines . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-32438-0 .

^ Brizuela-Garcia, Esperanza (2018). "Africa in the World: History and Historiography".

Oxford Research Encyclopedias: African History .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.296 .

ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 .

^ a b Suremain, Marie-Albane de SuremainMarie-Albane de (2019-04-18).

"Colonial History and Historiography" .

The Oxford Encyclopedia of African Historiography: Methods and Sources . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.303 .

ISBN 978-0-19-069870-6 . Retrieved 2025-03-31 .

^ Wrong, George M. (1931-01-01).

"Histoire des Colonies Françaises et de l'Expansion de la France dans le Monde. Publiée sous la direction de Gabriel Hanotaux de l'Académie Française et Alfred Martineau, Professeur au Collège de France. Tome I., Tome I., Introduction Générale, par Gabriel Hanotaux; L'Amerique, par Ch. de la Roncière, Conservateur it la Bibliothèque Nationale, Joannès Tramond, Professeur è l'École Navale, Émile Lauvrière, Professeur au Lycée Louis-le-Grand. (Paris: Librairie Plon. 1930. Pp. xlviii, 630. 150 fr)" .

The American Historical Review .

36 (2): 372– 374.

doi : 10.1086/ahr/36.2.372 .

ISSN 0002-8762 .

^ Callahan, J. M. (1924).

"The Partition and Colonization of Africa. By Sir Charles Lucas K.C.B., K.C.M.G. New York: Oxford University Press, American Branch, 1922, pp. 228. $4.20" .

American Journal of International Law .

18 (1): 209– 212.

doi : 10.2307/2189244 .

ISSN 0002-9300 .

JSTOR 2189244 .

^ a b c d Atieno-Odhiambo, E. S. (2002).

"From African Historiographies to an African Philosophy of History" . In Falola, Toyin; Jennings, Christian (eds.).

Africanizing Knowledge: African Studies Across the Disciplines (1st ed.). Taylor & Francis.

doi : 10.4324/9781351324403 .

ISBN 0-7658-0138-8 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Falola, Toyin (2011-05-05).

"African Historical Writing" . In Schneider, Axel; Woolf, Daniel (eds.).

The Oxford History of Historical Writing: Volume 5: Historical Writing Since 1945 . Oxford University Press. pp.

399– 421.

ISBN 978-0-19-922599-6 . Retrieved 2025-02-09 .

^ Usher, Beverley (1998).

"A Brief history of the Uganda Society" .

African Research and Documentation .

78 : 40– 44.

doi : 10.1017/S0305862X00014862 .

ISSN 0305-862X .

^ Chuku, Gloria (2013), Chuku, Gloria (ed.), "Kenneth Dike: The Father of Modern African Historiography" , The Igbo Intellectual Tradition: Creative Conflict in African and African Diasporic Thought , New York: Palgrave Macmillan US, pp.

137– 164, doi : 10.1057/9781137311290_6 , ISBN 978-1-137-31129-0 , retrieved 2024-11-18 ^ a b c d e f g Falola, Toyin; Borah, Abikal (2018-11-20), "African Philosophies of History and Historiography" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History , doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.355 , ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 , retrieved 2024-10-22 ^ a b Pawlikova-Vilhanova, Viera (2016).

"African historians and the production of historical knowledge in Africa: Some reflections" . In Horáková, Hana; Werkman, Katerina (eds.).

Knowledge Production in and on Africa . LIT Verlag Münster.

ISBN 978-3-643-90798-1 .

^ Maddox, Gregory H. (2018-11-20), "The Dar es Salaam School of African History" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History , doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.314 , ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 , retrieved 2025-02-09 ^ Coquery-Vidrovitch, Catherine (2018-11-20), "The Dakar School of African History" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History , doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.318 , ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 , retrieved 2025-05-11 ^ Cooper, Frederick (1999).

"Africa's Pasts and Africa's Historians" .

African Sociological Review / Revue Africaine de Sociologie .

3 (2): 1– 29.

doi : 10.4314/asr.v3i2.23163 .

ISSN 1027-4332 .

JSTOR 24487401 .

^ a b c d e f Henige, David (2005). "Oral tradition as a means of reconstructing the past". In Philips, John Edward (ed.).

Writing African History . Rochester Studies in African History and the Diaspora. Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-58046-164-1 .

^ a b c Studien, Forum Transregionale (2018-07-31).

"African Historiography and the Challenges of European Periodization: A Historical Comment" .

TRAFO – Blog for Transregional Research (in German).

doi : 10.58079/usq7 . Retrieved 2024-10-12 .

^ Falola, Toyin; Jennings, Christian (2003).

"Introduction" .

Sources and Methods in African History: Spoken, Written, Unearthed . University Rochester Press.

ISBN 978-1-58046-134-4 .

^ a b c d e f Mlambo, Alois (2019-04-18), "African Economic History and Historiography" , The Oxford Encyclopedia of African Historiography: Methods and Sources , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780190698706.001.0001 , ISBN 978-0-19-069870-6 , retrieved 2025-01-29 ^ a b c d Brett, Michael (2013).

Approaching African history . Internet Archive. Woodbridge, Suffolk; Rochester, NY : James Currey.

ISBN 978-1-84701-063-6 .

^ a b c Brizuela-García, Esperanza (2006).

"The History of Africanization and the Africanization of History" .

History in Africa .

33 : 85– 100.

doi : 10.1353/hia.2006.0007 .

ISSN 0361-5413 .

^ Austin, Gareth (2015).

"African economic history in Africa" .

Economic History of Developing Regions .

30 (1): 79– 94.

doi : 10.1080/20780389.2015.1033686 .

^ a b c d Austin, Gareth; Broadberry, Stephen (2014).

"Introduction: The renaissance of African economic history" .

The Economic History Review .

67 (4): 893– 906.

doi : 10.1111/1468-0289.12081 .

ISSN 0013-0117 .

JSTOR 24027256 .

^ a b Brizuela-Garcia, Esperanza (2002-01-01).

Decolonising African History: Crises and Transitions in African Historiography, 1950-1990 (Thesis). University of London.

^ a b c Schmidt, Peter R. SchmidtPeter R.; Arthur, Kathryn Weedman ArthurKathryn Weedman (2019-04-18), "Community-based Approaches to African History" , The Oxford Encyclopedia of African Historiography: Methods and Sources , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780190698706.001.0001 , ISBN 978-0-19-069870-6 , retrieved 2025-05-09 ^ Falola, Toyin (2024-04-05).

Decolonizing African History . African Books Collective.

ISBN 978-3-906927-51-0 .

^ Lorenz, Chris (2017), Carretero, Mario; Berger, Stefan; Grever, Maria (eds.), " 'The Times They Are a-Changin'. On Time, Space and Periodization in History" , Palgrave Handbook of Research in Historical Culture and Education , London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.

109– 131, doi : 10.1057/978-1-137-52908-4_6 , ISBN 978-1-137-52908-4 , retrieved 2025-01-19 ^ Connah, Graham (2013).

"Archaeological Practice in Africa: A Historical Perspective" .

The Oxford Handbook of African Archaeology .

^ Ogundiran, Akinwumi (2013-06-01).

"The End of Prehistory? An Africanist Comment" .

The American Historical Review .

118 (3): 788– 801.

doi : 10.1093/ahr/118.3.788 .

ISSN 0002-8762 .

^ McCall, Daniel (2005). "Introduction". In Philips, John Edward (ed.).

Writing African History . Rochester Studies in African History and the Diaspora. Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-58046-164-1 .

^ Fenwick, Corisande (2022), "The Arab Conquests and the End of Ancient Africa?" , A Companion to North Africa in Antiquity , John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp.

424– 438, doi : 10.1002/9781119071754.ch24 , ISBN 978-1-119-07175-4 , retrieved 2025-01-26 ^ Oliver, Roland; Atmore, Anthony (2001).

Medieval Africa, 1250–1800 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-79024-6 .

^ Oliver, Roland; Atmore, Anthony (2005-02-07).

Africa since 1800 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-44398-2 .

^ Parker, John (2023-03-21).

Great Kingdoms of Africa . Univ of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-39568-8 .

^ Foley, John Miles (2016-08-09).

"oral tradition | communication | Britannica.com" . Archived from the original on 9 August 2016 . Retrieved 2025-05-06 .

^ Ki-Zerbo, Joseph: "Methodology and African Prehistory", 1990, UNESCO International Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a General History of Africa ; James Currey Publishers, ISBN 0-85255-091-X , 9780852550915; see Ch. 7; "Oral tradition and its methodology" at pages 54–61; at page 54: "Oral tradition may be defined as being a testimony transmitted verbally from one generation to another. Its special characteristics are that it is verbal and the manner in which it is transmitted." ^ Mouralis, Bernard (2022). "Orality".

Encyclopedia of African Religions and Philosophy . Springer. pp.

537– 539.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-024-2068-5_296 .

ISBN 978-94-024-2066-1 .

^ Ogot, Bethwell Allan (2009).

"Rereading the History and Historiography of Epistemic Domination and Resistance in Africa" .

African Studies Review .

52 (1): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1353/arw.0.0127 .

^ a b Vansina, Jan (1971).

"Once upon a Time: Oral Traditions as History in Africa" .

Daedalus .

100 (2): 442– 468.

ISSN 0011-5266 .

JSTOR 20024011 .

^ a b c Cooper, Barbara (2005). "Oral sources and the challenges of African history". In Philips, John Edward (ed.).

Writing African History . Rochester Studies in African History and the Diaspora. Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-58046-164-1 .

^ Jimoh, Anselm Kole (2017), Ukpokolo, Isaac E. (ed.), "An African Theory of Knowledge" , Themes, Issues and Problems in African Philosophy , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

121– 136, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-40796-8_8 , ISBN 978-3-319-40796-8 , retrieved 2024-11-28 ^ Mirzeler, Mustafa Kemal (2021), Akinyemi, Akintunde; Falola, Toyin (eds.), "Oral Tradition and Identity" , The Palgrave Handbook of African Oral Traditions and Folklore , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

403– 419, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-55517-7_20 , ISBN 978-3-030-55517-7 , retrieved 2025-05-05 ^ a b Cooper, Barbara (2005). "Oral sources and the challenge of African history". In Philips, John Edward (ed.).

Writing African History . Rochester Studies in African History and the Diaspora. Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-58046-164-1 .

^ Blau, Soren (2014), "Archaeology: Definition" , in Smith, Claire (ed.), Encyclopedia of Global Archaeology , New York, NY: Springer, p. 449, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4419-0465-2_131 , ISBN 978-1-4419-0465-2 , retrieved 2025-04-19 ^ a b McIntosh, Susan (2005). "Archaeology and the reconstruction of the African past". In Philips, John Edward (ed.).

Writing African History . Rochester Studies in African History and the Diaspora. Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-58046-164-1 .

^ a b c Ehret, Christopher (2005). "Writing African history from linguistic evidence". In Philips, John Edward (ed.).

Writing African History . Rochester Studies in African History and the Diaspora. Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-58046-164-1 .

^ "What is Anthropology?" .

The American Anthropological Association .

American Anthropological Association .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2016 . Retrieved 10 August 2013 .

^ Isabelle, Crevecoeur; Van Dyck, Marie Claire (2013), "Physical Anthropology (Paleoanthropology)" , in Runehov, Anne L. C.; Oviedo, Lluis (eds.), Encyclopedia of Sciences and Religions , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

1706– 1709, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-8265-8_1370 , ISBN 978-1-4020-8265-8 , retrieved 2025-05-01 ^ Keita, S. O. Y. (2005). "Physical anthropology and African history". In Philips, John Edward (ed.).

Writing African History . Rochester Studies in African History and the Diaspora. Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-58046-164-1 .

^ Dahlman, Carl; Renwick, William (2014).

Introduction to Geography: People, Places & Environment (6th ed.). Pearson.

ISBN 978-0137504510 .

^ Bedigian, Dorothea (2005). "The importance of botanical data to historical research on Africa". In Philips, John Edward (ed.).

Writing African History . Rochester Studies in African History and the Diaspora. Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-58046-164-1 .

^ a b Lawrence, Paul (2013-03-01), Breuilly, John (ed.), "Nationalism and Historical Writing" , The Oxford Handbook of the History of Nationalism , Oxford University Press, p. 0, ISBN 978-0-19-920919-4 , retrieved 2025-02-09 ^ Iggers, Georg G.; Mukherjee, Supriya; Wang, Qingjia E (2015-01-01), "Historical Thought and Historiography: Current Trends" , in Wright, James D. (ed.), International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences (Second Edition) , Oxford: Elsevier, pp.

39– 47, ISBN 978-0-08-097087-5 , retrieved 2025-01-17 ^ a b c Emmanuel, Ololade; Oluwatosin, Olayanju; Sodiq, Boladale; Temitope, Ajibola (2024-06-30).

"Marxist Historiography: A Threshold To The Study Of African Historiography And Decolonization In The 20th Century" .

Periodicals of Social Sciences .

4 (1): 63– 73.

^ Marzagora, Sara (2016-05-03).

"The humanism of reconstruction: African intellectuals, decolonial critical theory and the opposition to the 'posts' (postmodernism, poststructuralism, postcolonialism)" .

Journal of African Cultural Studies .

28 (2): 161– 178.

doi : 10.1080/13696815.2016.1152462 .

ISSN 1369-6815 .

^ Schmidt, Peter Ridgway (2006).

Historical Archaeology in Africa: Representation, Social Memory, and Oral Traditions . Rowman Altamira.

ISBN 978-0-7591-0965-0 .

^ Bostoen, Koen (2018-04-26).

"The Bantu Expansion" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.191 .

ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 . Retrieved 2025-02-07 .

^ Rossi, Benedetta (2019-04-18), "Migration History and Historiography" , The Oxford Encyclopedia of African Historiography: Methods and Sources , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780190698706.001.0001 , ISBN 978-0-19-069870-6 , retrieved 2025-01-30 ^ a b c Zeleza, Paul Tiyambe (2005), Oyěwùmí, Oyèrónké (ed.), "Gender Biases in African Historiography" , African Gender Studies A Reader , New York: Palgrave Macmillan US, pp.

207– 232, doi : 10.1007/978-1-137-09009-6_11 , ISBN 978-1-137-09009-6 , retrieved 2025-02-02 ^ Sheldon, Kathleen (2018).

"Women and African History" .

Oxford Bibliographies .

^ Ross, Eric (2018-11-20), "African Urban History and Historiography" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History , doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.58 , ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 ^ a b c d e f g Hopkins, A. G. (2019-01-02).

"Fifty years of African economic history" .

Economic History of Developing Regions .

34 (1): 1– 15.

doi : 10.1080/20780389.2019.1575589 .

ISSN 2078-0389 .

^ Austin, Gareth (2007).

"Reciprocal Comparison and African History: Tackling Conceptual Eurocentrism in the Study of Africa's Economic Past" .

African Studies Review .

50 (3): 1– 28.

doi : 10.1353/arw.2008.0009 .

ISSN 0002-0206 .

^ Thornton, John K. (2017-07-10).

"Placing the Military in African History: A Reflection" .

Journal of African Military History .

1 ( 1– 2): 112– 119.

doi : 10.1163/24680966-00101007 .

ISSN 2468-0966 .

^ a b Parsons, Timothy (2018-11-20), "African Military History and Historiography" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History , doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.241 , ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 , retrieved 2025-02-14 ^ a b Moyd, Michelle (2023-01-02).

"African Military Historiography" .

War & Society .

42 (1): 34– 43.

doi : 10.1080/07292473.2023.2150477 .

ISSN 0729-2473 .

^ a b Kreike, Emmanuel (2018-11-20), "Environmental History" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History , ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 , retrieved 2025-05-10 ^ Swart, Sandra (2019-04-26), "Animals in African History" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History , doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.443 , ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 , retrieved 2025-02-15 ^ Monteiro-Ferreira, Ana (2009-11-01).

"Afrocentricity and the Western Paradigm" .

Journal of Black Studies .

40 (2): 327– 336.

doi : 10.1177/0021934708314801 .

ISSN 0021-9347 .

^ Asante, Molefi Kete (2007-12-17).

An Afrocentric Manifesto: Toward an African Renaissance . Polity.

ISBN 978-0-7456-4102-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Alagoa, Ebiegberi J., "The Practice of History in Africa: A History of African Historiography." Onyoma Research Publications (2006) Bates, Robert H., Vumbi Yoka Mudimbe, and Jean F. O'Barr, eds.

Africa and the disciplines: The contributions of research in Africa to the social sciences and humanities (U of Chicago Press, 1993).

Brown, Karen. "‘Trees, forests and communities’: some historiographical approaches to environmental history on Africa." Area 35.4 (2003): 343-356.

online Clarence-Smith, William G. "For Braudel: A Note on the 'École des Annales' and the Historiography of Africa." History in Africa 4 (1977): 275–281.

Cooper, Frederick. "Decolonizing Situations: The Rise, Fall, and Rise of Colonial Studies, 1951-2001," French Politics, Culture, and Society 20#2 (2002): 47–76.

Curtin, Philip, et al.

African History: From Earliest Times to Independence (2nd ed. 1995), a standard history; 546 pages0 Curtin, Philip D.

African history (1964) 80pp; online Engelbrecht, C. "Marx’s Theory of Colonisation and Contemporary Eastern Cape (South Africa) Historiography." (2012) online [ dead link ] Etherington, Norman. "Recent trends in the historiography of Christianity in Southern Africa." Journal of Southern African Studies 22.2 (1996): 201–219.

Hetherington, Penelope. "Women in South Africa: the historiography in English." International Journal of African Historical Studies 26.2 (1993): 241–269.

Hopkins, A. G. "Fifty years of African economic history." Economic History of Developing Regions 34.1 (2019): 1–15.

Iliffe, John.

Africans: The History of a Continent (1995; 3rd ed/ 2017) online , a standard history.

Ki-Zerbo, Joseph, ed.

UNESCO General History of Africa, Vol. I, Methodology and African Prehistory (1981), unabridged online 850pp; also abridged edition 368pp (U of California Press, 1981) Fage, J. D. "The development of African historiography." pp 25–42 Curtin, P.D. "Recent trends in African historiography and their contribution to history in general" pp 54–71.

MacGaffey, Wyatt. "Concepts of race in the historiography of Northeast Africa." Journal of African History (1966): 1–17.

online Manning, Patrick. "African and world historiography." Journal of African History (2013): 319–330.

online Martin, William G., William Martin, and Michael Oliver West, eds.

Out of one, many Africas: Reconstructing the study and meaning of Africa (U of Illinois Press, 1999).

Maylam, Paul.

South Africa's racial past: The history and historiography of racism, segregation, and apartheid (Routledge, 2017).

Roberts, A. D. "The Earlier Historiography of Colonial Africa" History in Africa , Vol. 5 (1978), pp. 153–167.

online Robertshaw, Peter. "Rivals no more: Jan Vansina, precolonial African historiography, and archaeology." History in Africa 45, no. 1 (2018): 145–160.

Whitehead, Clive. "The historiography of British imperial education policy, Part II: Africa and the rest of the colonial empire." History of Education 34.4 (2005): 441–454.

online Zewde, Bahru. "African historiography: Past, present and future." Afrika Zamani: revue annuelle d'histoire africaine/Annual Journal of African History 7-8 (2000): 33–40.

Zimmerman, Andrew. "Africa in imperial and transnational history: Multi-sited historiography and the necessity of theory." Journal of African History (2013): 331–340.

online [ dead link ] Regions [ edit ] Akyeampong, Emmanuel Kwaku.

Themes in West Africa's History (2006) 323pp.

Burton, Andrew, and Michael Jennings. "Introduction: The emperor's new clothes? Continuities in governance in late colonial and early postcolonial East Africa." International Journal of African Historical Studies 40.1 (2007): 1-25.

online Borutta, Manuel, and Sakis Gekas. "A colonial sea: The Mediterranean, 1798–1956." European Review of History 19.1 (2012): 1-13' North Africa online Cobley, Alan. "Does social history have a future? The ending of apartheid and recent trends in South African historiography." Journal of Southern African Studies 27.3 (2001): 613–625.

Dueck, Jennifer M. "The Middle East and North Africa in the imperial and post-colonial historiography of France." Historical Journal (2007): 935–949.

online Dueppen, Stephen A. "The archaeology of West Africa, ca. 800 BCE to 1500 CE." History Compass 14.6 (2016): 247–263.

Fage, J. D.

A Guide to Original Sources for Precolonial Western Africa Published in European Languages (2nd ed. 1994); updated in Stanley B. Alpern, ed.

Guide to Original Sources for Precolonial Western Africa (2006).

Gjersø, Jonas Fossli. "The scramble for East Africa: British motives reconsidered, 1884–95." Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History 43.5 (2015): 831–860.

online Greene, S. E.

Sacred Sites and the Colonial Encounter: A History of Meaning and Memory in Ghana (2002) Hannaford, Matthew J. "Pre-Colonial South-East Africa: Sources and Prospects for Research in Economic and Social History." Journal of Southern African Studies 44.5 (2018): 771–792.

online Heckman, Alma Rachel. "Jewish Radicals of Morocco: Case Study for a New Historiography." Jewish Social Studies 23.3 (2018): 67–100.

online [ dead link ] Lemarchand, René. "Reflections on the recent historiography of Eastern Congo." Journal of African History 54.3 (2013): 417–437.

online Mann, Gregory. "Locating colonial histories: between France and West Africa." American Historical Review 110.2 (2005): 409–434. focus on local memories and memorials online Reid, Richard. "Time and distance: Reflections on local and global history from East Africa." Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 29 (2019): 253–272.

online Reid, Andrew. "Constructing history in Uganda." Journal of African History 57.2 (2016): 195–207.

online Soares, Benjamin. "The historiography of Islam in West Africa: an anthropologist's view." Journal of African History 55.1 (2014): 27–36.

online Tonkin, Elizabeth.

Narrating our pasts: The social construction of oral history (Cambridge university press, 1995), on West Africa v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Countries and territories of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt (partly in Asia) Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic ( unclear sovereignty ) Somaliland Dependent territories France Îles Éparses United Kingdom Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha African territories fully part of non-African states France Mayotte Réunion Italy Pantelleria Pelagie Islands Portugal Madeira Savage Islands Spain Canary Islands Ceuta Melilla Plazas de soberanía Yemen Socotra Category Africa portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐74z5p
Cached time: 20250817225030
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.614 seconds
Real time usage: 1.790 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 30107/1000000
Revision size: 114555/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 580393/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18518/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 69/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 391229/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.805/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8619901/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1434.012      1 -total
 42.40%  608.084      2 Template:Reflist
 21.88%  313.695     74 Template:Rp
 20.86%  299.079     74 Template:R/superscript
 15.17%  217.608      1 Template:Historiography
 15.00%  215.146      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.92%  199.548     21 Template:Citation
 13.72%  196.814     19 Template:Navbox
 11.82%  169.504     31 Template:Cite_book
 10.08%  144.565    222 Template:R/where Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:60851339:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817225030 and revision id 1305828200. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=African_historiography&oldid=1305828200 " Category : Historiography of Africa Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles to be expanded from February 2025 All articles to be expanded Articles with empty sections from February 2025 All articles with empty sections All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2025 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 09:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents African historiography 5 languages Add topic

