Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins and 2000 manifesto 1.2 Exhibitions (2000–2009) 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Remodernism 7 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Español فارسی Italiano Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Present-day modernist philosophical movement Not to be confused with Premodernism .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Remodernism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Show, The Stuckists: The First Remodernist Art Group , [ 1 ] to launch the book of the same name. London EC1, March 2001.

Remodernism is an artistic and philosophical movement aimed at reviving aspects of modernism , particularly in its early form, in a manner that both follows after and contrasts against postmodernism . The movement was initiated in 2000 by stuckists Billy Childish and Charles Thomson , [ 2 ] with a manifesto, Remodernism in an attempt to introduce a period of new "spirituality" into art, culture and society to replace postmodernism, which they said was cynical and spiritually bankrupt. In 2002, a remodernism art show in Albuquerque was accompanied by an essay from University of California, Berkeley art professor, Kevin Radley. Adherents of remodernism advocate it as a forward and radical, not reactionary, impetus.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In 2006, the Stedelijk Museum and the University of Amsterdam held a talk on remodernism with Daniel Birnbaum and Alison Gingeras ; the introduction to this talked of the revival of painting as a possible return to traditional modernist values, such as authenticity , self-expression and autonomy, as opposed to multimedia practice.

[ 5 ] In 2008, London Evening Standard critic, Ben Lewis, applied the term to three Turner Prize nominees and saw them amongst a movement which was reviving the formalism of the early 20th century; he advocated values of an aesthetic informed by modesty, generosity and genuine emotion.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Postmodernism Preceded by Modernism Postmodernity Deconstruction Hypermodernity Hyperreality Posthumanism Post-structuralism Fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Criminology Dance Feminism Film Television Literature ( Picture books ) Music International relations Philosophy Anarchism Marxism Postpositivism Psychology Political science Theatre Theology and Religion Reactions Criticism Metamodernism Post-postmodernism Remodernism v t e Origins and 2000 manifesto [ edit ] Charles Thomson and Billy Childish , the founders of the stuckism art movement, inaugurated the period of remodernism.

[ 2 ] Their Remodernism manifesto was published on March 1, 2000 to promote vision, authenticity and self-expression, with an emphasis on painting, and subtitled "towards a new spirituality in art". Its premise is that the potential of the modernist vision has not been fulfilled, that its development has been in the wrong direction and that this vision needs to be reclaimed, redefined and redeveloped. It advocates the search for truth, knowledge and meaning, and challenges formalism .

It has a short introduction, summing up: "Modernism has progressively lost its way, until finally toppling into the bottomless pit of Postmodern balderdash ." This is followed by 14 numbered points, stressing bravery, individuality, inclusiveness, communication, humanity and the perennial against nihilism, scientific materialism and the "brainless destruction of convention." Point 7 states: Spirituality is the journey of the soul on earth. Its first principle is a declaration of intent to face the truth. Truth is what it is, regardless of what we want it to be. Being a spiritual artist means addressing unflinchingly our projections, good and bad, the attractive and the grotesque, our strengths as well as our delusions, in order to know ourselves and thereby our true relationship with others and our connection to the divine.

Point 9 states: "Spiritual art is not religion. Spirituality is humanity's quest to understand itself and finds its symbology through the clarity and integrity of its artists." Point 12 links its use of the word "God" to enthusiasm—from the Greek root en theos (to be possessed by God).

The summary at the end starts, "It is quite clear to anyone of an uncluttered mental disposition that what is now put forward, quite seriously, as art by the ruling elite, is proof that a seemingly rational development of a body of ideas has gone seriously awry," and finds the solution is a spiritual renaissance because "there is nowhere else for art to go. Stuckism's mandate is to initiate that spiritual renaissance now." [ 7 ] Billy Childish Charles Thomson In 1999, Childish and Thomson wrote a remodernism manifesto, calling for a period of new spirituality in art, culture and society to replace postmodernism .

Childish and Thomson sent their remodernism manifesto to Sir Nicholas Serota , Director of the Tate Gallery , who replied, "You will not be surprised to learn that I have no comment to make on your letter, or your manifesto Remodernism ." [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Exhibitions (2000–2009) [ edit ] In March 2000 the Stuckists declared themselves to be the first remodernist art group at a show The Resignation of Sir Nicholas Serota . In April, remodernism was quoted in The Gulf News ( UAE ).

[ 10 ] In May The Observer newspaper announced a stuckist show: "As the founding group of a self-named art movement called Remodernism, they stand on an art ticket that's against clever conceptualism and in favour of a more emotional and spiritual integrity in art via figurative painting." [ 11 ] In June, Thomson and Childish gave a talk on stuckism and remodernism at the Salon des Arts, Kensington, promoted by the Institute of Ideas .

[ 12 ] The same month the "Students for Stuckism" also gave "a Remodernist show and talk". The Institute of Remodernism was founded by Khatereh Ahmadi .

[ citation needed ] In 2001, Thomson stood in the UK general election , stating, "The Stuckist Party aims to bring the ideas of Stuckism and Remodernism into the political arena." [ 13 ] The University of New Mexico : graduates staged a remodernism show.

In January 2002, Magnifico Arts presented the show ReMo: ReModernism [ 14 ] of graduate students from the University of New Mexico . At an artists' talk, Kevin Radley, an art professor at the University of California, Berkeley said, "Remodernism isn't about going backwards, but about surging forward." [ 4 ] In an essay that accompanied the exhibition, Radley wrote: ...there seems to be a re-emergence of confidence in the artist's singular voice—a renewal of the belief that an artist can explore their own natures without the restraints of the ironic, the cynical or the didactic. To re-contact the notions of presence, reinvent their sense of beauty and renew our need for intimacy.

[ 15 ] The show curator, Yoshimi Hayashi, said: ReMo incorporates ideas from Modernism, Avantegardism , and Post Modernism; thus synthesizing an alternative and real time contemporary approach to art. In ReMo, issues such as multiculturalism , irony, the sublime , and identity are considered; however, they do not become the art itself. The reconsideration and redefinition of the traditions are sought not by mere deconstructionism, but rather by connecting new nodes of ideas. Therefore, by definition, ReMo is fundamentally cellular and its roots stem from provincial art settings.

[ 16 ] In 2003, an independent group, the Stuckist Photographers , was founded by Andy Bullock and Larry Dunstan with a statement of endorsement for remodernism.

[ 17 ] In 2004, the Defastenists, a new group of creatives in Ireland, declared themselves remodernist.

[ 18 ] A Remodernist art gallery, The Deatrick Gallery was founded in Louisville, Kentucky .
American film makers/photographers Jesse Richards and Harris Smith co-founded a new group remodernist film and photography with an emphasis on emotional meaning and characterised by elements of new-wave, no-wave, expressionist and transcendental film-making.

[ citation needed ] Stuckist artist Bill Lewis , interviewed by the BBC at the 2004 Liverpool Biennial , said that remodernism was "not a movement as such", [ 3 ] but a return to the start of modernism in order to move forward with an art for a new paradigm.

[ 3 ] To " remodernise " is to go "back to the root again, starting with painting ... and see where it goes".

[ 3 ] He said that this had been called reactionary, but it was radical "in the true sense of the word".

[ 3 ] New York stuckist artist, Terry Marks said that remodernism posited that modernism had started in a good direction, but veered from that into "pure idea" and that it was necessary to return to the starting point to take an as-yet unexplored alternative direction: "to pursue art-making that's more concrete and accessible to more people, and find out where that leads us".

[ 19 ] In 2004, Luke Heighton wrote in The Future magazine, "Remodernism, it seems, is here to stay whether we like it or not." [ 20 ] Alex Kapranos of Franz Ferdinand declared 2004 "a good year for remodernism—for having the gall to suggest that artists can have souls".

[ 21 ] In August 2005 an art show Addressing the Shadow and Making Friends with Wild Dogs: Remodernism (a title taken from a line in the stuckist remodernism manifesto) was held at CBGBs 313 gallery in New York City .

[ 22 ] Artist and blogger Mark Vallen said, "In the mid-1970s punk rock was born in a dank little New York nightclub called CBGB's. It all started when rockers like Television, the Ramones and Patti Smith launched a frontal assault on the monolith of corporate rock 'n roll. Now another artistic revolt, Remodernism, is about to widen its offensive from the birthplace of punk." [ 22 ] The Stedelijk Museum : in 2006, it staged a talk on remodernism with the University of Amsterdam .

[ 5 ] On 10 May 2006, the Stedelijk Museum and the University of Amsterdam staged a talk on remodernism by Daniel Birnbaum, contributing editor of Artforum , and Alison Gingeras, Assistant Curator, Guggenheim Museum .

[ 5 ] The summary is: Recently, we have been witness to yet another resurgence of interest in painting. Should we view the revitalization of this ancient medium as a return to traditional modernist values like autonomy, authenticity and self-expression? If indeed we can speak of a return to modernism (remodernism), where will this leave multimedial and transdisciplinary practice in the arts?

[ 5 ] In 2006, artist Matt Bray said, "I do not wish to be considered a Stuckist, as I find some of there (sic) antics unnecessary. The Stuckists are however the first and most famous Remodernist group, so for that, and for bringing this particular manifesto to my attention; I thank them." [ 23 ] In May 2007, with punk singer Adam Bray, he created the Mad Monk Collective in Folkestone , England, to promote remodernism.

[ 24 ] In January 2008, London Evening Standard critic, Ben Lewis, said the year would see "the invention of a new word to describe the modernist revival: 'remodernism,'" [ 25 ] which he applied later in the year to Turner Prize nominees Mark Leckey , Runa Islam and Goshka Macuga , as "part of a whole movement reviving early 20th-century formalism", praising Macuga for her "heartfelt, modest and generous-spirited aesthetic", of which he said there was more needed today.

[ 6 ] In April 2009, he described Catalina Niculescu, a Romanian artist using "nostalgic" [ 26 ] 16mm film, as among a significant trend in art of fetishising the offcuts of modernism: "Let's call it Remodernism." [ 26 ] On 27 August 2008, Jesse Richards published a Remodernist Film Manifesto , calling for a "new spirituality in cinema", use of intuition in filmmaking, as well as describing the remodernist film as being a "stripped down, minimal, lyrical, punk kind of filmmaking". The manifesto criticizes Stanley Kubrick , filmmakers who use digital video, and Dogme 95 . Point 4 says: The Japanese ideas of wabi-sabi (the beauty of imperfection) and mono no aware (the awareness of the transience of things and the bittersweet feelings that accompany their passing), have the ability to show the truth of existence, and should always be considered when making the remodernist film.

[ 27 ] In 2009, Nick Christos and other students from Florida Atlantic University founded the Miami Stuckists group. Christos said, 
"Stuckism is a renaissance of modernism—it's re-modernism." [ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Remodernist film Neomodern Post-postmodernism Neo-minimalism New Sincerity New Puritans Art manifesto References [ edit ] ^ Listed as "Best London exhibition of the week" in The Guardian Guide . Source: Stuckism.com .

^ a b Packer, William. "Childish artists coming unstuck", p.13, and "Young pretenders of art have much to learn", p. 20, Financial Times , March 13, 2001. The text from different editions is the same: "Childish and his co-founder, Charles Thomson, ushered in remodernism, 'a period of art ... to reclaim the vision and spiritual values of the early Modernists and replace the ennui of Post-Modernism'." ^ a b c d e Lewis, Bill . "Listen to Bill Lewis on Remodernism" (audio) in: Sumpter, Helen.

"Liverpool Biennial 04" , BBC , 4 September 2004. Retrieved 22 September 2009.

^ a b Medina, Valerie J. (2002) "Modern art surges ahead:¡Magnifico! features new artistic expression" Daily Lobo , 17 January 2002. Accessed 29 April 2006 ^ a b c d "Right about now: Remodernism" University of Amsterdam. Accessed 29 April 2006 ^ a b Lewis, Ben.

"Turner Prize 2008" , 3 October 2008. Retrieved 22 September 2009.

^ Childish, Billy, and Thomson, Charles.

"Remodernism" , stuckism.com, March 1, 2000. Accessed 12 September 2007.

^ "Stuck on the Turner Prize: Send in the clowns" , University of Glasgow . Retrieved from Internet Archive cache of 21 December 2002.

^ Kennedy, Maeve "Shock of the old as paint returns to the Turner Prize" , The Guardian , 24 October 2000. Accessed 12 September 2007.

^ Lethbridge, Lucy (2000) "Letter from London" The Gulf News , 14 May 2000. Accessed 29 April 2006 ^ Sumpter, Helen (2000) "Go see... the Stuckists" The Observer , 14 May 2000. Accessed 29 April 2006 ^ "Stella Vine meets (and joins) the Stuckists" stuckism.com. Accessed 29 April 2006 ^ "The Stuckist Party: Manifesto 2001" pdf accessed from Keele University website, 29 April 2006.

^ "Magnifico presents ReMo: ReModernism" , Magnifico 2002. Retrieved from the Internet Archive store of 21 January 2002.

^ Radley, Kevin (2002) "RE MODernism: Trajectories towards the NU Modern" magnifico.org, 1 January 2002. Retrieved from the Internet Archive .

^ "Magnífico presents ReMo" , Magnifico, 2002. Retrieved from the Internet Archive store of 7 February 2002.

^ "The Stuckists Photographers" , Walker Art Gallery, National Museums Liverpool. Accessed 12 September 2007.

^ "News: Defastenism—A Remodernist art group" , stuckism.com, 13 May 2004. Retrieved 15 October 2009.

^ Strickland, Carol.

"Stuckist in New York City: An Interview with Narrative Painter Terry Marks" , NYArts , September/October 2004. Accessed 15 October 2009.

^ Heighton, Luke (2004) "Dead Painters Society" The Future . Accessed 29 April 2006 ^ Kapranos, Alex . "Alex Kapranos, singer/guitarist, Franz Ferdinand" in: "The triumphs and turkeys of 2004" , The Guardian , 16 December 2004. Accessed 29 April 2006 ^ a b Vallen, Mark .

"Stuckists at CBGBs" , Art-for-a-change, 2 August 2005. Retrieved 1 June 2008.

^ Bray, Matt (2006) "Art Portal: Matt Bray 2006" artnow.uk.com. Accessed 29 April 2006 ^ Mad Monk (2007) "Mad Monk" , Mad Monk Books. Accessed May 2008 ^ Lewis, Ben.

"The London galleries to watch , Evening Standard , 18 January 2008. Retrieved 22 September 2009.

^ a b Lewis, Ben. "Exhibition: Atalina Nicolescu/Maurizio Anzeri", Evening Standard , p.36, 28 April 2009.

^ "Remodernist Film Manifesto", When The Trees Were Still Real, 27 August 2008 Retrieved 1 September  2008 ^ Soler, Eilenn.

"Stuckists display art" , The Miami Herald , August 29, 2009. Retrieved 21 September 2009.

Further reading [ edit ] Ed. Katherine Evans (2000), The Stuckists: The First Remodernist Art Group , Victoria Press, ISBN 0-907165-27-3 Ed. Frank Milner (2004), The Stuckists Punk Victorian , National Museums Liverpool , ISBN 1-902700-27-9 External links [ edit ] Remodernism Manifesto (in English, French, German, Persian, Portuguese and Spanish) Charles Thomson on the writing of the Remodernism manifesto Remodernism manifesto in the Tate Gallery v t e Remodernism Remodernist film Stuckism International Stuckist Photographers « Postmodernism v t e Criticism of postmodernism Concepts Altermodern Anti-anti-art Hypermodernity Metamodernism Neomodern Neomodernism New sincerity Post-irony Post-postmodernism Remodernism Remodernist film Stuckism International Transmodernism Critics Anderson Benson Berman Bricmont Bunge Chomsky Crews Dawkins Dennett Dussel Eagleton Fukuyama Hicks Jameson Kramer Lindsay Paglia Peterson Pluckrose Scruton Sokal Windschuttle Works Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (1991) Higher Superstition (1994) Dead White Males (1995) Fashionable Nonsense (1997) Explaining Postmodernism (2004) The Dictionary of Fashionable Nonsense (2006) Cynical Theories (2020) Related Grievance studies affair Postmodernism Generator Science wars Sokal affair v t e Modernism Movements Acmeism Art Deco Art Nouveau Ashcan School Constructivism Cubism Dada Expressionism Der Blaue Reiter Die Brücke Music Fauvism Functionalism Bauhaus Futurism Imagism Lettrism Neoplasticism De Stijl Orphism Surrealism Symbolism Synchromism Tonalism Literary arts Literature Apollinaire Barnes Beckett Bely Breton Broch Bulgakov Chekhov Conrad Döblin Forster Faulkner Flaubert Ford Gide Hamsun Hašek Hemingway Hesse Joyce Kafka Koestler Lawrence Mann Mansfield Marinetti Musil Dos Passos Platonov Porter Proust Stein Svevo Unamuno Woolf Poetry Akhmatova Aldington Auden Cendrars Crane H.D.

Desnos Eliot Éluard Elytis George Jacob Lorca Lowell (Amy) Lowell (Robert) Mallarmé Moore Owen Pessoa Pound Rilke Seferis Stevens Thomas Tzara Valéry Williams Yeats Works In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927) The Metamorphosis (1915) Ulysses (1922) The Waste Land (1922) The Magic Mountain (1924) Mrs Dalloway (1925) The Sun Also Rises (1926) The Master and Margarita (1928–1940) The Sound and the Fury (1929) Visual arts Painting Albers Arp Balthus Bellows Boccioni Bonnard Brâncuși Braque Calder Cassatt Cézanne Chagall Chirico Claudel Dalí Degas Delaunay Delaunay Demuth Dix Doesburg Duchamp Dufy Ensor Ernst Gauguin Giacometti Goncharova Gris Grosz Höch Hopper Kahlo Kandinsky Kirchner Klee Kokoschka Kooning Lawrence Léger Magritte Malevich Manet Marc Matisse Metzinger Miró Modigliani Mondrian Monet Moore Munch Nolde O'Keeffe Picabia Picasso Pissarro Ray Redon Renoir Rodin Rousseau Schiele Seurat Signac Sisley Soutine Steichen Stieglitz Toulouse-Lautrec Van Gogh Vuillard Wood Film Akerman Aldrich Antonioni Avery Bergman Bresson Buñuel Carné Cassavetes Chaplin Clair Cocteau Dassin Deren Dovzhenko Dreyer Edwards Eisenstein Epstein Fassbinder Fellini Flaherty Ford Fuller Gance Godard Hitchcock Hubley Jones Keaton Kubrick Kuleshov Kurosawa Lang Losey Lupino Lye Marker Minnelli Murnau Ozu Pabst Pudovkin Ray (Nicholas) Ray (Satyajit) Resnais Renoir Richardson Rossellini Sirk Sjöström Sternberg Tarkovsky Tati Trnka Truffaut Varda Vertov Vigo Welles Wiene Wood Architecture Breuer Bunshaft Gaudí Gropius Guimard Horta Hundertwasser Johnson Kahn Le Corbusier Loos Melnikov Mendelsohn Mies Nervi Neutra Niemeyer Rietveld Saarinen Steiner Sullivan Tatlin Wright Works A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886) Mont Sainte-Victoir (1887) The Starry Night (1889) Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907) The Dance (1909–1910) Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912) Black Square (1915) The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920) Ballet Mécanique (1923) Battleship Potemkin (1925) Metropolis (1927) Un Chien Andalou (1929) Villa Savoye (1931) Fallingwater (1936) Citizen Kane (1941) Meshes of the Afternoon (1943) Performing arts Music Antheil Bartók Berg Berio Boulanger Boulez Copland Debussy Dutilleux Falla Feldman Górecki Hindemith Honegger Ives Janáček Ligeti Lutosławski Milhaud Nono Partch Russolo Satie Schaeffer Schoenberg Scriabin Stockhausen Strauss Stravinsky Szymanowski Varèse Villa-Lobos Webern Weill Theatre Anderson Anouilh Artaud Beckett Brecht Chekhov Ibsen Jarry Kaiser Maeterlinck Mayakovsky O'Casey O'Neill Osborne Pirandello Piscator Strindberg Toller Wedekind Wilder Witkiewicz Dance Balanchine Cunningham Diaghilev Duncan Fokine Fuller Graham Holm Laban Massine Nijinsky Shawn Sokolow St. Denis Tamiris Wiesenthal Wigman Works Don Juan (1888) Ubu Roi (1896) Verklärte Nacht (1899) Pelléas et Mélisande (1902) Salome (1905) The Firebird (1910) Afternoon of a Faun (1912) The Rite of Spring (1913) Fountain (1917) Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921) The Threepenny Opera (1928) Waiting for Godot (1953) Related American modernism Armory Show Avant-garde Ballets Russes Bloomsbury Group Buddhist modernism Classical Hollywood cinema Degenerate art Ecomodernism Experimental film Film noir Fin de siècle Fourth dimension in art Fourth dimension in literature Grosvenor School of Modern Art Hanshinkan Modernism High modernism Hippie modernism Impressionism Music Literature Post- Incoherents International Style Late modernism Late modernity List of art movements List of avant-garde artists List of modernist poets Maximalism Metamodernism Modernity Neo-primitivism Neo-romanticism New Hollywood New Objectivity Poetic realism Pop Art Pulp noir Reactionary modernism Remodernism Second Viennese School Structural film Underground film Vulgar modernism ← Romanticism Postmodernism → Category v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kmbpd
Cached time: 20250815042330
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.774 seconds
Real time usage: 0.964 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4032/1000000
Revision size: 20207/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 272979/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7509/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 71533/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.398/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22158932/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  657.969      1 -total
 47.08%  309.801     10 Template:Navbox
 28.59%  188.106      1 Template:Modernism
 16.55%  108.866      8 Template:Lang
 11.82%   77.801      1 Template:Postmodernism
 11.54%   75.948      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.14%   66.723      2 Template:ISBN
  9.79%   64.390      1 Template:Short_description
  8.52%   56.057      1 Template:Verification
  7.69%   50.596      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:68062:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815042330 and revision id 1305968448. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Remodernism&oldid=1305968448 " Categories : Remodernism Contemporary art movements Criticism of postmodernism Modernism Architectural theory Architectural styles Visual arts genres British art movements 21st century in art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from April 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 04:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Remodernism 7 languages Add topic

