Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Moral dualism Toggle Moral dualism subsection 1.1 History 2 Duotheism, bitheism, ditheism Toggle Duotheism, bitheism, ditheism subsection 2.1 Radical and mitigated dualism 3 Theistic dualism Toggle Theistic dualism subsection 3.1 Zoroastrianism 3.2 Manichaeism 3.3 In Pseudo-Christian Practice 3.3.1 Cathars 3.4 In Hinduism 4 Ontological dualism Toggle Ontological dualism subsection 4.1 In Chinese philosophy 5 In other religions Toggle In other religions subsection 5.1 Samoyed peoples 5.2 Comparative studies of Kets and neighboring peoples 5.3 Chukchi 5.4 Fuegians 6 See also 7 Footnotes 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Dualism in cosmology 9 languages বাংলা Čeština فارسی हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Magyar Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Two fundamental and often opposing concepts For other uses, see Dualism (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Baháʼí Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism Indo-Iranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names ( "God" ) Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil ( theodicy ) Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e Dualism or dualistic cosmology is the moral or belief that two fundamental concepts exist, which often oppose each other. It is an umbrella term that covers a diversity of views from various religions, including both traditional religions and scriptural religions.

Moral dualism is the belief of the great complement of, or conflict between, the benevolent and the malevolent. It simply implies that there are two moral opposites at work, independent of any interpretation of what might be "moral" and independent of how these may be represented. Moral opposites might, for example, exist in a worldview that has one god, more than one god, or none. By contrast, duotheism , bitheism or ditheism implies (at least) two gods. While bitheism implies harmony, ditheism implies rivalry and opposition, such as between good and evil, or light and dark, or summer and winter. For example, a ditheistic system could be one in which one god is a creator and the other a destroyer. In theology , dualism can also refer to the relationship between the deity and creation or the deity and the universe (see theistic dualism). That form of dualism is a belief shared in certain traditions of Christianity and Hinduism .

[ 1 ] Alternatively, in ontological dualism, the world is divided into two overarching categories. Within Chinese culture and philosophy the opposition and combination of the universe's two basic principles are expressed as yin and yang and are traditionally foundational doctrine of Taoism , Confucianism and some Chinese Buddhist Schools.

Many myths and creation motifs with dualistic cosmologies have been described in ethnographic and anthropological literature. The motifs conceive the world as being created, organized, or influenced by two demiurges , culture heroes , or other mythological beings, who compete with each other or have a complementary function in creating, arranging or influencing the world. There is a huge diversity of such cosmologies. In some cases, such as among the Chukchi , the beings collaborate rather than compete, and they contribute to the creation in a coequal way. In many other instances the two beings are not of the same importance or power (sometimes, one of them is even characterized as gullible). Sometimes they can be contrasted as good versus evil.

[ 2 ] They may be often believed to be twins or at least brothers.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Dualistic motifs in mythologies can be observed in all inhabited continents. Zolotarjov concludes that they cannot be explained by diffusion or borrowing but are rather of convergent origin. They are related to a dualistic organization of society ( moieties ); in some cultures, the social organization may have ceased to exist, but mythology preserves the memory in more and more disguised ways.

[ 5 ] Moral dualism [ edit ] Moral dualism is the belief of the great complement or conflict between the benevolent and the malevolent. Like ditheism/bitheism (see below), moral dualism does not imply the absence of monist or monotheistic principles. Moral dualism simply implies that there are two moral opposites at work, independent of any interpretation of what might be "moral" and—unlike ditheism/bitheism—independent of how these may be represented.

For example, Mazdaism (Mazdean Zoroastrianism ) is both dualistic and monotheistic (but not monist by definition) since in that philosophy God—the Creator—is purely good, and the antithesis —which is also uncreated—is an absolute one.

Mandaeism is monotheistic and Gnostic and in its cosmology , the World of Light ( alma d-nhūra ) that is good, is contrasted with the World of Darkness or underworld ( alma d-hšuka ) that is evil.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Zurvanism (Zurvanite Zoroastrianism) and Manichaeism are representative of dualistic and monist philosophies since each has a supreme and transcendental First Principle from which the two equal-but-opposite entities then emanate. This is also true for the suppressed Christian gnostic religions, such as Bogomils , Catharism , and so on. More complex forms of monist dualism also exist, for instance in Hermeticism , where Nous "thought"—that is described to have created man—brings forth both good and evil, dependent on interpretation, whether it receives prompting from the God or from the Demon. Duality with pluralism is considered a logical fallacy .

History [ edit ] Moral dualism began as a theological belief. Dualism was first seen implicitly in Egyptian religious beliefs by the contrast of the gods Set (disorder, death) and Osiris (order, life).

[ 8 ] The first explicit conception of dualism came from the Ancient Persian religion of Zoroastrianism around the mid-fifth century BC. Zoroastrianism is a monotheistic religion that believes that Ahura Mazda is the eternal creator of all good things. Any violations of Ahura Mazda's order arise from druj , which is everything uncreated. From this comes a significant choice for humans to make. Either they fully participate in human life for Ahura Mazda or they do not and give druj power. Personal dualism is even more distinct in the beliefs of later religions.

The religious dualism of Christianity between good and evil is not a perfect dualism as God (good) will inevitably destroy Satan (evil). Early Christian dualism is largely based on Platonic Dualism (See: Neoplatonism and Christianity ). There is also a personal dualism in Christianity with a soul-body distinction based on the idea of an immaterial Christian soul .

[ 9 ] Duotheism, bitheism, ditheism [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) When used with regards to multiple gods, dualism may refer to duotheism, bitheism, or ditheism. Although ditheism/bitheism imply moral dualism, they are not equivalent: ditheism/bitheism implies (at least) two gods, while moral dualism does not necessarily imply theism ( theos = god ) at all.

Both bitheism and ditheism imply a belief in two equally powerful gods with complementary or antonymous properties; however, while bitheism implies harmony, ditheism implies rivalry and opposition, such as between good and evil, bright and dark, or summer and winter. For example, a ditheistic system would be one in which one god is creative, the other is destructive (cf.

theodicy ). In the original conception of Zoroastrianism , for example, Ahura Mazda was the spirit of ultimate good, while Ahriman ( Angra Mainyu ) was the spirit of ultimate evil.

In a bitheistic system, by contrast, where the two deities are not in conflict or opposition, one could be male and the other female (cf. duotheism [ clarification needed ] ). One well-known example of a bitheistic or duotheistic theology based on gender polarity is found in the neopagan religion of Wicca . In Wicca, dualism is represented in the belief of a god and a goddess as a dual partnership in ruling the universe. This is centered on the worship of a divine couple , the Moon Goddess and the Horned God , who are regarded as lovers. However, there is also a ditheistic theme within traditional Wicca, as the Horned God has dual aspects of bright and dark—relating to day/night, summer/winter—expressed as the Oak King and the Holly King , who in Wiccan myth and ritual are said to engage in battle twice a year for the hand of the Goddess, resulting in the changing seasons. (Within Wicca, bright and dark do not correspond to notions of "good" and "evil" but are aspects of the natural world, much like yin and yang in Taoism .) Radical and mitigated dualism [ edit ] Radical Dualism – or absolute Dualism which posits two co-equal divine forces.

[ 10 ] Manichaeism conceives of two previously coexistent realms of light and darkness which become embroiled in conflict, owing to the chaotic actions of the latter. Subsequently, certain elements of the light became entrapped within darkness; the purpose of material creation is to enact the slow process of extraction of these individual elements, at the end of which the kingdom of light will prevail over darkness. Manicheanism likely inherits this dualistic mythology from Zoroastrianism , in which the eternal spirit Ahura Mazda is opposed by his antithesis, Angra Mainyu ; the two are engaged in a cosmic struggle, the conclusion of which will likewise see Ahura Mazda triumphant. The ' Hymn of the Pearl ' included the belief that the material world corresponds to some sort of malevolent intoxication brought about by the powers of darkness to keep elements of the light trapped inside it in a state of drunken distraction.

Mitigated Dualism – is where one of the two principles is in some way inferior to the other. Such classical Gnostic movements as the Sethians conceived of the material world as being created by a lesser divinity than the true God that was the object of their devotion. The spiritual world is conceived of as being radically different from the material world, co-extensive with the true God, and the true home of certain enlightened members of humanity; thus, these systems were expressive of a feeling of acute alienation within the world, and their resultant aim was to allow the soul to escape the constraints presented by the physical realm.

[ 10 ] However, bitheistic and ditheistic principles are not always so easily contrastable, for instance in a system where one god is the representative of summer and drought and the other of winter and rain/fertility (cf. the mythology of Persephone ).

Marcionism , an early Christian sect, held that the Old and New Testaments were the work of two opposing gods: both were First Principles, but of different religions.

[ 11 ] Theistic dualism [ edit ] In theology, dualism can refer to the relationship between God and creation or God and the universe. This form of dualism is a belief shared in certain traditions of Christianity and Hinduism.

[ 12 ] [ 1 ] Zoroastrianism [ edit ] Main article: Zoroastrianism Zoroastrianism or "Mazdayasna" is one of the world's oldest continuously-practiced religions, based on the teachings of the Iranian-speaking prophet Zoroaster .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] It has a dualistic cosmology of good and evil and an eschatology which predicts the ultimate conquest of evil by good.

[ 15 ] Zoroastrianism exalts an uncreated and benevolent deity of wisdom known as Ahura Mazda ( lit.

' Wise Lord ' ) as its supreme being.

[ 16 ] Manichaeism [ edit ] Main article: Manichaeism Manichaeism was a major religion [ 17 ] founded in the 3rd century AD by the Parthian [ 18 ] prophet Mani ( c.

216 – c.

274 AD ), in the Sasanian Empire .

[ 19 ] Manichaeism taught an elaborate dualistic cosmology describing the struggle between a good , spiritual world of light , and an evil , material world of darkness .

[ 20 ] Through an ongoing process that takes place in human history, light is gradually removed from the world of matter and returned to the world of light, whence it came. Its beliefs were based on local Mesopotamian religious movements and Gnosticism .

[ 21 ] In Pseudo-Christian Practice [ edit ] The Cathars being expelled from Carcassonne in 1209. The Cathars were denounced as heretics by the Roman Catholic Church for their dualist beliefs.

The dualism between God and Creation has existed in many forms against traditional 1st century Christian doctrine, including Marcionism , Catharism , Paulicianism , and other forms of Gnostic . Christian dualism refers to the belief that God and creation are distinct, but interrelated through an indivisible bond.

[ 1 ] However, Gnosticism is a diverse, syncretistic religious movement consisting of various belief systems generally united in a belief in a distinction between a supreme, transcendent God and a blind, evil demiurge responsible for creating the material universe , thereby trapping the divine spark within matter. Gnosticism is not limited to Christianity, and also incorporates beliefs from other Abrahamic traditions, such as early Jewish sects.

[ 22 ] In sects like the Cathars and the Paulicians, this is a dualism between the material world, created by an evil god, and a moral god. Historians divide Christian dualism into absolute dualism, which held that the good and evil gods were equally powerful, and mitigated dualism, which held that material evil was subordinate to the spiritual good.

[ 23 ] The belief, by Christian theologians who adhere to a libertarian or compatibilist view of free will, that free will separates humankind from God has also been characterized as a form of dualism.

[ 1 ] The theologian Leroy Stephens Rouner compares the dualism of Christianity with the dualism that exists in Zoroastrianism and the Samkhya tradition of Hinduism. The theological use of the word dualism dates back to 1700, in a book that describes the dualism between good and evil.

[ 1 ] The tolerance of dualism ranges widely among the different Christian traditions. As a monotheistic religion, the conflict between dualism and monism has existed in Christianity since its inception.

[ 24 ] The 1912 Catholic Encyclopedia describes that, in the Catholic Church, "the dualistic hypothesis of an eternal world existing side by side with God was of course rejected" by the thirteenth century, but mind–body dualism was not.

[ 25 ] The problem of evil is difficult to reconcile with absolute monism, and has prompted some Christian sects to veer towards dualism. Gnostic forms of Christianity were more dualistic, and some Gnostic traditions posited that the Devil was separate from God as an independent deity.

[ 24 ] The Christian dualists of the Byzantine Empire, the Paulicians , were seen as Manichean heretics by Byzantine theologians. This tradition of Christian dualism, founded by Constantine-Silvanus , argued that the universe was created through evil and separate from a moral God.

[ 26 ] Cathars [ edit ] Main article: Catharism The Cathars , a Christian sect in southern France, believed that there was a dualism between two gods, one representing good and the other representing evil. Whether or not the Cathari possessed direct historical influence from ancient Gnosticism is a matter of dispute, as the basic conceptions of Gnostic cosmology are to be found in Cathar beliefs (most distinctly in their notion of a lesser creator god), though unlike the second century Gnostics, they did not apparently place any special relevance upon knowledge ( gnosis ) as an effective salvific force. In any case, the Roman Catholic Church denounced the Cathars as heretics, and sought to crush the movement in the 13th century. The Albigensian Crusade was initiated by Pope Innocent III in 1208 to remove the Cathars from Languedoc in France, where they were known as Albigensians. The Inquisition , which began in 1233 under Pope Gregory IX , also targeted the Cathars.

[ 27 ] In Hinduism [ edit ] The Dvaita Vedanta school of Indian philosophy espouses a dualism between God and the universe by theorizing the existence of two separate realities . The first and the more important reality is that of Shiva or Shakti or Vishnu or Brahman . Shiva or Shakti or Vishnu is the supreme Self , God, the absolute truth of the universe, the independent reality. The second reality is that of dependent but equally real universe that exists with its own separate essence. Everything that is composed of the second reality, such as individual soul ( Jiva ), matter, etc. exist with their own separate reality. The distinguishing factor of this philosophy as opposed to Advaita Vedanta ( monistic conclusion of Vedas) is that God takes on a personal role and is seen as a real eternal entity that governs and controls the universe.

[ 28 ] [ better source needed ] Because the existence of individuals is grounded in the divine, they are depicted as reflections, images or even shadows of the divine, but never in any way identical with the divine.

Salvation therefore is described as the realization that all finite reality is essentially dependent on the Supreme.

[ 29 ] Ontological dualism [ edit ] The yin and yang symbolizes the duality in nature and all things in Traditional Chinese Medicine, Confucianism and Taoist religion.

Alternatively, dualism can mean the tendency of humans to perceive and understand the world as being divided into two overarching categories . In this sense, it is dualistic when one perceives a tree as a thing separate from everything surrounding it. This form of ontological dualism exists in Taoism and Confucianism and a foundational theory within Traditional Chinese medicine, beliefs that divide the universe into the complementary oppositions of yin and yang .

[ 30 ] In traditions such as classical Hinduism ( Samkhya , Yoga , Vaisheshika and the later Vedanta schools, which accepted the theory of Gunas ), Chinese Pure land and Zen Buddhism or Islamic Sufism , a key to enlightenment is "transcending" this sort of dualistic thinking, without merely substituting dualism with monism or pluralism .

In Chinese philosophy [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The opposition and combination of the universe's two basic principles of yin and yang is a large part of Chinese philosophy , and is an important feature of Taoism , both as a philosophy and as a religion, although the concept developed much earlier. Some argue that yin and yang were originally an earth and sky god, respectively.

[ 31 ] Some of the common associations with yang and yin, respectively, are: male and female, light and dark , active and passive, motion and stillness. Some scholars believe that the two ideas may have originally referred to two opposite sides of a mountain, facing towards and away from the sun.

[ 31 ] The yin and yang symbol actually has very little to do with Western dualism; instead it represents the philosophy of balance, where two opposites co-exist in harmony and are able to transmute into each other. In the yin-yang symbol there is a dot of yin in yang and a dot of yang in yin. In Taoism, this symbolizes the inter-connectedness of the opposite forces as different aspects of Tao, the First Principle. Contrast is needed to create a distinguishable reality, without which we would experience nothingness. Therefore, the independent principles of yin and yang are actually dependent on one another for each other's distinguishable existence.

The complementary dualistic concept seen in yin and yang represent the reciprocal interaction throughout nature, related to a feedback loop , where opposing forces do not exchange in opposition but instead exchange reciprocally to promote stabilization similar to homeostasis . An underlying principle in Taoism states that within every independent entity lies a part of its opposite. Within sickness lies health and vice versa. This is because all opposites are manifestations of the single Tao, and are therefore not independent from one another, but rather a variation of the same unifying force throughout all of nature.

In other religions [ edit ] Samoyed peoples [ edit ] In a Nenets myth, Num and Nga collaborate and compete with each other, creating land, [ 32 ] there are also other myths about competing-collaborating demiurges.

[ 33 ] Comparative studies of Kets and neighboring peoples [ edit ] Among others, also dualistic myths were investigated in researches which tried to compare the mythologies of Siberian peoples and settle the problem of their origins.

Vyacheslav Ivanov and Vladimir Toporov compared the mythology of Ket people with those of speakers of Uralic languages , assuming in the studies, that there are modelling semiotic systems in the compared mythologies; and they have also made typological comparisons.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Among others, from possibly Uralic mythological analogies, those of Ob-Ugric peoples [ 36 ] and Samoyedic peoples [ 37 ] are mentioned. Some other discussed analogies (similar folklore motifs , and purely typological considerations, certain binary pairs in symbolics) may be related to dualistic organization of society—some of such dualistic features can be found at these compared peoples.

[ 38 ] It must be admitted that, for Kets, neither dualistic organization of society [ 39 ] nor cosmological dualism [ 40 ] has been researched thoroughly: if such features existed at all, they have either weakened or remained largely undiscovered; [ 39 ] although there are some reports on division into two exogamous patrilinear moieties, [ 41 ] folklore on conflicts of mythological figures, and also on cooperation of two beings in creating the land: [ 40 ] the diving of the water fowl.

[ 42 ] If we include dualistic cosmologies meant in broad sense, not restricted to certain concrete motifs, then we find that they are much more widespread, they exist not only among some Siberian peoples, but there are examples in each inhabited continent.

[ 43 ] Chukchi [ edit ] A Chukchi myth and its variations report the creation of the world; in some variations, it is achieved by the collaboration of several beings ( birds , collaborating in a coequal way; or the creator and the raven , collaborating in a coequal way; or the creator alone, using the birds only as assistants).

[ 44 ] Fuegians [ edit ] See also: Fuegians § Spiritual culture All three Fuegian tribes had dualistic myths about culture heroes .

[ 45 ] The Yámana have dualistic myths about the two  brothers. They act as culture heroes, and sometimes stand in an antagonistic relation with each other, introducing opposite laws. Their figures can be compared to the Kwanyip-brothers of the Selkʼnam .

[ 46 ] In general, the presence of dualistic myths in two compared cultures does not imply relatedness or diffusion necessarily.

[ 43 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Cosmology – Scientific study of the origin, evolution, and eventual fate of the universe Didache – The Two Ways Duality Mind-body dualism – Philosophical theory Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Cosmotheism – Idea that the entire universe is God Evil twin – Archetype Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces Gnosticism – Early Christian and Jewish religious systems Pantheism – Belief that God and reality are identical Nondualism – Absence of fundamental duality Table of Opposites – Philosophical system based on the teachings of Pythagoras Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Trinity – Christian doctrine that God exists in three persons Yanantin Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Rouner, Leroy (1983).

The Westminster Dictionary of Christian Theology .

Westminster John Knox Press . p. 166.

ISBN 978-0-664-22748-7 .

^ Zolotarjov 1980 , p. 42.

^ Zolotarjov 1980 , p. 43.

^ Gusinde 1966 , pp. 71, 181.

^ Zolotarjov 1980 , p. 54.

^ Buckley, Jorunn Jacobsen (2002).

The Mandaeans: ancient texts and modern people . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-515385-5 .

OCLC 65198443 .

^ Hanish, Shak (2019).

"The Mandaeans In Iraq" . In Rowe, Paul S. (ed.).

Routledge Handbook of Minorities in the Middle East . London and New York: Routledge . p. 163.

ISBN 9781317233794 .

^ "Egypt and Mesopotamia" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ Knight, Kevin.

"Soul" .

Catholic Encyclopedia (Online ed.) . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ a b Popov 2010 .

^ Riparelli 2008 .

^ For dualism school of Hinduism, see: Clooney, Francis X. (2010).

Hindu God, Christian God: How Reason Helps Break Down the Boundaries between Religions .

Oxford University Press . pp.

51– 58, 111– 115.

ISBN 978-0199738724 .

^ "Zarathustra – Iranian prophet" . Retrieved 9 June 2017 .

^ "Welcome to Encyclopaedia Iranica" .

www.iranicaonline.org . Retrieved 2021-03-29 .

^ Skjærvø, Prods Oktor (2005).

"Introduction to Zoroastrianism" (PDF) .

Iranian Studies at Harvard University . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-12-24 . Retrieved 2021-12-15 .

^ "AHURA MAZDĀ – Encyclopaedia Iranica" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Retrieved 2019-07-13 .

^ Broek, R. van den; Hanegraaff, Wouter J. (1998).

Gnosis and Hermeticism from Antiquity to Modern Times .

SUNY Press . p. 37.

ISBN 978-0-7914-3611-0 .

^ Yarshater, Ehsan (1983).

The Cambridge History of Iran . Vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

^ "Manichaeism" . New Advent Encyclopedia . Retrieved 4 October 2013 .

^ "Cosmogony and Cosmology iii. In Manicheism" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Retrieved 2018-02-24 .

[I]n Manicheism the world was a prison for demons...

^ Widengren, Geo Mesopotamian elements in Manichaeism (King and Saviour II): Studies in Manichaean, Mandaean, and Syrian-gnostic religion , Lundequistska bokhandeln, 1946.

^ Pagels, Elaine (1989).

The Gnostic Gospels . New York: Random House .

^ Peters, Edward (2011).

Heresy and Authority in Medieval Europe .

University of Pennsylvania Press . p. 106.

ISBN 978-0-8122-0680-7 .

^ a b Russell, Jeffrey (1998).

A History of Heaven: The Singing Silence .

Princeton University Press . p. 53.

ISBN 978-0-691-00684-0 .

^ The Catholic Encyclopedia: An International Work of Reference on the Constitution, Doctrine, Discipline, and History of the Catholic Church . Robert Appleton Company. 1912. p. 170.

^ Hamilton, Janet; Hamilton, Bernard; Stoyanov, Yuri (1998).

Christian Dualist Heresies in the Byzantine World, C. 650-c. 1450: Selected Sources .

Manchester University Press . pp.

1–2 .

ISBN 978-0-7190-4765-7 .

^ Chidester, David (2001).

Christianity: A Global History .

HarperCollins . pp.

266– 268.

ISBN 978-0-06-251770-8 .

^ Etter, Christopher.

A Study of Qualitative Non-Pluralism . iUniverse Inc. pp.

59– 60.

ISBN 0-595-39312-8 – via Google Books .

^ Fowler, Jeaneane D.

Perspectives of Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Hinduism .

Sussex Academic Press . pp.

340– 344.

ISBN 1-898723-93-1 – via Google Books .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Girardot, N.J. (1988).

Myth and Meaning in Early Taoism: The Theme of Chaos (hun-tun) .

University of California Press . p. 247.

ISBN 978-0-520-06460-7 .

^ a b Roberts, Jeremy.

"Yin and Yang" .

Ancient and Medieval History . Facts on File . Retrieved 19 March 2017 .

^ Vértes 1990 , pp. 104, 105.

^ Zolotarjov 1980 , p. 47–48.

^ Ivanov & Toporov 1973 .

^ Ivanov (1984a) , p. 390, in editorial afterword by Hoppál ^ Ivanov 1984b , pp. 225, 227, 229.

^ Ivanov 1984b , pp. 229, 230.

^ Ivanov 1984b , pp. 229–231.

^ a b Zolotarjov 1980 , p. 39.

^ a b Zolotarjov 1980 , p. 48.

^ Zolotarjov 1980 , p. 37.

^ Ivanov 1984b , p. 229.

^ a b Zolotarjov 1980 , p. 56.

^ Anisimov 1966 ; Anisimov 1971 ; Zolotarjov 1980 , pp. 40–41.

^ Gusinde 1966 , p. 71.

^ Gusinde 1966 , p. 181.

Bibliography [ edit ] Anisimov, F. А. (1966).

Dukhovnaya zhizn' pervobytnogo obshchestva Духовная жизнь первобытново общества [ The spiritual life of the primitive commune ] (in Russian). Moscow: Leningrad: Nauka.

Anisimov, F. А. (1971).

Istoricheskiye osobennosti pervobytnogo myshleniya Исторические особенности первобытново мышления [ Historical futures of the primitive mind ] (in Russian). Moscow: Leningrad: Nauka.

Gusinde, Martin (1966).

Nordwind—Südwind. Mythen und Märchen der Feuerlandindianer [ North wind—south wind. Myths and tales of Fuegians ] (in German). Kassel: E. Röth.

Ivanov, Vyacheslav ; Toporov, Vladimir (1973). "Towards the Description of Ket Semiotic Systems".

Semiotica .

9 (4). The Hague; Prague; New York: Mouton: 318– 346.

Ivanov, Vjacseszlav (1984a). "Nyelvek és mitológiák" [Languages and mythologies].

Nyelv, mítosz, kultúra [ Language, myth, culture ] (in Hungarian). Collected, appendix, editorial afterword by Hoppál, Mihály. Budapest: Gondolat.

ISBN 963-281-186-0 .

Ivanov, Vjacseszlav (1984b). "Obi-ugor és ket folklórkapcsolatok" [Obi-Ugric and Ket folklore contacts].

Nyelv, mítosz, kultúra [ Language, myth, culture ] (in Hungarian). Collected, appendix, editorial afterword by Hoppál, Mihály. Budapest: Gondolat. pp.

215– 233.

ISBN 963-281-186-0 .

Lavazza, Andrea; Robinson, Howard, eds. (2014).

Contemporary Dualism: A Defense . Routledge Studies in Contemporary Philosophy. New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-415-81882-7 .

Popov, Igor N. (2010).

Metafizika absolyutnogo dualizma: oratoriya preodoleniya Метафизика абсолютного дуализма: оратория преодоления [ Metaphysics of Absolute Dualism: an oratorio of the overcoming ] (in Russian). Barnaul: Azbuka.

ISBN 978-5-93957-396-2 .

Riparelli, Enrico (2008).

Il volto del Cristo dualista. Da Marcione ai catari [ The face of the dualistic Christ. From Marcion to the Cathars ] (in Italian). Bern; Berlin; Bruxelles; Frankfurt am Main; New York; Oxford; Wien: Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-3-03911-490-0 .

Vértes, Edit (1990).

Szibériai nyelvrokonaink hitvilága [ Belief systems of our language relatives in Siberia ] (in Hungarian). Budapest: Tankönyvkiadó.

ISBN 963-18-2603-1 .

Zolotarjov, A. M. (1980). "Társadalomszervezet és dualisztikus teremtésmítoszok Szibériában" [Social structure and dualistic creation myths in Siberia]. In Hoppál, Mihály (ed.).

A Tejút fiai. Tanulmányok a finnugor népek hitvilágáról [ The sons of Milky Way. Studies on the belief systems of Finno-Ugric peoples ] (in Hungarian). Budapest: Európa Könyvkiadó. pp.

29– 58.

ISBN 963-07-2187-2 .

External links [ edit ] Look up Dualism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Dualism .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Dualism ".

Media related to Dualism in cosmology at Wikimedia Commons "Duality" entry in the UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology "Dualism in Philosophy and Religion" in the Dictionary of the History of Ideas v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Belief systems Abrahamism Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Deism Dharmism Dualism Esotericism Feminist theology Gnosticism Henotheism Immanence Monism Monolatry Monotheism Mysticism Neoplatonism New Age New Thought Nondualism Pandeism Pantheism Panentheism Polytheism Process theology Religious naturalism Shamanism Shramanism Taoic Theism Transcendence v t e Beliefs condemned as heretical by the Catholic Church ( list ) Antiquity Adoptionism Apollinarism Arianism Anomoeanism Semi-Arianism Antidicomarianites Audianism Docetism Donatism Circumcellions Collyridianism Dualism Ebionites Euchites Gnosticism Manichaeism Paulicianism Priscillianism Naassenes Ophites Sethianism Valentinianism Iconoclasm Luciferianism Macedonianism Marcionism Melchisedechians Modalism Monarchianism Athinganoi Modalistic Monophysitism Monothelitism Montanism Nestorianism Novatianism Patripassianism Pelagianism Semipelagianism Pneumatomachians Psilanthropism Sabellianism Subordinationism Valentinianism Middle Ages Arnoldism Bogomilism Bosnian Church Catharism Conciliarism Dulcinians Fraticelli Free Spirits Henricians Humiliati Hussites Impanation Josephines Lollardy Migetians Pasagians Spanish Adoptionism Taborites Waldensians Early modernity Antinomianism Consubstantiation Febronianism Gallicanism Jansenism Josephinism Pantheism Protestantism Anabaptism Arminianism Calvinism Lutheranism Quietism Modernity Americanism Community of the Lady of All Nations Feeneyism Indifferentism Jehovah's Witnesses Modernism Mormonism Narco-saints Maximón Santa Muerte Positive Christianity Reincarnationism Catholic Church portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9dnk6
Cached time: 20250818010609
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.076 seconds
Real time usage: 1.271 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7862/1000000
Revision size: 35136/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 336467/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7207/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 195372/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.647/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20152787/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1002.152      1 -total
 24.95%  250.028      1 Template:Reflist
 20.56%  206.055     25 Template:Cite_book
 11.30%  113.205     15 Template:Navbox
  8.61%   86.318      1 Template:God_sidebar
  8.46%   84.820      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.13%   81.479     23 Template:Sfn
  7.41%   74.297      1 Template:Lang
  7.38%   73.995     10 Template:Anl
  6.90%   69.173      1 Template:Metaphysics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13568947:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818010609 and revision id 1304840351. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dualism_in_cosmology&oldid=1304840351 " Categories : Dualism in cosmology Religious cosmologies Religious existentialism Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Modern Mandaic-language text Articles needing additional references from June 2021 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2016 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2018 Articles needing additional references from March 2017 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces via Module:Annotated link CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Commons category link is defined as the pagename This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 13:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dualism in cosmology 9 languages Add topic

