Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Roy and Lila Ash 2 Projects Toggle Projects subsection 2.1 The Study of Democratic Governance 2.2 Rajawali Foundation Institute for Asia 2.3 Innovations in Government Program 2.3.1 Data-Smart City Solutions 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public policy research institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation Named after Roy and Lila Ash Formation 2003 Type International relations Location Cambridge , Massachusetts Parent organization Harvard Kennedy School Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation , formerly known as the Ash Institute , was established in 2003 and is part of the Harvard Kennedy School at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts , in the United States.

The Center's mission is to advance public discussion and public policy research on key issues of democratic governance worldwide, as well as recognize and promote innovations in government that are improving the lives of citizens.

[ 1 ] The center consists of three major programs: the Program on Democratic Governance, the Innovations in Government Program; and the Rajawali Foundation Institute for Asia.

History [ edit ] In April 2001, the Ford Foundation announced a $50 million endowment to the Harvard Kennedy School . This endowment was the largest single endowment ever made by the Ford Foundation at that time.

Susan Berresford , then president of the Ford Foundation, explained that the endowment would enable much-needed recognition of numerous innovative government programs in the United States and worldwide.

The grant enabled Harvard Kennedy School to launch the Innovations in American Government Awards in 1985 which recognizes and supports state, local, tribal, and territorial government initiatives. Many past award winners have been replicated around the country including: CitiStat : As a 2004 Innovations in American Government Award winner, CitiStat was launched in 1999 as a tool for improving the performance of Baltimore's city government practices. The tool has quickly become an industry standard for driving down costs and improving citizen engagement initiatives: more than 11 U.S. cities have adopted the CitiStat model, including SomerStat in Somerville, Massachusetts , ProvStat in Providence, Rhode Island , and PerformanceStat in Los Angeles .

Brownfields Economic Redevelopment Initiative: Created by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in 1995, the initiative has allocated more than $500 million to leverage a total of $9.6 billion in cleanup funds, resulting in the assessment of more than 10,000 sites and the comprehensive development of nearly 200 sites that were previously condemned and vacant due to dangerous contamination. The program was a 2000 Innovations in American Government Award winner.

Competition and Costing: While Mayor of Indianapolis in the mid-1990s, Stephen Goldsmith spearheaded a program to privatize city services through managed competition, improving efficiencies and cutting unnecessary costs. “As a result of the recognition we received from the Innovations Award, we had more than 3,000 officials from around the country and beyond coming to see how we did it,” said Goldsmith. Mayor Goldsmith went on to serve as the director of the Innovations in Government Program, overseeing the Innovations Awards program. He later served as deputy mayor of New York City .

Roy and Lila Ash [ edit ] In 2003, Harvard Kennedy School received a substantial gift from benefactors Roy and Lila Ash . Designed to enhance the Innovations in American Government Awards Program by emphasizing the connection between innovation and democratic governance, the gift created the Ash Center.

Roy Ash 's own experience in the public and private sector made him aptly positioned to set the vision for the new Ash Center. Ash served as a cabinet member in two U.S. government administrations and is the founder of the modern Office of Management and Budget .

“We have to consider the concept of democracy fragile and in need of real and constant hands-on care,” said Roy Ash. “The purpose of the Institute [now Ash Center] is to encourage thoughtful and focused attention to the nature, principles, functioning, and continued innovation and adaptations essential to a living and effective democracy." [ 2 ] Projects [ edit ] The Ash Center offers grant funding and internship opportunities for students in the Harvard community. Support for field research in Indonesia and Vietnam , as well as other regions are also offered. Its Ford Foundation Mason Fellowship and Roy and Lila Ash Fellowship provide financial support to students studying at the Harvard Kennedy School .

The Study of Democratic Governance [ edit ] In November 2008, Harvard Kennedy School announced a new initiative with the Ford Foundation to link innovative governance to the world's major social challenges.

The Program on Democratic Governance includes research on democratic participation, immigration , and democracy in the developed and developing world.

The Center now hosts the Seminar Series, bringing distinguished speakers to Harvard Kennedy School throughout the academic year to address critical challenges facing democratic governance. Its Democracy Fellowships program provides financial support for doctoral and postdoctoral students to pursue research related to democratic governance.

Rajawali Foundation Institute for Asia [ edit ] Under the leadership of Ash Center Director Anthony Saich , Asia Programs, a school-wide initiative integrating Asia-related activities, joined the Ash Center in July 2008.

The permanently endowed Rajawali Foundation Institute for Asia consisting of Asia Programs was established on January 1, 2010, through support from the Rajawali Foundation in Indonesia . The new Institute is designed to bring together academics and practitioners from around the world to enhance research, teaching, and training on public policy and governance issues of critical importance in Asia . The gift also established the HKS Indonesia Program, which promotes research, education, and capacity building in support of democratic governance and institutional development in Indonesia .

Both the Institute for Asia and the HKS Indonesia Program are housed within the Ash Center. Other Institute for Asia programs include its China Public Policy Program, Vietnam Program, and HKS Singapore Program. The Institute also supports Rajawali Fellows, a host of academics and public practitioners with independent research projects relevant to Asia . Its annual China Goes Global Conference examines the impact of the internationalization of Chinese firms.

Innovations in Government Program [ edit ] In addition to the Innovations in American Government Awards Program, the Innovations in Government Program includes five additional projects that work together to produce a cohesive marketplace for best practices and successful innovations in the public sector. These include the following projects: the Liaison Group for Innovations in Governance and Public Action; the Project on Municipal Innovation; the Forum on Networked Governance; the Social Innovation Project; Better, Faster, Cheaper—Smart Ideas for Government; and the Program on Crisis Leadership.

In 2019, the Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development joined the Ash Center, adding then nearly 33 years of research in determining what works for tribal nations in their pursuit of good governance, and why.

[1] Data-Smart City Solutions [ edit ] The Data-Smart City Solutions initiative at the Ash Center is supported by Bloomberg Philanthropies .

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ "History - Ash Center" . Ash Center. 5 December 2010.

^ "History" . Retrieved 2017-01-10 .

^ "Data-Smart City Solutions | Data-Smart City Solutions" .

Data-Smart City Solutions . Retrieved 2017-01-10 .

External links [ edit ] Official site v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ash_Center_for_Democratic_Governance_and_Innovation&oldid=1296376912 " Categories : Harvard Kennedy School 2003 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from June 2025 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 16:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation Add languages Add topic

