Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Criteria 3 Management actions 4 Case study 5 Future 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Conservation-reliant species 3 languages العربية فارسی Igbo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of species requiring human intervention Percentages of United States listed species which are conservation-reliant Conservation-reliant species are animal or plant species that require continuing species-specific wildlife management intervention such as predator control , habitat management and parasite control to survive, even when a self-sustainable recovery in population is achieved.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The term "conservation-reliant species" grew out of the conservation biology undertaken by The Endangered Species Act at Thirty Project (launched 2001) [ 2 ] and its popularization by project leader J. Michael Scott .

[ 3 ] Its first use in a formal publication was in Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment in 2005.

[ 4 ] Worldwide use of the term has not yet developed and it has not yet appeared in a publication compiled outside North America.

Passages of the 1973 Endangered Species Act (ESA) carried with it the assumption that endangered species would be delisted as their populations recovered. It assumed they would then thrive under existing regulations and the protections afforded under the ESA would no longer be needed. However, eighty percent of species currently listed under the ESA fail to meet that assumption. To survive, they require species-specific conservation interventions (e.g. control of predators, competitors, nest parasites, prescribed burns, altered hydrological processes, etc.) and thus they are conservation-reliant.

[ 5 ] Criteria [ edit ] The criteria for assessing whether a species is conservation-reliant are: [ 6 ] Threats to the species’ continued existence are known and treatable.

The threats are pervasive and recurrent, for example: nest parasites, non-native predators , human disturbance.

The threats render the species at risk of extinction , absent ongoing conservation management.

Management actions sufficient to counter threats have been identified and can be implemented, for example: prescribed fires , restrictions on grazing or public access, predator or parasite control.

National, state or local governments, often in cooperation with private or tribal interests, are capable of carrying out the necessary management actions as long as necessary.

Management actions [ edit ] There are five major areas of management action for conservation of vulnerable species: Control of other species may include: control of exotic fauna , exotic flora , other native species and parasites and disease .

Control of direct human impacts may include control of grazing , human access, on and off-road vehicles , low impact recreation and illegal collecting and poaching .

Pollution control may include control of chemical run-off , siltation , water quality and use of pesticides and herbicides .

Active habitat management may include fire management and control , control of soil erosion and waterbodies , habitat restoration and mechanical vegetation control .

Artificial population recruitment may include captive propagation (forced immigration) or captive breeding .

[ 6 ] Case study [ edit ] Bengal tiger at Bannerghatta National Park , Bangalore, India A prominent example is in India , where tigers , an apex predator and the national animal, are considered a conservation-reliant species. This keystone species can maintain self-sustaining wild populations; however, they require ongoing management actions because threats are pervasive, recurrent and put them at risk of extinction. The origin of these threats are rooted in the changing socio-economic, political and spatial organization of society in India. Tigers have become extinct in some areas because of extrinsic factors such as habitat destruction , poaching, disease, floods, fires and drought, decline of prey species for the same reasons, as well as intrinsic factors such as demographic stochasticity and genetic deterioration .

Recognizing the conservation reliance of tigers, Project Tiger is establishing a national science-based framework for monitoring tiger population trends in order to manage the species more effectively. India now has 28 tiger reserves, located in 17 states. These reserves cover 37,761 square kilometres (14,580 sq mi) including 1.14% of the total land area of the country. These reserves are kept free of biotic disturbances, forestry operations, collection of minor forest products, grazing and human disturbance. The populations of tigers in these reserves now constitute some of the most important tiger source populations in the country.

[ 7 ] Future [ edit ] The magnitude and pace of human impacts on the environment make it unlikely that substantial progress will be made in delisting many species unless the definition of "recovery" includes some form of active management. Preventing delisted species from again being at risk of extinction may require continuing, species-specific management actions. Viewing "recovery" of  "conservation-reliant species" as a continuum of phases rather than a simple "recovered/not recovered" status may enhance the ability to manage such species within the framework of the Endangered Species Act. With ongoing loss of habitat , disruption of natural cycles, increasing impacts of non-native invasive species, it is probable that the number of conservation-reliant species will increase.

It has been proposed that development of "recovery management agreements", with legally and biologically defensible contracts would provide for continuing conservation management following delisting. The use of such formalized agreements will facilitate shared management responsibilities between federal wildlife agencies and other federal agencies, and with state, local, and tribal governments, as well as with private entities that have demonstrated the capability to meet the needs of conservation-reliant species.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Biology portal Conservation biology Conservation-dependent species Environmental protection Habitat conservation Natural environment Sustainability References [ edit ] ^ J. Michael Scott, US Geological Survey; Dale Goble, University of Idaho Law School (December 2008).

"Endangered Species and Other Conservation Reliant Species" .

9th National Conference on Science, Policy, and the Environment (Washington, D.C.) . NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR SCIENCE AND THE ENVIRONMENT. Archived from the original on 2010-06-13 . Retrieved 2009-02-27 .

^ Goble, Dale; J. Michael Scott; Frank W. Davis (2006).

The Endangered Species Act at Thirty: Renewing the Conservation Promise . Vol. I. Island Press. pp. xii, 299.

ISBN 978-1-59726-009-1 .

^ Scott, J. Michael (Jan 2007). "AOU Conservation Award, 2006".

The Auk .

124 (1). The American Ornithologists' Union: 353– 355.

doi : 10.1642/0004-8038(2007)124[353:ACA]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0004-8038 .

^ a b Scott, J. Michael; Goble, Dale D.; Wiens, John A.; Wilcove, David S.; Bean, Michael; Male, Timothy (September 2005).

"Recovery of imperiled species under the Endangered Species Act: The need for a new approach" .

Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment .

3 (7): 383– 89.

doi : 10.1890/1540-9295(2005)003[0383:ROISUT]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 1540-9295 . Archived from the original on 2012-02-23 . Retrieved 2009-02-22 .

^ "Conservation Reliant Species: Our New Relationship with Nature" . Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2009-02-22 .

^ a b Scott, J. Michael Scott; Dale Goble; Aaron Haines (August 21, 2008).

"Conservation Reliant Species:Our New Relationship with Nature?" (PDF) .

CSP3900 Conservation Science Web Conference Series . U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-01-25 . Retrieved 2009-02-21 .

^ R Maraj, J Seidensticker (2006).

"Assessment of a Framework for Monitoring Tiger Population Trends in India" (PDF) .

A Report to the IUCN: World Conservation Union and India's Project Tiger . Govt. of India, Project Tiger. pp.

7– 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-02-25 . Retrieved 2009-02-22 .

v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Threatened arthropods / Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Decline in amphibian populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics .

v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservation-reliant_species&oldid=1301035731 " Categories : Conservation-reliant species Biota by conservation status Conservation biology Ecological restoration Ecology Endangered species Environmental conservation Habitat Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 19:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservation-reliant species 3 languages Add topic

