Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Kant's transcendental idealism 3 Schopenhauer 4 P. F. Strawson 5 Henry E. Allison 6 Opposing views: naïve realism 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Transcendental idealism 28 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical system founded by Immanuel Kant This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Immanuel Kant Major works Critique of Pure Reason Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics " Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment?

" Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals Critique of Practical Reason Critique of Judgment Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason Perpetual Peace The Metaphysics of Morals " On a Supposed Right to Tell Lies from Benevolent Motives " Opus Postumum Kantianism • Kantian ethics Transcendental idealism Critical philosophy Sapere aude Thing-in-itself Schema A priori and a posteriori Analytic–synthetic distinction Noumenon Category Categorical imperative Hypothetical imperative " Kingdom of Ends " Political philosophy Teleology People J. G. Fichte G. W. F. Hegel David Hume F. H. Jacobi Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Related topics German idealism Neo-Kantianism Category • Philosophy portal Transcendental idealism is a philosophical system [ 1 ] founded by German philosopher Immanuel Kant in the 18th century. Kant's epistemological program [ 2 ] is found throughout his Critique of Pure Reason (1781). By transcendental (a term that deserves special clarification [ 3 ] ) Kant means that his philosophical approach to knowledge transcends mere consideration of sensory evidence and requires an understanding of the mind 's innate modes of processing that sensory evidence.

[ 4 ] In the "Transcendental Aesthetic" section of the Critique of Pure Reason , Kant outlines how space and time are pure forms of human intuition contributed by our own faculty of sensibility. Space and time do not have an existence "outside" of us, but are the "subjective" forms of our sensibility and hence the necessary a priori conditions under which the objects we encounter in our experience can appear to us at all. Kant describes time and space not only as " empirically real" but transcendentally ideal .

[ 5 ] Kant argues that the conscious subject recognizes the objects of experience not as they are in themselves , but only the way they appear to us under the conditions of our sensibility . This fits his model of perception outlined at the outset of the "Transcendental Aesthetic" by which he distinguishes the empirical reality of appearances studied by the empirical sciences from the noumenal reality of things as they are in themselves, independent of empirical observation.

[ 6 ] Thus Kant's doctrine restricts the scope of our cognition to appearances given to our sensibility and denies that we can possess cognition of things as they are in themselves, i.e. things as they are independently of how we experience them through our cognitive faculties.

[ 7 ] Background [ edit ] Although it influenced the course of subsequent German philosophy dramatically, exactly how to interpret this concept was a subject of some debate among 20th-century philosophers. Kant first described it in his Critique of Pure Reason and distinguished his view from contemporary views of realism and idealism , but it remains the case that philosophers do not agree on how sharply Kant differs from each of these positions.

Transcendental idealism is associated, if not identified, with the formalistic idealism Kant discusses in his Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics , although recent research has tended to dispute this identification. Transcendental idealism was also adopted as a label by the subsequent German philosophers Johann Gottlieb Fichte and Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling , Arthur Schopenhauer , and in the early 20th century by Edmund Husserl in the novel form of transcendental-phenomenological idealism.

Kant's transcendental idealism [ edit ] Kant presents an account of how we intuit ( German : anschauen ) objects and accounts of space and of time. Before Kant, some thinkers, such as Leibniz , had come to the conclusion that space and time were not things, but only the relations among things. Contrary to thinkers, including Newton, who maintained that space and time were real things or substances, Leibniz had arrived at a radically different understanding of the universe and the things found in it. According to his Monadology , all things that humans ordinarily understand as interactions between and relations among individuals (such as their relative positions in space and time) have their being in the mind of God but not in the Universe where we perceive them to be. In the view of realists, individual things interact by physical connection and the relations among things are mediated by physical processes that connect them to human brains and give humans a determinate chain of action to them and correct knowledge of them.

Kant was aware of problems with both of these positions. He had been influenced by the physics of Newton and understood that there is a physical chain of interactions between things perceived and the one who perceives them.  However, an important function of mind is to structure incoming data and to process it in ways that make it other than a simple mapping of outside data.

[ 8 ] : 57 Gottfried Martin says: If we try to keep within the framework of what can be proved by the Kantian argument, we can say that it is possible to demonstrate the empirical reality of space and time, that is to say, the objective validity of all spatial and temporal properties in mathematics and physics. But this empirical reality involves transcendental ideality; space and time are forms of human intuition, and they can only be proved valid for things as they appear to us and not for things as they are in themselves.

[ 9 ] : 41 The salient element here is that space and time, rather than being real things-in-themselves or empirically mediated appearances ( German : Erscheinungen ), are the very forms of intuition ( German : Anschauung ) by which we must perceive objects. They are hence neither to be considered properties that we may attribute to objects in perceiving them, nor substantial entities of themselves. They are in that sense subjective, yet necessary, preconditions of any given object insofar as this object is an appearance and not a thing-in-itself . Humans necessarily perceive objects as located in space and in time.  This condition of experience is part of what it means for a human to cognize an object, to perceive and understand it as something both spatial and temporal:  "By transcendental idealism I mean the doctrine that appearances are to be regarded as being, one and all, representations only, not things in themselves, and that time and space are therefore only sensible forms of our intuition..." [ 10 ] Kant argues for these several claims in the section of the Critique of Pure Reason entitled the "Transcendental Aesthetic".  That section is devoted to inquiry into the a priori conditions of human sensibility, i.e. the faculty by which humans intuit objects.  The following section, the "Transcendental Logic", concerns itself with the manner in which objects are thought.

Schopenhauer [ edit ] Arthur Schopenhauer takes Kant's transcendental idealism as the starting point for his own philosophy, which he presents in The World as Will and Representation . Schopenhauer described transcendental idealism briefly as a "distinction between the phenomenon and the thing in itself", and a recognition that only the phenomenon is accessible to us because "we know neither ourselves nor things as they are in themselves, but merely as they appear." [ 11 ] In volume 1 of the Parerga and Paralipomena ("Fragments for the History of Philosophy"), Schopenhauer writes: Now in the first place, Kant understands by transcendental the recognition of the a priori and thus merely formal element in our knowledge as such, in other words, the insight that such knowledge is independent of experience, indeed prescribes for this even the unalterable rule whereby it must turn out. Such insight is bound up with the understanding why such knowledge is this and has this power, namely because it constitutes the form of our intellect, and thus in consequence of its subjective origin ...

Transcendental is the philosophy that makes us aware of the fact that the first and essential laws of this world that are presented to us are rooted in our brain and are therefore known a priori . It is called transcendental because it goes beyond the whole given phantasmagoria to the origin thereof. Therefore, as I have said, only the Critique of Pure Reason and generally the critical (that is to say, Kantian ) philosophy are transcendental.

— Parerga and Paralipomena , vol. I, "Fragments for the History of Philosophy," § 13 Further on in §13, Schopenhauer says of Kant's doctrine of the ideality of space and time: "Before Kant, it may be said, we were in time; now time is in us. In the first case, time is real and, like everything lying in time, we are consumed by it. In the second case, time is ideal ; it lies within us." Schopenhauer contrasted Kant's transcendental critical philosophy with Leibniz's dogmatic philosophy.

With Kant the critical philosophy appeared as the opponent of this entire method [of dogmatic philosophy]. It makes its problem just those eternal truths (principle of contradiction, principle of sufficient reason) that serve as the foundation of every such dogmatic structure, investigates their origin, and then finds this to be in man's head. Here they spring from the forms properly belonging to it, which it carries in itself for the purpose of perceiving and apprehending the objective world. Thus here in the brain is the quarry furnishing the material for that proud, dogmatic structure. Now because the critical philosophy, in order to reach this result, had to go beyond the eternal truths, on which all the previous dogmatism was based, so as to make these truths themselves the subject of investigation, it became transcendental philosophy. From this it follows also that the objective world as we know it does not belong to the true being of things-in-themselves, but is its mere phenomenon , conditioned by those very forms that lie a priori in the human intellect (i.e., the brain); hence the world cannot contain anything but phenomena.

— The World as Will and Representation , vol. I, Appendix: " Critique of the Kantian Philosophy " P. F. Strawson [ edit ] In The Bounds of Sense , P. F. Strawson suggests a reading of Kant's first Critique that, once accepted, forces rejection of most of the original arguments, including transcendental idealism. Strawson contends that, had Kant followed out the implications of all that he said, he would have seen that there were many self-contradictions implicit in the whole.

[ 12 ] : 403 Strawson views the analytic argument of the transcendental deduction as the most valuable idea in the text, and regards transcendental idealism as an unavoidable error in Kant's greatly productive system. In Strawson's traditional reading (also favored in the work of Paul Guyer and Rae Langton ), the Kantian term phenomena (literally, things that can be seen—from Greek: phainomenon , "observable") refers to the world of appearances, or the world of "things" sensed.

[ 13 ] : 99–101 They are tagged as "phenomena" to remind the reader that humans confuse these derivative appearances with whatever may be the forever unavailable "things in themselves" behind our perceptions. The necessary preconditions of experience, the components that humans bring to their apprehending of the world, the forms of perception such as space and time , are what make a priori judgments possible, but all of this process of comprehending what lies fundamental to human experience fails to bring anyone beyond the inherent limits of human sensibility. Kant's system requires the existence of noumena to prevent a rejection of external reality altogether, and it is this concept (senseless objects of which we can have no real understanding) to which Strawson objects in his book.

Henry E. Allison [ edit ] In Kant's Transcendental Idealism , Henry E. Allison proposes a new reading that opposes, and provides a meaningful alternative to, Strawson's interpretation.

[ 14 ] Allison argues that Strawson and others misrepresent Kant by emphasising what has become known as the two-worlds reading (a view developed by Paul Guyer ). This—according to Allison, false—reading of Kant's phenomena/noumena distinction suggests that phenomena and noumena are ontologically distinct from each other. It concludes on that basis that we somehow fall short of knowing the noumena due to the nature of the very means by which we comprehend them. On such a reading, Kant would himself commit the very fallacies he attributes to the transcendental realists . On Allison's reading, Kant's view is better characterized as a two-aspect theory, where noumena and phenomena refer to complementary ways of considering an object. It is the dialectic character of knowing, rather than epistemological insufficiency, that Kant wanted most to assert.

Allison's two-aspect interpretation also serves as an at least partially successful defense of transcendental idealism, particularly within anglophone analytic philosophy . Although his interpretive position is contested among Kant scholars, including Anja Jauernig in her 2021 monograph The World According to Kant , [ 15 ] Allison's Kant's Transcendental Idealism uncontroversially helped start the late-20th century revival of contemporary interest in Kant's metaphysical, or as Allison describes it 'metaepistemological', transcendental idealism.

[ 16 ] Opposing views: naïve realism [ edit ] Opposing Kantian transcendental idealism is the doctrine of naïve realism , that is, the proposition that the world is knowable as it really is, without any consideration of the knower's manner of knowing. This has been propounded by philosophers such as Hilary Putnam , [ 17 ] John Searle , [ 18 ] and Henry Babcock Veatch .

[ citation needed ] Naïve or direct realism claims, contrary to transcendental idealism, that perceived objects exist in the way that they appear, in and of themselves, independent of a knowing spectator's mind.

[ citation needed ] Kant referred to this view as "transcendental realism", which he defined as purporting the existence of objects in space and time independent from our sensibility.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Critical idealism Critique of the Kantian Philosophy Transcendence Transcendental empiricism Transcendental materialism Transcendental naturalism Transcendental subject References [ edit ] ^ Kitcher, Patrica (1996) [First edition originally published in 1781; second edition originally published in 1787]. "Introduction by Patricia Kitcher, 3. Transcendental Aesthetic: The Science of Sensory Perception, B. Space, Time, and Mathematics".

Critique of Pure Reason . By Kant, Immanuel. Translated by Pluhar, Werner S. (Unified Edition with all variants from the 1781 and 1787 editions ed.). Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. p. xxxvi.

ISBN 0-87220-257-7 .

This is one of the first conclusions of ' transcendental idealism ' , Kant's own name for his philosophical system, and we need to pause to consider it carefully to avoid some standard misunderstandings.

^ Kitcher, Patrica (1996) [First edition originally published in 1781; second edition originally published in 1787]. "Introduction by Patricia Kitcher, 2. Prefaces and Introduction: Kant's Central Problem".

Critique of Pure Reason . By Kant, Immanuel. Translated by Pluhar, Werner S. (Unified Edition with all variants from the 1781 and 1787 editions ed.). Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. p. l.

ISBN 0-87220-257-7 .

Kant prefaces the Critique with a lament about the sad state of metaphysics. But his program for reform is thoroughly epistemological. It is only by working our way to a better understanding of the sources and limits of human knowledge that we will be able to figure out what metaphysical questions can fruitfully be asked.

^ Kitcher, Patrica (1996) [First edition originally published in 1781; second edition originally published in 1787]. "Introduction by Patricia Kitcher, 2. Prefaces and Introduction: Kant's Central Problem".

Critique of Pure Reason . By Kant, Immanuel. Translated by Pluhar, Werner S. (Unified Edition with all variants from the 1781 and 1787 editions ed.). Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. p. l.

ISBN 0-87220-257-7 .

Because of the unusual nature of his enterprise, Kant gave it a special name: ' transcendental ' philosophy. The goal of transcendental philosophy is to investigate the necessary conditions for knowledge with a view to showing that some of those necessary conditions are a priori , universal and necessary features of our knowledge, that derive from the mind's own ways of dealing with the data of the senses. The term ' transcendental ' has often been a source of confusion, because it includes three not obviously related ideas: (1) the idea that some conditions are necessary for knowledge and (2) the idea that some claims are a priori , in stating necessary and universal features of the world, and (3) the idea that some features of our knowledge are a priori , in the sense that they do not derive from sensory evidence, but from our minds' ways of dealing with sensory evidence. What is distinctive about Kant's philosophy is his belief that some of the necessary conditions for knowledge are also a priori , in all four sense of that term: they are universal, necessary, cannot be established by sensory experience, and reflect the mind's ways of dealing with sensory experience; the term ' transcendental ' constantly draws attention to that complex doctrine.

^ Durant, Will (1933). "VI. Immanuel Kant and German Idealism, III. The Critique of Pure Reason, 1. Transcendental Esthetic".

The Story of Philosophy . New York: Simon & Schuster (published 1953). p. 267.

The effort to answer this question, to study the inherent structure of the mind, or the innate laws of thought, is what Kant calls 'transcendental philosophy', because it is a problem transcending sense experience. 'I call knowledge transcendental which is occupied not so much with objects, as with a priori concepts of objects'—with our modes of correlating our experience into knowledge.

^ Kant 1999 , p. A36/B52.

^ Kant 1999 , p. A20/B34.

^ Kant 1999 , p. A84–130, B116–169.

^ Martin, G., Kant's Metaphysics and Theory of Science (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1955), p. 57 .

^ Martin, G., Kant's Metaphysics and Theory of Science (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1955), p. 41 .

^ Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Reason , trans.

Norman Kemp Smith (London: Macmillan, 1933), p. 345 (A 369).

^ Parerga and Paralipomena , vol. 2, "Sketch of a History of the Doctrine of the Ideal and the Real." ^ Allison, H. E., Kant's Transcendental Deduction: An Analytical-historical Commentary (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), p. 403 .

^ Nagel, T.

, The View From Nowhere (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986), pp. 99–101 .

^ Allison, H. E., Kant's Transcendental Idealism ( New Haven : Yale University Press , 1983); Revised and Enlarged Edition, 2004 .

^ Jauernig, Anja, The World According to Kant ( Oxford University Press , 2021); https://books.google.com/books?vid=ISBN0192646273 .

^ Gardner, Sebastian (2005).

"Kant's Transcendental Idealism: An Interpretation and Defense, Revised and Enlarged Edition" .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews .

^ Putnam, Hilary (Sep 1994).

"Sense, Nonsense, and the Senses: An Inquiry into the Powers of the Human Mind" .

The Journal of Philosophy .

91 (9): 445– 517.

doi : 10.2307/2940978 .

ISSN 0022-362X .

JSTOR 2940978 .

^ Luis López, Alberto (2017-07-18).

"SEARLE, John (2015): Seeing Things as They Are: A Theory of Perception. New York: Oxford University Press" .

Daímon (71): 216.

doi : 10.6018/daimon/277171 .

ISSN 1989-4651 .

^ Stang, Nicholas F.

(Spring 2022).

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Kant's Transcendental Idealism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford . Retrieved September 27, 2022 .

[Kant] distinguishes transcendental idealism from transcendental realism: 'To this [transcendental] idealism is opposed transcendental realism, which regards space and time as something given in themselves (independent of our sensibility). The transcendental realist therefore represents outer appearances [...] as things in themselves [...], which would exist independently of us and our sensibility and thus would also be outside us according to pure concepts of the understanding.' Sources [ edit ] Kant, Immanuel (1999).

Critique of Pure Reason (The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant) . Translated and edited by Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-5216-5729-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Transcendental idealism .

Wikisource has the text of the 1879 American Cyclopædia article Transcendental .

Immanuel Kant: Transcendental Idealism , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy "Kant's Transcendental Idealism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Kant at the Bar: Transcendental Idealism in Daily Life" .

Philosophy Now .

v t e Idealism Forms Absolute British Actual Canadian German Italian Monistic Epistemological Platonic Subjective Objective Transcendental Indian Monistic (Shaivism) Magical (thaumaturgic) Buddhist (consciousness-only) Practical Political Related topics Metaphysics Idea Plato's Theory of Ideas Anti-realism Consciousness-only Rationalism Panpsychism Phenomenalism Idealistic pluralism Idealistic Studies v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐b666f4b‐ttdvj
Cached time: 20250815123859
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.627 seconds
Real time usage: 0.774 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3401/1000000
Revision size: 24403/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85931/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6336/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 71278/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.421/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23127795/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  678.736      1 -total
 23.03%  156.342      1 Template:Reflist
 17.47%  118.603      5 Template:Cite_book
 15.31%  103.892      3 Template:Langx
 11.54%   78.336      1 Template:Immanuel_Kant
 11.21%   76.079      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.65%   58.724      1 Template:Short_description
  8.24%   55.932      2 Template:Navbox
  7.42%   50.352      1 Template:More_footnotes
  6.73%   45.649      1 Template:Idealism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:519343:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815123859 and revision id 1306019374. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transcendental_idealism&oldid=1306019374 " Categories : Enlightenment philosophy Epistemological theories German idealism Idealism Kantianism Ontology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 12:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transcendental idealism 28 languages Add topic

