Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 1.1 Deeper themes 2 Reception 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Managerial Revolution Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1941 book by James Burnham The Managerial Revolution: What is Happening in the World First edition book cover Author James Burnham Language English Subject Political philosophy , Political science , Sociology Publisher John Day Company Publication date 1941 Publication place United States Pages 214 This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Managerial Revolution: What is Happening in the World is a book written by James Burnham in 1941. It discusses the rise of managers and technocrats in modern industrial societies , arguing that they would replace the traditional capitalist class as the rulers of the economic system, through mechanisms such as economic planning .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Summary [ edit ] Burnham's seminal work, The Managerial Revolution (1941), theorized about the future of world capitalism based upon its development in the interwar period. Burnham begins by saying that "It is a historical law, with no apparent exceptions so far known, that all social and economic groups of any size strive to improve their relative position with respect to power and privilege in society". He then weighed three possibilities: (1) that capitalism was a permanent form of social and economic organization and would continue indefinitely; (2) that it was temporary and destined by its nature to collapse and be replaced by socialism; (3) that it was currently being transformed into some non-socialist future form of society.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Since capitalism had a more or less definite beginning in the 14th century, it could not be regarded as an immutable and permanent form.

[ 5 ] Moreover, in the last years of previous economic systems such as those of Ancient Greece and the Roman Empire , mass unemployment was "a symptom that a given type of social organization is just about finished." [ 6 ] The worldwide mass unemployment of the depression era thus indicated that capitalism was itself "not going to continue much longer." [ 6 ] Burnham agreed with Marxists that the capitalist class would inevitably lose the class struggle, but disagreed that they would lose to the working class due to this class being too disorganized and weak. He instead argued that a new class called the managerial class would win against the capitalist class. Burnham defines this new class as the individuals responsible for "the tasks of the technical direction and coordination of the process of production." The managerial class is responsible for directing technical experts, including "operating executives, superintendents, administrative engineers, supervisory technicians; or, in government ... administrators, commissioners, bureau heads, and so on." According to Burnham, the managerial class has risen due to the increasing complexity and large scope of modern economies. Because doing certain tasks requires hyper specific technical knowledge, the capitalist class cannot perform all of the necessary tasks by themselves. This means that the capitalist class has to employ individuals who manage other individuals engaged in technical work. By doing this, the capitalist class has made themselves obsolete, since the managers are the individuals who actually control production. Although the managerial class is still employed by the capitalist class, Burnham argued that this arrangement was irreconcilable. This would eventually result in the managerial class who actually owns production seizing it from the capitalist class who owns it in name only. According to Burnham, the managerial class would seize power by implementing state ownership of production. Due to the complexity and large scale of modern economies, Burnham argues that this form of state ownership would prove more efficient than rule by individual capitalists. The "managerial revolution", according to Burnham, would result in the decline of capitalist democracy and the rise of managerial control of production while using "the unlimited state" as a vehicle.

[ 4 ] Analyzing the emerging forms of society around the world, Burnham saw certain commonalities between the economic formations of Nazi Germany , Stalinist Russia, and America under Roosevelt's New Deal . Burnham argued that in the short period since the First World War , a new society had emerged in which a social group or class of "managers" had waged a "drive for social dominance, for power and privilege, for the position of ruling class." [ 7 ] For at least the previous decade, there had grown in America the idea of a "separation of ownership and control" of the modern corporation, notably expounded in The Modern Corporation and Private Property by Berle and Means.

[ 8 ] Burnham expanded this concept, arguing that whether ownership was corporate and private or statist and governmental, the essential demarcation between the ruling elite (executives and managers backed by bureaucrats and functionaries) and the mass of society was not ownership so much as control of the means of production.

Burnham emphasized that "New Dealism", as he called it, "is not, let me repeat, a developed, systematized managerial ideology." Still, this ideology had contributed to American capitalism's moving in a "managerial direction": In its own more confused, less advanced way, New Dealism too has spread abroad the stress on the state as against the individual, planning as against private enterprise, jobs (even if relief jobs) against opportunities, security against initiative, "human rights" against "property rights." There can be no doubt that the psychological effect of New Dealism has been what the capitalists say it has been: to undermine public confidence in capitalist ideas and rights and institutions. Its most distinctive features help to prepare the minds of the masses for the acceptance of the managerial social structure.

[ 9 ] Burnham argued that the power of the capitalist class would decline, while a new managerial class would rise to take its place, directing the state and industry. He described both Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union as having a managerial class based on an economic model he considered to be superior to liberal capitalism. Because of this, he incorrectly predicted that the Nazis would win World War II.

[ 4 ] Deeper themes [ edit ] The book explores the transformation of capitalism into a managerial society where the control and administrative decisions are made by a new class of managers, rather than the traditional capitalists or the owners.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Description of capitalism: Individual Ownership : Capitalists own the factories, resources, and tools required for production.

Profit Motivation : The primary goal of economic activity in capitalism is to generate profit for the owners.

Market Competition : Enterprises compete in relatively free markets where prices and production are determined by supply and demand.

Labor as a Commodity : Workers sell their labor to capitalists and are paid wages, which are generally less than the value of the goods and services they produce.

Decentralized Decision-Making : Economic decisions are made by individual owners and consumers based on market signals rather than centralized planning.

Predictions on post-capitalism: End of Traditional Capitalism : Burnham argues that traditional capitalism, characterized by private ownership and control by owners, is being supplanted by a new form of economic organization where control rests with a managerial elite.

Rise of the Managerial Class : A new class of managers—administrators, bureaucrats, and executives—emerges as the primary controllers of economic resources, replacing the old capitalist class.

Technological and Organizational Changes : The complexity and scale of modern industry necessitate this shift, as advanced technologies and large-scale organizational structures require specialized management skills that traditional capitalists cannot provide.

Decline of Property Rights : The significance of private property rights diminishes in this new order, as the management of resources becomes more crucial than ownership.

Political Implications : The managerial revolution leads to changes in government structure, favoring a more centralized and bureaucratized form that aligns with managerial needs.

Global Perspective : Burnham views this shift as a global phenomenon, not confined to any single nation, affecting capitalist, fascist, and socialist states alike.

Future Predictions : He predicts that the managerial societies will likely evolve into more authoritarian structures, as managerial elites consolidate power to manage economies and societies efficiently.

Reception [ edit ] The book has been influential in various fields, including political science and economics, and continues to be relevant in discussions about corporate governance and economic power dynamics.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] It was most famously reviewed by George Orwell in his essay Second Thoughts on James Burnham , written in 1946. Orwell finds the central premise of the book fascinating, but lists a range of criticisms, including problems with the practical war predictions of Burnham.

[ 14 ] In June 1941, a hostile review of The Managerial Revolution by Socialist Workers Party loyalist Joseph Hansen in the SWP's theoretical magazine accused Burnham of surreptitiously lifting the central ideas of his book from the Italian Bruno Rizzi 's La Bureaucratisation du Monde (1939).

[ 15 ] Despite certain similarities, there is no evidence Burnham knew of this book beyond Leon Trotsky's brief references to it in his debates with Burnham.

[ 16 ] Burnham was influenced by the idea of bureaucratic collectivism of the Trotskyist Yvan Craipeau , but Burnham took a distinct conservative Machiavellian rather than a Marxist viewpoint, an important philosophical difference which Burnham explored in greater detail in The Machiavellians .

According to Vox , "Virtually all of The Managerial Revolution's major predictions—the coming collapse of capitalism, an Axis victory in World War II, the superior efficiency of state-run enterprises—were proven wrong. The power of the capitalist class has become more entrenched since the neoliberal revolution of the 1970s and '80s and attendant skyrocketing inequality. The rise of tech capitalism, with firms founded by individual innovators and technical experts, seems to disprove his theory that capitalists cannot themselves perform technical and management tasks at scale." [ 4 ] Burnham's idea of an unaccountable managerial class has gained traction among conservative intellectuals seeking to counteract the power of this class, viewing " woke " as the justifying ideology of the new class.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Administrative state References [ edit ] ^ "Seen From the Right; Suicide of the West. By James Burnham. 312 pp. New York: The John Day Company. $5.95" .

The New York Times . 1964-10-04.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2024-06-24 .

^ "Second Thoughts on James Burnham | The Orwell Foundation" .

www.orwellfoundation.com . 2010-11-30.

Archived from the original on 2024-06-15 . Retrieved 2024-06-24 .

^ Burnham, James (1941), The Managerial Revolution: What is Happening in the World , New York: John Day Co., p. 29 .

^ a b c d e Beauchamp, Zack (2022-12-14).

"The 80-year-old book that explains Elon Musk and tech's new right-wing tilt" .

Vox . Retrieved 2023-08-17 .

^ Burnham 1941 , p. 30.

^ a b Burnham 1941 , p. 31.

^ Burnham 1941 , p. 71.

^ Burnham 1941 , p. 88.

^ Burnham 1941 , pp. 201–2.

^ "James Burnham's managerialism eighty years later" .

Global Policy Journal . Retrieved 2024-06-24 .

^ Purser, Ronald (2024-02-12).

"Against Managerialism" .

Current Affairs .

ISSN 2471-2647 . Retrieved 2024-06-24 .

^ Beauchamp, Zack (2022-12-14).

"The 80-year-old book that explains Elon Musk and tech's new right-wing tilt" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on 2023-12-10 . Retrieved 2024-06-24 .

^ "The moral hazard of Managerialism" .

The Spectator Australia . 2024-02-29 . Retrieved 2024-06-24 .

^ "Second Thoughts on James Burnham" .

orwellfoundation.com . Retrieved 18 April 2025 .

^ Joseph Hansen, "Burnham's 'Managerial Revolution,'" The Fourth International , v. 2, no. 5 (June 1941), p. 157.

^ Rizzi, Bruno; Adam Westoby (1985).

The Bureaucratization of the World: The USSR: Bureaucratic Collectivism . Tavistock.

ISBN 978-0-42278600-3 . Retrieved 2012-11-25 – via Google Books.

External links [ edit ] Works by or about The Managerial Revolution at the Internet Archive Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Managerial_Revolution&oldid=1299451407 " Categories : Books about capitalism 1941 books Books about conservatism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 13:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Managerial Revolution Add languages Add topic

