Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Hellenic era 1.2 Roman Acrillae 1.3 Arab Gulfi 2 Excavations 3 See also 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Akrillai 4 languages Euskara Italiano Latina Sicilianu Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 37°01′N 14°42′E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.017°N 14.700°E ﻿ / 37.017; 14.700 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Sicilian city and archeological site South-east Sicily and the Greek cities in red and the Native settlements in blue. The Via Selinuntina in yellow and the Via Elorina in green.

Akrillai ( Ancient Greek : Ἄκριλλαι ) and Akrilla ( Ancient Greek : Ἄκριλλα ), [ 1 ] Acrillae (in Latin ) was an ancient Greek colony of Magna Graecia located in the modern province of Ragusa , Sicily , Italy , where the town of Chiaramonte Gulfi stands today. The ruins of the old colony can be found in the contrada (quarter) Piano del Conte-Morana and Piano Grillo. A necropolis dating from the 6th-5th century BC has been identified in the contrada Paraspola-Pirruna.

The name appears in different forms among different authors: Akrilla , Akrille ; in ancient sources: Akrillaiu ; the name is variously written by Latin writers Acrilla and Acrille .

History [ edit ] Hellenic era [ edit ] The city was founded by the Corinthian and Syracusan colonists at the same time of Kamarina (598 BC), overlooking the Valley of the Hipparis to establish their power against the city of Gela , founded by a Cretan - Rhodian effort. Akrillai was also a road-station on the route from Syracuse to Gela and Akragas . By passing via Akrai and Kasmenai , the road avoided the low Hyblaean Mountains and Hybla Heraea .

The city based its economy on trade, thanks to  its strategic position along the Via Selinuntina . Near to Akrillai was the Hellenistic settlement of Scornavacche, where recent excavations have found several clay ovens. Throughout its existence Akrillai remained under the influence of the mother-city Syracuse, with which it was allied. According to the  Roman historian Titus Livius , the city was used as a fortress and military base during the Carthaginians ' second Sicilian campaign. In 406 BC, after the fall of Akragas and Gela, the city was destroyed for the first time, as the Carthaginians passed on their way to attack and besiege Syracuse.

Roman Acrillae [ edit ] Titus Livius also recounts [ 2 ] [ 3 ] the battle fought at Akrillai in 213 BC between Syracusan forces guided by the strategos Hippokrates, and the Roman army led by the consul Marcus Claudius Marcellus : One night in 213 BC, whilst the city of Syracuse was under siege by the Romans, the Syracusan army managed to find an unguarded passage between the Roman lines. Epicides, brother of Hippokrates, was left to guard the city, whilst his brother took the army to Akrillai and prepared to counter attack the Romans. The consul Marcello, marching towards Akrillai from Akragas, arrived at the colony to find the Syracusan army busy establishing their camp. The consul, strong from months of preparation against the Carthaginians, ordered the attack and the Syracusan army, disorientated and unarmed, was divided from its cavalry and commanders. Powerless in this situation, Hippokrates was forced to take refuge in Akrai.

With the defeat of Hippokrates’ Syracusans, the city of Akrillai became part of the Roman province of Sicily , its name Latinized as Acrillae .

[ 4 ] Arab Gulfi [ edit ] In 827 AD the town was destroyed again, this time by the Arabs of Asad ibn al-Furat . The name Acrillae disappeared and the rebuilt centre was known by the Arab name of Gulfi , which means "the rose-garden" and "place rich with vegetation".  The nearby river Dirillo also takes its name from Acrillae: called Achates ( agate ) during the Greek- Roman era and said to be where agates were first found, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] in Arab times the river was called Wadi Ikrilu (River of Acrille).

Excavations [ edit ] Akrillai was discovered by the historian Corrado Melfi and identified by the archaeologist Antonio Di Vita,
an academic of the Lincei , who conducted several campaigns of excavation. The many findings are housed
in the Hyblean Archaeological Museum of Ragusa and in the Regional Archeological Museum of Syracuse.

See also [ edit ] History portal List of ancient Greek cities Notes [ edit ] ^ Stephanus of Byzantium, Ethnica, §A63.11 ^ thelatinlibrary.com Livy, Book XXIV, 35-36 in Latin.

^ Livy, Book XXIV, 24.35-24.36 ^ Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (1854), ed. William Smith, LLD (20.68) ^ Theophrastus, On Stones ^ Pliny the Elder, The Natural History , Book XXXVII Chapter 54 , at the Perseus Project ^ The Chambers Dictionary (2001) Edinburgh: Chambers Harrap Publishers. P.27 External links [ edit ] 37°01′N 14°42′E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.017°N 14.700°E ﻿ / 37.017; 14.700 v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Archaeological sites in Sicily Province of Agrigento Heraclea Minoa Akragas Valle dei Templi - Temple of Concordia - Temple of Heracles - Temple of Juno - Temple of Olympian Zeus Province of Caltanissetta Gela Bosco Littorio Greek baths of Gela Gibil Gabib Monte Bubbonia Polizzello archaeological site Sabucina Vassallaggi Province of Catania Aetna (city) Katáne Amphitheatre of Catania Roman Theatre of Catania Palike Sant'Ippolito (Caltagirone) Province of Enna Centuripe Morgantina Villa Romana del Casale Villa of Geraci Province of Messina Abacaenum Halaesa Naxos Ancient theatre of Taormina Tindari Villa Romana di Patti Villa Romana Bagnoli Province of Palermo Entella Grotta dell'Addaura Hippana Ietas Himera Pirama Soluntum Province of Ragusa Akrillai Hybla Heraea Kamarina Kaukana Province of Syracuse Akrai Santoni Casmenae Cava del Rivettazzo Colonne di San Basilio Helorus Netum Megara Hyblaea Syrakousai Roman amphitheatre of Syracuse Altar of Hieron Ear of Dionysius Galermi Aqueduct Greek Theatre of Syracuse Grotta del Ninfeo Temple of Athena Temple of Apollo Necropolis of Cassibile Necropolis of Pantalica Thapsos Villa Romana del Tellaro Province of Trapani Eryx / Erice Drepanum Halyciae Grotta del Genovese Monte Polizzo Motya Segesta Selinunte Temple C Temple E Temple F Cave di Cusa Roman furnaces in Alcamo Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Akrillai&oldid=1254074913 " Categories : Archaeological sites in Sicily Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Italy Dorian colonies in Magna Graecia Syracusian colonies Province of Ragusa Former populated places in Italy Ancient cities in Sicily Greek city-states Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 October 2024, at 09:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Akrillai 4 languages Add topic

