Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Legal issues 2 Cultural references 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Trap street 7 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fictitious street on a map For the 2013 film, see Trap Street (film) .

An atlas being used In cartography , a trap street is a fictitious entry in the form of a misrepresented street on a map, often outside the area the map nominally covers, for the purpose of "trapping" potential plagiarists of the map who, if caught, would be unable to explain the inclusion of the "trap street" on their map as innocent. On maps that are not of streets, other "trap" features (such as nonexistent towns , or mountains with the wrong elevations) may be inserted or altered for the same purpose.

[ 1 ] Trap streets are often nonexistent streets, but sometimes, rather than actually depicting a street where none exists, a map will misrepresent the nature of a street in a fashion that can still be used to detect copyright violators but is less likely to interfere with navigation. For instance, a map might add nonexistent bends to a street, or depict a major street as a narrow lane, without changing its location or its connections to other streets, or the trap street might be placed in an obscure location of a map that is unlikely to be referenced.

Trap streets are rarely acknowledged by publishers. One exception is a popular driver's atlas for the city of Athens , Greece , which has a warning inside its front cover that potential copyright violators should beware of trap streets.

[ 2 ] Legal issues [ edit ] Trap streets are not copyrightable under the federal law of the United States .  In Nester's Map & Guide Corp. v. Hagstrom Map Co.

(1992), [ 3 ] [ 4 ] a United States federal court found that copyright traps are not themselves protectable by copyright . There, the court stated: "[t]o treat 'false' facts interspersed among actual facts and represented as actual facts as fiction would mean that no one could ever reproduce or copy actual facts without risk of reproducing a false fact and thereby violating a copyright ... If such were the law, information could never be reproduced or widely disseminated."  (Id. at 733) In a 2001 case, The Automobile Association in the United Kingdom agreed to settle a case for £20,000,000 when it was caught copying Ordnance Survey maps. In this case, the identifying "fingerprints" were not deliberate errors but rather stylistic features such as the width of roads.

[ 5 ] In another case, the Singapore Land Authority sued Virtual Map , an online publisher of maps, for infringing on its copyright. The Singapore Land Authority stated in its case that there were deliberate errors in maps they had provided to Virtual Map years earlier. Virtual Map denied this and insisted that it had done its own cartography .

[ 6 ] Cultural references [ edit ] The 1979 science fiction novel The Ultimate Enemy by Fred Saberhagen includes the short story "The Annihilation of Angkor Apeiron" in which a salesman allows a draft of a new Encyclopedia Galactica to be captured by alien war machines. It leads them to believe there is a nearby planet ripe for attack, but the planet is actually a copyright trap and the aliens are led away from inhabited worlds, saving millions of lives.

The 2010 novel Kraken by China Miéville features the trap streets of the London A-Z being places where the magical denizens of the city can exist without risk of being disturbed by normal folk.

A 2013 film, Trap Street , inverts the usual meaning of a trap street , becoming a real street which is deliberately obscured or removed from a map—and anyone who attempts to identify it by placing it on public record is then "trapped".

[ 7 ] The 2015 Doctor Who episode " Face the Raven " features a hidden street where alien asylum seekers have taken shelter. Due to a psychic field that subconsciously makes observers ignore it, outsiders consider it a trap street when they see it on maps. One scene involves the character Clara Oswald discussing the definition of "trap street". The episode's working title was also "Trap Street".

See also [ edit ] Agloe, New York Argleton Beatosu and Goblu, Ohio Honeytoken Paper street Phantom settlement Fictitious entry Watermark References [ edit ] ^ Cecil Adams.

Do maps have 'copyright traps' to permit detection of unauthorized copies?

The Straight Dope , August 16, 1991.

^ " Αττική " Greek-language map book published by Nik. & Ioan Fotis O.E.

[ clarification needed ] (Νικ. & Ιωάν. Φωτής Ο.Ε.

[ clarification needed ] , http://www.fotismaps.gr Archived 2012-11-07 at the Wayback Machine ), Greek-language warning inside front cover ^ 796 F.Supp. 729, E.D.N.Y.

, 1992 ^ "Nester's Map & Guide Corp. v. Hagstrom Map Co" .

leagle.com . Retrieved 2015-11-14 .

^ Clark, Andrew (2001-03-06).

"Copying maps costs AA £20m" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2007-09-24 .

^ Hin, Peh Aik.

"Virtual Map (Singapore) Pte Ltd v Singapore Land Authority and another application[2009] 2 SLR(R) 558; [2009] SGCA 2" .

www.singaporelaw.sg . Archived from the original on 2015-09-24.

^ Chang, Justin (2013-09-06).

"Venice Film Review: 'Trap Street' " .

Variety . Retrieved 2014-05-11 .

External links [ edit ] "The Straight Dope: Do maps have "copyright traps" to permit detection of unauthorized copies?" .

www.straightdope.com .

The Straight Dope . 16 August 1991.

Copyright Easter Eggs at OpenStreetMap Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trap_street&oldid=1244914760 " Categories : Fictitious entries Intellectual property law Cartography Streets Fictional streets and roads Plagiarism detectors Phantom geographical features Hidden categories: Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2014 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 September 2024, at 22:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trap street 7 languages Add topic

