Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Statistics 3 Notable people 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Finnish Australians 2 languages Español Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Finnish Australians Australiansuomalaiset Total population 7,939 (by birth, 2011 Census ) [ 1 ] 22,420 (by ancestry, 2011 census ) [ 1 ] Regions with significant populations Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Mount Isa Languages Australian English · Finnish Related ethnic groups Finnish New Zealanders , Danish Australians , Estonian Australians , Norwegian Australians , Swedish Australians Finnish Australians ( Finnish : Australiansuomalaiset ) are Australian citizens of Finnish ancestry or Finland-born people who reside in Australia. According to Finnish estimates, there are approximately 30,000 Australians of Finnish ancestry, and about 7,500 Finland-born Finns residing in Australia.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The first person from Finland to arrive in Australia was Herman Spöring Jr.

from Turku , who was part of the first voyage of James Cook that landed on the continent in 1770. The first Finns to migrate permanently were joining the Victorian gold rush in the 1850s.

[ 3 ] More migration followed in the following decades to Queensland . In 1899, Matti Kurikka tried to establish a utopian community in Chillagoe with about a 100 Finns, though the experiment failed within a year.

[ 4 ] Many Finnish immigrants began arriving in Australia between 1947 and 1971. When these new immigrants came to Australia, they were taken to migrant camps. Once in the camp, they were given free room and board until the head of the family was assigned his first job. The largest and best-known of these camps was Bonegilla , a former military camp in northern Victoria. Most of these Finns, along with more than 300,000 immigrants from other countries, began their new lives in Bonegilla during this period.

[ 5 ] A migrant camp located in Bonegilla, Victoria in 1954. Groups of immigrants were housed there until they were destined for a job and a place to settle with their families.

The first group of Finnish immigrants who arrived in Australia came to work in the gold mines of Victoria in the 1850s. Years later, after the first significant wave of Finnish immigration in the 1920s, a second major wave of immigrants from the Nordic country takes place again, this being more numerous than the first one. Finns were usually hired to perform heavy physical labour. Despite this, they were particularly attracted by the income from the sugar cane fields and mining in Mount Isa , in north Queensland . As a result, Mount Isa has one of the largest Finnish communities in Australia.

At the end of the Second World War , around 20,000 Finns had moved to Australia. In the last three decades the Finnish immigration has dropped significantly.

In the mid-1950s an economic crisis occurs in Finland causing a new wave of Finnish immigration to Australia . One of the main reasons for leaving Finland, besides crisis, was Australia's reinvigorated assisted passage scheme.

Statistics [ edit ] The below table shows the number of residents in Australia that were Finnish-born or Australian-born with Finnish ancestry at different times.

[ 3 ] [ 6 ] Year Finnish-born Finnish ancestry 1921 1,358 1954 1,733 1961 6,488 1971 10,359 1991 9,110 2011 7,939 22,420 2016 7,711 24,144 2021 7,831 27,811 Notable people [ edit ] The Holy Trinity Finnish Lutheran Church in Canberra See also: Category:Australian people of Finnish descent Matt Acton , goalkeeper Carsten Haitzler , software engineer Greg Norman , professional golfer Connie Garner , bodybuilder, actor, fitness model and cybersecurity Sanna Jalomäki , singer, songwriter and painter Paul Sironen , rugby league player Satu Vänskä , violinist Shane Jacobson , actor, director, writer, and comedian David Michael , Western Australian politician See also [ edit ] Australia portal Finland portal Australia–Finland relations European Australians Europeans in Oceania Finnish diaspora Immigration to Australia Danish Australians Norwegian Australians Scandinavian Australians Swedish Australians References [ edit ] ^ a b Australian Government – Department of Immigration and Border Protection.

"Finnish Australians" . Archived from the original on 16 January 2014 . Retrieved 16 January 2014 .

^ Embassy of Finland, Canberra.

"History of the Finns in Australia" . Retrieved 6 September 2013 .

^ a b Watson, G. (1997). "The Finnish-Australian English Corpus*".

S2CID 128284076 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Matti Kurikka (1863-1915)" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 23 December 2000. p. 95 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ "Finnish Immigration to Australia in the 1950s and 1960s" . Archived from the original on 29 July 2012 . Retrieved 6 September 2013 .

^ "SBS Census Explorer: How diverse is your community?" .

SBS News . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

v t e Finns abroad and their descendants Americas Argentina Brazil Canada Findians United States list Findians Europe Norway [ fi ] Forest Finns , Kvens Russia [ fi ; ru ] Ingrians Äyrämöiset Savakot Siberian Finns Korlaks Murmansk Finns Sweden Forest Finns , Tornedalians Switzerland Asia Japan [ ja ] Oceania Australia New Zealand Categories Emigrants Expatriates People of Finnish descent Refugees Related Estonians Izhorians Karelians Livonians Sámi Vepsians Votians See also Finns and Nordic diaspora v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Portals : Australia Finland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Finnish_Australians&oldid=1289755483 " Category : Finnish diaspora in Australia Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from May 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Finnish-language text This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 16:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Finnish Australians 2 languages Add topic

