Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Chronology Toggle Chronology subsection 1.1 Post-independence 1.2 1980s and 1990s 1.3 2000s and 2010s 1.4 2020s 2 Legislative achievements 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Senegal Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminism in Senegal became prominent in the 1980s with the creation of Yewwu-Yewwi . A second wave in the 1990s was more individual and pan-Africanist .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A third wave in the 2000s and 2010s was more intersectional , accepting both the LGBT community and the wearing of the hijab , and extensively using online social networks .

[ 1 ] Chronology [ edit ] Researchers Barrel Gueye and Selly Ba view Senegalese feminism in the form of three waves: overt elite feminism with Yewwu-Yewwi in the 1980s; a more covert, pan-African wave in the 1990s; and an intersectional wave more insistent on Senegalese and African identity in the 2000s and 2010s.

[ 1 ] Post-independence [ edit ] Prior to Gueye and Ba's three waves, the Union des Femmes Sénégalaises was created several decades earlier, in 1956, before merging into what later became known as the Socialist Party of Senegal , the party that held political power in Senegal for several decades. Other women's organisations were created, including the Association des Femmes Africaines pour la Recherche et le Développement (AFARD) established in 1977, some of whose members were key in creating Yewwu-Yewwi.

[ 1 ] 1980s and 1990s [ edit ] Yewwu-Yewwi (YY) was created in 1984, by founders including the sociologist Marie Angélique Savané .

[ 2 ] YY was overtly feminist, calling for "resistance and struggle" against patriarchal norms and institutions in both private and public life. YY opposed polygamy , support women's rights of contraception and abortion , equal rights for women and men in politics and in salaries. Gueye and Ba see YY as having successfully created "national and international momentum" in improving women's status.

[ 1 ] According to Gueye and Ba, YY membership was mostly elite and leftist. It was verbally attacked by Islamists as the "henchmen of Satan" and "corrupting" society, as "ugly women" and as "easy women", and some were physically attacked. YY did not grow to include wider social groups or youth, leading to its eventual dissolution.

[ 1 ] The second wave of Senegalese feminism benefited from the YY wave, but was more individual and covert, while also including a more pan-Africanist outlook. Specific issues of the second wave included continued actions to oppose female genital mutilation and child marriages .

[ 1 ] 2000s and 2010s [ edit ] The third wave is seen by Gueye and Ba as further insisting on a diverse, intersectional , Senegalese form of feminism that is not the Western model of feminism, which is open to the LGBT community , does not oppose polygamy, and does not see wearing the hijab to be oppressive. Gueye and Ba view the third wave as achieving feminist aims through compromise with the patriarchal status quo as a practical strategy rather than through provocation.

[ 1 ] The dominant use of online social networks by the third wave, without contact with large numbers of illiterate women without internet access, was seen by Gueye and Ba as limiting the wave's ability to achieve major changes.

[ 1 ] In a March 2015 discussion on Senegalese feminism, Marie-Angélique Savané objected to discussion of gender replacing discussion of oppression. She viewed the younger generation as failing to maintain the gains of YY , and said that accepting the wearing of the hijab was not part of Senegalese culture.

[ 2 ] 2020s [ edit ] In April 2023, Feminist sociologist Fatou Sow supported the creation of the Réseau des féministes du Sénégal (English: Network of feminists in Senegal ) . She commended the organisations in the network for overtly declaring themselves to be feminist, as stated in the "Charter of feminist principles for African feminists" created during the 2009 African Feminist Forum held in Accra ; and for the organisations' willingness to network together despite diverse interests and conflicts. Sow argued that Africa is the only continent to have a women's rights convention , the Maputo Protocol .

[ 3 ] Legislative achievements [ edit ] The third wave of Senegalese feminists were credited with several legal changes.

[ 1 ] In 2004, Law 91-22 of 16 February 1991 on education was modified to make education obligatory for all children from the age of six to sixteen.

[ 4 ] In 2010, Law 2010-11 of 28 May 2010 established "absolute parity" in all institutions that are "partially or totally" electoral . Lists of candidates have to alternate candidates of "the two sexes".

[ 5 ] The law was implemented, with the 2012 parliamentary election resulting in 64 women parliamentarians out of 150 seats in total [ 6 ] (43%) and the 2022 election resulting in 73 women out of 165 seats (44%).

[ 7 ] In 2020, Law 2020-05 of 10 January 2020 criminalised rape and paedophilia .

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] African feminism Women in Senegal References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Barrel Gueye; Selly Ba (7 July 2021), Senegalese Feminism Across Generations: From Radicalism to a More Inclusive Feminism , Heinrich Böll Foundation , Wikidata Q125142417 , archived from the original on 25 March 2024 ^ a b c Ousmane Laye Diop (16 March 2015).

"Féminisme au Sénégal - Quand le genre prend le dessus" .

Enquête Plus (in French).

Wikidata Q125142259 .

Archived from the original on 25 March 2024.

^ Fatou Sow (21 April 2023), Les enjeux du féminisme au Sénégal (in French), Centre Tricontinental - CETRI, Wikidata Q125143496 , archived from the original on 25 March 2024 ^ Loi N° 91-22 du 16 février 1991 portant orientation de l’Education nationale, modifiée (PDF) (in French), journal officiel du Sénégal, 16 February 1991, Wikidata Q125145857 , archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2024 ^ "Loi n° 2010-11 du 28 maLoi n° 2010-11 du 28 mai 2010 instituant la parité absolue Homme-Femmei 2010 instituant la parité absolue Homme-Femme" (PDF) .

journal officiel du Sénégal (in French). 28 May 2010.

Wikidata Q125145915 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2024.

^ Elections Législatives au Sénégal: le nombre de femmes députées a presque doublé (in French), UN Women , 12 July 2012, Wikidata Q125176572 , archived from the original on 27 March 2024 ^ Keisha Gitari (12 September 2022), Le Sénégal compte la plus forte proportion de femmes parlementaires en Afrique de l'Ouest (in French), BBC News , Wikidata Q125176756 , archived from the original on 27 March 2024 ^ "Loi n° 2020-05 du 10 janvier 2020 modifie la loi n° 65-60 du 21 juillet 1965 portant code pénal relatif à la criminalisation du viol et de la pédophilie" (PDF) .

journal officiel du Sénégal (in French). 13 January 2010.

Wikidata Q125146172 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2024.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminism_in_Senegal&oldid=1254150341 " Categories : Feminism in Africa Women's rights in Senegal Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text This page was last edited on 29 October 2024, at 17:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Senegal Add languages Add topic

