Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Title page 2 Preface 3 Discourses 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Atalanta Fugiens 6 languages Català Español Français Italiano Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1617 emblem book by Michael Maier and Matthias Merian Atalanta Fugiens Title page.

Author Michael Maier Original title Atalanta Fugiens, hoc est, Emblemata Nova de Secretis Naturae Chymica, Accommodata partim oculis et intellectui, figuris cupro incisis, adjectisquesententiis, Epigrammatis et notis, partim auribus & recreationi animi plus minus 50 Fugis Musicalibus trium Vocum, quarum duae ad unam simplicem melodiam distichis canendis peraptam, correspondeant, non absq; singulari jucunditate videnda, legenda, meditanda, intelligenda, dijudicanda, canenda et audienda.

Illustrator Matthias Merian Subject Alchemy Genre Multimedia Published Oppenheim Publisher Johann Theodor de Bry , printed by Hieronymus Galler Publication date 1617 Atalanta Fugiens or Atalanta Fleeing is an emblem book with an alchemical theme by Michael Maier (1568–1622), published by Johann Theodor de Bry in Oppenheim in 1617 (2nd edition 1618). It consists of 50 discourses with illustrations by Matthias Merian , each of which is accompanied by an epigrammatic verse , prose and a musical fugue . It may therefore be considered an early example of multimedia.

The fugues were arranged in three voices symbolizing the philosopher's stone , the pursuing adept, and obstacles in his way.

[ 1 ] Florin G. Calian wrote: It is the first alchemical Gesamtkunstwerk that comprises music, images, poetry, and prose together in one piece. As is stressed on the frontispiece of the book, all the senses are involved in contact with this treatise: partim oculis et inteflectui... partim auribus et recreationi... videnda, legenda, meditanda, intelligenda, dijudicanda, canenda et audienda . In this respect, Atalanta is a book that requires a rather contemplative exercise.

[ 2 ] Title page [ edit ] The title page depicts various scenes from Greek mythology related to golden apples : Top: Garden of the Hesperides .

Left: Hercules stretching out his arm to seize one of the golden apples.

Right: Aphrodite handing the golden apples to Hippomenes .

Bottom: Race between Atalanta and Hippomenes, with Atalanta picking up an apple. Behind them is a temple with lovers embracing each other, while in the background they appear as a lion and lioness.

Preface [ edit ] Maier's reinterpretation of the Riddle of the Sphinx as pictured in Emblem 39 [ 3 ] The preface contains a dissertation upon ancient music and narrates the Greek myth of Atalanta and Hippomenes.

Discourses [ edit ] Each of the 50 discourses contains: A detailed copper-plated engraving by Matthias Merian .

An epigram in verse set to music in the form of a fugue for three voices - Atalanta, or the vox fugiens ; Hippomenes, or the vox sequens , and Pomum objectum (Apple) or vox morans . "Atalanta fugiens" is a play on the word "fugue" [ 4 ] Forty of the fifty fugues are based on compositions by John Farmer [ 5 ] An epigram in German.

A Latin verse with an accompanying discourse.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Read, John (1995-01-01).

From Alchemy to Chemistry . Courier Corporation. pp.

72– 73.

ISBN 978-0-486-28690-7 .

^ "Alkimia operativa and alkimia speculativa. Some Modern Controversies on the Historiography of Alchemy" .

scholar.google.com . Retrieved 2022-09-05 .

^ Peter Forshaw/Ritman Library - Ritman Library Webinar on 'Atalanta Fugiens .

, at 48:45 ^ Peter Forshaw/Ritman Library, at 18:15.

^ Ludwig, Loren. “John Farmer’s Sundry Waies : The English Origin of Michael Maier’s ‘Alchemical Fugues.’” Furnace and Fugue: A Digital Edition of Michael Maier’s “Atalanta fugiens” (1618) with Scholarly Commentary . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2020.

doi : 10.26300/bdp.ff.ludwig ^ Count Michael Maier: Life and writings J.B.Craven pub. 1914 reprinted 2003 Ibis Press Further reading [ edit ] Calian, Florin G (2009), Spiritual Alchemy and the Function of Image: Coincidentia oppositorum in Michael Maier's Atalanta fugiens , Central European University, Budapest.

Forshaw, Peter J (2010) ' Oratorium-Auditorium-Laboratorium: Early Modern Improvisations on Cabala, Music and Alchemy ', in Aries .

Lenke, Nils; Roudet, Nicolas; Tilton, Hereward (2014), Michael Maier - Nine Newly Discovered Letters.

Ambix: Journal of the Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry (pp. 1-47).

Carla Bromberg, (2015), Musical Knowledge in the History of Atalanta fugiens . In: Crossing Oceans: Exchange of Products, Instruments, Procedures and Ideas in the History of Chemistry and Related Science (pp. 117-133).

Chaitow, Sasha, Atalanta Unveiled: Alchemical Initiation in the Emblems of the Atalanta Fugiens , Attic Books, 2020 External links [ edit ] Copies at various websites: scribd.com Archived 2019-04-07 at the Wayback Machine (with engravings; without fugues, German epigrams) pagesperso-orange.fr (complete scanned text including German epigrams; with appendix, errata; without engravings, fugues) digital.sciencehistory.org (complete high-resolution scan of a 1618 printing, all pages including engravings and fugues) Images and other media at Wikimedia Commons English translation of Epigram Verse at wikisource alchemywebsite.com English translation of complete book youtube colored prints with instrumental version of the music for each emblem [1] Furnace and Fugue. An open-access multimedia resource published by the University of Virginia Press. This English translation of Maier's work features high-resolution, zoomable images and newly commissioned, manipulable vocal recordings of Atalanta’s music.

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases MusicBrainz work Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atalanta_Fugiens&oldid=1282562228 " Categories : 1617 books 1618 books Alchemical documents Emblem books Fugues Multimedia works Classical mythology in popular culture Atalanta Hesperides Hercules Aphrodite Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 27 March 2025, at 05:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Atalanta Fugiens 6 languages Add topic

