Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Activities 2 Research 3 The Life Detection Forum Project 4 Workshops 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Center for Life Detection Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Center for Life Detection Science ) Institute dedicated to the scientific search of extraterrestrial life Center for Life Detection Abbreviation CLD Formation February 11, 2019 ; 6 years ago ( 2019-02-11 ) Type Abiogenesis and astrobiology research Legal status Active Headquarters NASA's Ames Research Center Location Moffett Federal Airfield in California, USA Key people Tori Hoehler, Andrew Pohorille , Richard Quinn Parent organization NASA Website www .nasa .gov /ames /cld The Center for Life Detection (CLD) is a collaboration among scientists and technologists from NASA ’s Ames Research Center and Goddard Spaceflight Center , which formed in 2018 to support the planning and implementation of missions that will seek evidence of life beyond Earth .  CLD is supported by NASA’s Planetary Science Division and is one of three core teams in the Network for Life Detection.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] CLD’s perspectives on life detection science and technology development are summarized in “Groundwork for Life Detection”, [ 3 ] a white paper submitted to and cited in the 2023-2032 Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey.

[ 4 ] Activities [ edit ] The search for life elsewhere is among the NASA Science Mission Directorate's high-level priorities ( Science 2020-2024: A Vision for Scientific Excellence , Priority 1).

[ 5 ] The Center for Life Detection was founded to support this search by: conducting research on biosignature “detectability” to help inform target/sample selection and measurement strategies/requirements; developing tools and engagement activities that enable members of the broader astrobiology community to formulate their knowledge, research, and expertise in a way that facilitates use in mission planning; supporting the instrument development community in mapping existing and emerging measurement technology to life detection science objectives, in order to establish science traceability [ 6 ] and identify technology development needs.

Research [ edit ] Multiple worlds within and beyond the Solar System are considered potentially habitable by virtue of the presence of liquid water, and mission concepts to seek evidence of life on these worlds are being developed. On Earth , the abundance distribution of life and its products ranges over many orders of magnitude, as a function of multiple environmental and ecological factors. Similar variability can be expected both within and among inhabited worlds beyond Earth , if any exist, and understanding it can inform target selection, observing strategies, and measurement requirements for missions that seek evidence of life. To build this understanding, scientists in CLD conduct research to assess how environmental factors affect “detectability” – the extent to which life , if present, would express itself in characteristic, observable features.  This research is responsive to a recommendation in the National Academies Consensus Report on Astrobiology Strategy [ 7 ] (NASEM ABS): “Detectability: NASA should support expanding biosignature research to address gaps in understanding biosignature preservation and the breadth of possible false positives and false negative signatures”.  The research is conducted with applications to Mars , Ocean Worlds , and Exoplanets .

The Life Detection Forum Project [ edit ] The astrobiology knowledge that will be required for life detection mission concept development and science definition is diverse, often taking forms that do not map clearly to mission design, and diffuse, in that it is spread across many scientific disciplines and a wide-ranging literature.  The Life Detection Forum (LDF) project seeks to develop a ‘living’, community-driven suite of tools to centralize the requisite body of knowledge and organize it in a way that streamlines its use in program planning, mission concept development, and interpretation of findings. Researchers in CLD work actively to engage a diverse range of communities in the use of this tool in order to harness expertise that is not well represented in the traditional sphere of space science.

The LDF is being built as a web-based platform that can be populated and continually updated by a broad user base, in order to track the evolving state of knowledge regarding life detection science and technology. The core module of the system, released in early 2021, is the Life Detection Knowledge Base (LDKB).

[ 8 ] LDKB is a system for organizing user-provided knowledge about objects, patterns, or processes that might serve as evidence for life according to its bearing on the potential for false positive or false negative results. A technology-oriented counterpart to LDKB, the Measurement Technology Module (MTM) is currently in development. MTM will house user-contributed information regarding current and emerging technologies that could be used to support life detection objectives. When combined, LDKB and MTM will provide a basis for establishing science traceability and identifying technology development needs.

The Life Detection Forum Project is responsive to the NASEM ABS recommendation: “ NASA should aid the community in developing a comprehensive framework [...] to guide testing and evaluation of in situ and remote biosignatures.

[ 7 ] Workshops [ edit ] CLD sought extensive community involvement in the development of LDF tools and early stages of LDKB content development, through a series of workshops and hands-on community engagement activities.

Introduction to the Life Detection Forum Project (Summer 2019) Special session, approx. 130 participants Introduction to, and feedback on, the LDF concept and a basic working model Criteria for Life Detection Measurements (Fall 2020) Two community workshops, 60+ participants Establish & vet the evaluative organizing basis for LDKB The Life Detection Knowledge Base (January 2021) Rollout of LDKB at a community workshop of > 150 participants LDKB Content Development Groups (Spring-Fall 2021) CLD-facilitated, community-based user groups (100+ participants, active 6–8 months) Content provision in 5 theme areas, beta testing of LDKB, build & train user base Future of the Search for Life (Spring 2022) 2-weeks workshop, 100 participants Engage scientists and technologists to discuss high-priority approaches to life detection, define measurement requirements, and identify corresponding measurement technology gaps References [ edit ] ^ "New NASA Team Tackles Next Challenges in Detecting Life Beyond Earth" . NASA AMES. 11 February 2019. Archived from the original on 17 June 2019 . Retrieved 19 February 2019 .

^ "Network for Life Detection (NFoLD)" . Retrieved 19 April 2022 .

^ Hoehler, Tori; Brinckerhoff, Will; Davila, Alfonso; Marais, David Des; Getty, Stephanie; Glavin, Danny; Pohorille, Andrew; Quinn, Richard; Bebout, Lee; Broddrick, Jared; Dateo, Christopher (2021-03-18).

"Groundwork for Life Detection" .

Bulletin of the AAS .

53 (4): 202.

Bibcode : 2021BAAS...53d.202H .

doi : 10.3847/25c2cfeb.bd9172f9 .

S2CID 236682722 .

^ National Academies of Sciences, Engineering (2022-04-19).

Origins, Worlds, and Life: A Decadal Strategy for Planetary Science and Astrobiology 2023-2032 .

doi : 10.17226/26522 .

ISBN 978-0-309-47578-5 .

S2CID 248283239 .

^ "Science 2020-2024: A Vision for Scientific Excellence" .

^ Weiss, J.R.; Smythe, W.D.; Lu, Wenwen (2005).

"Science traceability" .

2005 IEEE Aerospace Conference . pp.

292– 299.

doi : 10.1109/AERO.2005.1559323 .

ISBN 0-7803-8870-4 .

S2CID 23592686 .

^ a b National Academies of Sciences, Engineering (2018-10-10).

An Astrobiology Strategy for the Search for Life in the Universe .

doi : 10.17226/25252 .

ISBN 978-0-309-48416-9 .

PMID 30986006 .

S2CID 243600456 .

^ "Life Detection Knowledge Base" .

External links [ edit ] Astrobiology.nasa.gov https://www.nfold.org/ v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry Portals : Astronomy Biology Space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Center_for_Life_Detection&oldid=1263588563 " Categories : NASA Astrobiology Research institutes in California Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 December 2024, at 14:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Center for Life Detection Add languages Add topic

