Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Predation and oscillations 2 Huffaker's experiments on predator–prey interactions (1958) 3 The Levins model 4 Stochasticity and metapopulations 5 Stochastic patch occupancy models (SPOMs) 6 Microhabitat patches (MHPs) and bacterial metapopulations 7 Life history evolution 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Metapopulation 21 languages العربية Bosanski Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of separated yet interacting ecological populations Metapopulations are important in fisheries. The local population (1.) serves as a source for hybridization with surrounding subspecies populations (1.a, 1.b, and 1.c).The populations are normally spatially separated and independent but spatial overlap between them during breeding times allows for gene flow between the populations.

A metapopulation consists of a group of spatially separated populations of the same species which interact at some level. The term metapopulation was coined by Richard Levins in 1969 to describe a model of population dynamics of insect pests in agricultural fields, but the idea has been most broadly applied to species in naturally or artificially fragmented habitats . In Levins' own words, it consists of "a population of populations".

[ 1 ] A metapopulation is generally considered to consist of several distinct populations together with areas of suitable habitat which are currently unoccupied. In classical metapopulation theory, each population cycles in relative independence of the other populations and eventually goes extinct as a consequence of demographic stochasticity (fluctuations in population size due to random demographic events); the smaller the population, the more chances of inbreeding depression and prone to extinction.

Although individual populations have finite life-spans, the metapopulation as a whole is often stable because immigrants from one population (which may, for example, be experiencing a population boom) are likely to re-colonize habitat which has been left open by the extinction of another population. They may also emigrate to a small population and rescue that population from extinction (called the rescue effect ). Such a rescue effect may occur because declining populations leave niche opportunities open to the "rescuers".

The development of metapopulation theory, in conjunction with the development of source–sink dynamics , emphasised the importance of connectivity between seemingly isolated populations. Although no single population may be able to guarantee the long-term survival of a given species, the combined effect of many populations may be able to do this.

Metapopulation theory was first developed for terrestrial ecosystems, and subsequently applied to the marine realm.

[ 2 ] In fisheries science, the term "sub-population" is equivalent to the metapopulation science term "local population". Most marine examples are provided by relatively sedentary species occupying discrete patches of habitat , with both local recruitment and recruitment from other local populations in the larger metapopulation. Kritzer & Sale have argued against strict application of the metapopulation definitional criteria that extinction risks to local populations must be non-negligible.

[ 2 ] : 32 Finnish biologist Ilkka Hanski of the University of Helsinki was an important contributor to metapopulation theory.

Predation and oscillations [ edit ] The first experiments with predation and spatial heterogeneity were conducted by G. F. Gause in the 1930s, based on the Lotka–Volterra equation , which was formulated in the mid-1920s, but no further application had been conducted.

[ 3 ] The Lotka-Volterra equation suggested that the relationship between predators and their prey would result in population oscillations over time based on the initial densities of predator and prey. Gause's early experiments to prove the predicted oscillations of this theory failed because the predator–prey interactions were not influenced by immigration. However, once immigration was introduced, the population cycles accurately depicted the oscillations predicted by the Lotka-Volterra equation, with the peaks in prey abundance shifted slightly to the left of the peaks of the predator densities. Huffaker's experiments expanded on those of Gause by examining how both the factors of migration and spatial heterogeneity lead to predator–prey oscillations.

Huffaker's experiments on predator–prey interactions (1958) [ edit ] In order to study predation and population oscillations, Huffaker used mite species, one being the predator and the other being the prey.

[ 4 ] He set up a controlled experiment using oranges, which the prey fed on, as the spatially structured habitat in which the predator and prey would interact.

[ 5 ] At first, Huffaker experienced difficulties similar to those of Gause in creating a stable predator–prey interaction. By using oranges only, the prey species quickly became extinct followed consequently with predator extinction. However, he discovered that by modifying the spatial structure of the habitat, he could manipulate the population dynamics and allow the overall survival rate for both species to increase. He did this by altering the distance between the prey and oranges (their food), establishing barriers to predator movement, and creating corridors for the prey to disperse.

[ 3 ] These changes resulted in increased habitat patches and in turn provided more areas for the prey to seek temporary protection. When the prey would become extinct locally at one habitat patch, they were able to reestablish by migrating to new patches before being attacked by predators. This habitat spatial structure of patches allowed for coexistence between the predator and prey species and promoted a stable population oscillation model.

[ 6 ] Although the term metapopulation had not yet been coined, the environmental factors of spatial heterogeneity and habitat patchiness would later describe the conditions of a metapopulation relating to how groups of spatially separated populations of species interact with one another. Huffaker's experiment is significant because it showed how metapopulations can directly affect the predator–prey interactions and in turn influence population dynamics.

[ 7 ] The Levins model [ edit ] Levins' original model applied to a metapopulation distributed over many patches of suitable habitat with significantly less interaction between patches than within a patch. Population dynamics within a patch were simplified to the point where only presence and absence were considered. Each patch in his model is either populated or not.

Let N be the fraction of patches occupied at a given time. During a time dt , each occupied patch can become unoccupied with an extinction probability edt . Additionally, 1 − N of the patches are unoccupied. Assuming a constant rate c of propagule generation from each of the N occupied patches, during a time dt , each unoccupied patch can become occupied with a colonization probability cNdt . Accordingly, the time rate of change of occupied patches, dN/dt , is d N d t = c N ( 1 − − N ) − − e N .

{\displaystyle {\frac {dN}{dt}}=cN(1-N)-eN.\,} This equation is mathematically equivalent to the logistic model , with a carrying capacity K given by K = 1 − − e c {\displaystyle K=1-{\frac {e}{c}}\,} and growth rate r r = c − − e .

{\displaystyle r=c-e.\,} At equilibrium, therefore, some fraction of the species's habitat will always be unoccupied.

Stochasticity and metapopulations [ edit ] Huffaker's [ 4 ] studies of spatial structure and species interactions are an example of early experimentation in metapopulation dynamics. Since the experiments of Huffaker [ 4 ] and Levins, [ 1 ] models have been created which integrate stochastic factors. These models have shown that the combination of environmental variability (stochasticity) and relatively small migration rates cause indefinite or unpredictable persistence. However, Huffaker's experiment almost guaranteed infinite persistence because of the controlled immigration variable.

Stochastic patch occupancy models (SPOMs) [ edit ] One major drawback of the Levins model is that it is deterministic , whereas the fundamental metapopulation processes are stochastic . Metapopulations are particularly useful when discussing species in disturbed habitats , and the viability of their populations , i.e., how likely they are to become extinct in a given time interval. The Levins model cannot address this issue. A simple way to extend the Levins' model to incorporate space and stochastic considerations is by using the contact process . Simple modifications to this model can also incorporate for patch dynamics . At a given percolation threshold , habitat fragmentation effects take place in these configurations predicting more drastic extinction thresholds.

[ 8 ] For conservation biology purposes, metapopulation models must include (a) the finite nature of metapopulations (how many patches are suitable for habitat), and (b) the probabilistic nature of extinction and colonisation. Also, in order to apply these models, the extinctions and colonisations of the patches must be asynchronous.

Microhabitat patches (MHPs) and bacterial metapopulations [ edit ] E. coli metapopulation on a chip.

Combining nanotechnology with landscape ecology , synthetic habitat landscapes have been fabricated on a chip by building a collection of bacterial mini-habitats with nano-scale channels providing them with nutrients for habitat renewal, and connecting them by corridors in different topological arrangements, generating a spatial mosaic of patches of opportunity distributed in time. This can be used for landscape experiments by studying the bacteria metapopulations on the chip, for example their evolutionary ecology .

[ 9 ] Life history evolution [ edit ] Metapopulation models have been used to explain life-history evolution, such as the ecological stability of amphibian metamorphosis in small vernal ponds . Alternative ecological strategies have evolved. For example, some salamanders forgo metamorphosis and sexually mature as aquatic neotenes . The seasonal duration of wetlands and the migratory range of the species determines which ponds are connected and if they form a metapopulation. The duration of the life history stages of amphibians relative to the duration of the vernal pool before it dries up regulates the ecological development of metapopulations connecting aquatic patches to terrestrial patches.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Competition (biology) Conservation biology Landscape ecology Lotka–Volterra equations Oscillation Population viability analysis Predation Spatial heterogeneity References [ edit ] ^ a b Levins, R. (1969), "Some demographic and genetic consequences of environmental heterogeneity for biological control", Bulletin of the Entomological Society of America , 15 (3): 237– 240, doi : 10.1093/besa/15.3.237 ^ a b Kritzer, J. P. & Sale, P. F. (eds) (2006) Marine metapopulations , Academic Press, New York.

^ a b Real, Leslie A. and Brown, James H. 1991.

Foundations of Ecology: Classic papers with commentaries . The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

^ a b c Huffaker, C.B. (1958), "Experimental Studies on Predation: Dispersion factors and predator–prey oscillations", Hilgardia , 27 (343): 343– 383, doi : 10.3733/hilg.v27n14p343 ^ Legendre, P.; Fortin, M.J. (1989), "Spatial pattern and ecological analysis", Plant Ecology , 80 (2): 107, CiteSeerX 10.1.1.330.8940 , doi : 10.1007/BF00048036 , S2CID 17101938 ^ Kareiva, P. (1987), "Habitat Fragmentation and the Stability of Predator–Prey Interactions", Nature , 326 (6111): 388– 390, Bibcode : 1987Natur.326..388K , doi : 10.1038/326388a0 , S2CID 4335135 ^ Janssen, A. et al. 1997. Metapopulation Dynamics of a Persisting Predator–Prey system.

^ Keymer J.E; P.A. Marquet; J.X. Velasco-Hernández; S.A. Levin (November 2000). "Extinction Thresholds and Metapopulation Persistence in Dynamic Landscapes".

The American Naturalist .

156 (5): 478– 4945.

doi : 10.1086/303407 .

hdl : 10533/172124 .

PMID 29587508 .

S2CID 4385886 .

^ Keymer J.E.; P. Galajda; C. Muldoon R. & R. Austin (November 2006).

"Bacterial metapopulations in nanofabricated landscapes" .

PNAS .

103 (46): 17290– 295.

Bibcode : 2006PNAS..10317290K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0607971103 .

PMC 1635019 .

PMID 17090676 .

^ Petranka, J. W. (2007), "Evolution of complex life cycles of amphibians: bridging the gap between metapopulation dynamics and life history evolution", Evolutionary Ecology , 21 (6): 751– 764, Bibcode : 2007EvEco..21..751P , doi : 10.1007/s10682-006-9149-1 , S2CID 38832436 .

Bascompte J.; Solé R. V. (1996), "Habitat Fragmentation and Extinction Thresholds in spatially explicit models", Journal of Animal Ecology , 65 (4): 465– 473, Bibcode : 1996JAnEc..65..465B , doi : 10.2307/5781 , JSTOR 5781 .

Hanski, I.

Metapopulation Ecology Oxford University Press. 1999.

ISBN 0-19-854065-5 Fahrig, L. 2003. Effects of Habitat Fragmentation on Biodiversity. Annual Review of ecology, evolution, and systematics. 34:1, p. 487.

Levin S.A. (1974), "Dispersion and Population Interactions", The American Naturalist , 108 (960): 207, doi : 10.1086/282900 , S2CID 83630608 .

External links [ edit ] Helsinki-science: Metapopulation v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology v t e Meta- Domains and methods Meta-analysis Metabibliography Metaclass Semantic Web Metacognition Meta-learning Metamemory Meta-communication Metacomputing Metadata Metadesign Metadiscourse Meta-emotion Metamood Metafiction Metagaming Metagenomics Metaheuristic Metahistory Metahumor Metaknowledge Metalanguage Metapragmatics Metasemantics Metalinguistics Metamaterials Metamathematics Metamedia Metamodeling Metamodernism Metamotivation Metanarrative Metaobject Meta-optimization Meta-organization Metaphenomics Metaphilosophy Metaepistemology Metaethics Metalogic Meta-ontology Metaphysics Metametaphysics Metapolitics Metapopulation Metaprogramming Metapsychiatry Metapsychology Metapuzzle Meta-reference Meta-regulation Metascience Metasociology Meta-system Metatheorem Metatheory Metaverse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metapopulation&oldid=1241604157 " Categories : Population ecology Landscape ecology Population Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2016 This page was last edited on 22 August 2024, at 04:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metapopulation 21 languages Add topic

