Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 Conversion factors Toggle Conversion factors subsection 2.1 Energy 2.2 Power 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Foot-pound (energy) 8 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 日本語 Simple English Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Foot pound ) Unit of energy Not to be confused with Pound-foot (torque) or Foot-poundal .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Foot-pound" energy – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Foot-pound Unit system English engineering units and British gravitational system Unit of Energy Symbol ft⋅lbf, ft⋅lb Conversions 1 ft⋅lbf in ...

... is equal to ...

SI units 1.355818 J CGS units 13,558,180 erg The foot-pound force (symbol: ft⋅lbf , [ 1 ] ft⋅lb f , [ 2 ] or ft⋅lb [ 3 ] ) is a unit of work or energy in the engineering and gravitational systems in United States customary and imperial units of measure. It is the energy transferred upon applying a force of one pound-force (lbf) through a linear displacement of one foot .  The corresponding SI unit is the joule , though in terms of energy, one joule is not equal to one foot-pound.

Usage [ edit ] The term foot-pound is also used as a unit of torque (see pound-foot (torque) ).  In the United States this is often used to specify, for example, the tightness of a fastener (such as screws and nuts ) or the output of an engine .  Although they are dimensionally equivalent, energy (a scalar ) and torque (a Euclidean vector ) are distinct physical quantities. Both energy and torque can be expressed as a product of a force vector with a displacement vector (hence pounds and feet); energy is the scalar product of the two, and torque is the vector product .

Although calling the torque unit "pound-foot" has been academically suggested, both are still commonly called "foot-pound" in colloquial usage.  To avoid confusion, it is not uncommon for people to specify each as "foot-pound of energy" or "foot-pound of torque" respectively.

In small arms ballistics and particularly in the United States , the foot-pound is often used to specify the muzzle energy of a bullet .

Conversion factors [ edit ] Energy [ edit ] 1 foot pound-force is equivalent to: 1.355818 joules or newton-metres 13,558,180 ergs 1.285067 × 10 −3 British thermal units 0.3240483 calories 8.462351 × 10 18 electronvolts =  8.462351 × 10 9 gigaelectronvolts Power [ edit ] 1 foot pound-force per second is equivalent to: 1.355818 watts 1.818182 × 10 −3 horsepower Related conversions: 1 watt ≈ 44.25373 ft⋅lbf/min ≈ 0.7375621 ft⋅lbf/s 1 horsepower (mechanical) = 33,000 ft⋅lbf/min = 550 ft⋅lbf/s See also [ edit ] Conversion of units Pound-foot (torque) Poundal Slug (unit) Units of energy References [ edit ] ^ IEEE Std 260.1™-2004, IEEE Standard Letter Symbols for Units of Measurement (SI Units, Customary Inch-Pound Units, and Certain Other Units) ^ Fletcher, Leroy S.; Shoup, Terry E. (1978), Introduction to Engineering , Prentice-Hall, ISBN 978-0135018583 , LCCN 77024142 .

: 257 ^ Budynas, Richard G.; Nisbett, J. Keith (2014-01-27).

Mechanical Engineering Design . McGraw Hill Education.

ISBN 978-0073529288 . Archived from the original on 2018-08-27 . Retrieved 2016-12-20 .

v t e Imperial units Comparison with US customary system Length Twip Thousandth of an inch Barleycorn Inch Hand Link Foot Yard Fathom Rod Chain Gunter's chain Furlong Cable Mile Nautical mile League Area Square inch Square foot Square yard Perch Rood Acre Square mile Volume Derived Cubic inch Cubic foot Hoppus Cubic yard Cubic mile Tmcft Cooking Teaspoon Tablespoon Fluid ounce Cup Pint Quart Trade gallon Gallon Other Chaldron Minim Gill Fluid Scruple Fluid Drachm Peck Bushel Barrel Stuck Hogshead Speed Miles per hour Mass Grain Drachm Ounce Pound (mass) Stone Quarter Slug Long hundred Hundredweight Ship load Ton Pressure Ksi Pounds per square inch Other units and measures British thermal unit Degree Fahrenheit Rankine Foot-candle Foot-pound Foot-poundal Horsepower Horsepower-hour Kenning Pound (force) Pound-foot Poundal Span Spinning count Related systems Avoirdupois system English units Winchester Exchequer English Engineering units Foot–pound–second system (FPS) Twenty-foot equivalent unit v t e United States customary units Comparison with imperial unit system Length Thousandth of an inch Inch Hand Link Foot Yard Rod Chain Furlong Mile Statute mile Area Square inch Square foot Square yard Acre Square mile Volume Derived Cubic inch Cubic foot Cubic yard Cubic mile Cooking Teaspoon Tablespoon Fluid ounce Cup Pint Quart Gallon Wood Board foot Cord Face cord Other Minim Gill Peck Bushel Barrel Acre-foot Speed Foot per second Miles per hour Mass Grain Dram Ounce Pound Hundredweight Ton Long Short Force Poundal Pound-force Kip Pressure Inch of mercury Pound per square inch Kilopound per square inch Other units and measures Bolt (cloth) British thermal unit Degree (angle) Fahrenheit Foot-candle Foot-lambert Foot-pound (energy) Horsepower Perm Pound-foot (torque) Spinning count Ton of refrigeration Related systems American wire gauge Avoirdupois system Body jewelry sizes English Engineering Units Foot–pound–second system of units Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Foot-pound_(energy)&oldid=1288280078 " Categories : Customary units of measurement in the United States Imperial units Units of energy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2018 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 16:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Foot-pound (energy) 8 languages Add topic

