Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Techniques 3 AM radio 4 FM radio 5 PM 6 QAM 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Demodulation 25 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Interlingua Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of extracting the original information-bearing signal from a carrier wave This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Demodulation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Passband modulation Analog modulation AM SM SSB Angle modulation FM PM QAM Digital modulation ASK APSK CPM FSK MFSK MSK OOK PPM PSK QAM SC-FDE TCM TC-PAM WDM Hierarchical modulation QAM WDM Spread spectrum CSS DSSS FHSS THSS See also Capacity-approaching codes Demodulation Line coding Modem AnM PoM PAM PCM PDM PWM ΔΣM OFDM FDM Multiplexing v t e Demodulation is the process of extracting the original information-bearing signal from a carrier wave . A demodulator is an electronic circuit (or computer program in a software-defined radio ) that is used to recover the information content from the modulated carrier wave.

[ 1 ] There are many types of signal modulation , and there are many types of demodulators. The signal output from a demodulator may represent sound (an analog audio signal ), images (an analog video signal ) or binary data (a digital signal ).

These terms are traditionally used in connection with radio receivers , but many other systems use many kinds of demodulators. For example, in a modem , which is a contraction of the terms modulator/demodulator, a demodulator is used to extract a serial digital data stream from a carrier signal which is used to carry it through a telephone line , coaxial cable , or optical fiber .

History [ edit ] Demodulation was first used in radio receivers .  In the wireless telegraphy radio systems used during the first 3 decades of radio (1884–1914) the transmitter did not communicate audio (sound) but transmitted information in the form of pulses of radio waves that represented text messages in Morse code .

[ citation needed ] Therefore, the receiver merely had to detect the presence or absence of the radio signal, and produce a click sound.  The device that did this was called a detector .  The first detectors were coherers , simple devices that acted as a switch. The term detector stuck, was used for other types of demodulators and continues to be used to the present day for a demodulator in a radio receiver.

The first type of modulation used to transmit sound over radio waves was amplitude modulation (AM), invented by Reginald Fessenden around 1900.  An AM radio signal can be demodulated by rectifying it to remove one side of the carrier, and then filtering to remove the radio-frequency component, leaving only the modulating audio component. This is equivalent to peak detection with a suitably long time constant. The amplitude of the recovered audio frequency varies with the modulating audio signal, so it can drive an earphone or an audio amplifier.  Fessendon invented the first AM demodulator in 1904 called the electrolytic detector , consisting of a short needle dipping into a cup of dilute acid.  The same year John Ambrose Fleming invented the Fleming valve or thermionic diode which could also rectify an AM signal.

Techniques [ edit ] There are several ways of demodulation depending on how parameters of the base-band signal such as amplitude, frequency or phase are transmitted in the carrier signal. For example, for a signal modulated with a linear modulation like amplitude modulation (AM), we can use a synchronous detector . On the other hand, for a signal modulated with an angular modulation, we must use a frequency modulation (FM) demodulator or a phase modulation (PM) demodulator. Different kinds of circuits perform these functions.

Many techniques such as carrier recovery , clock recovery , bit slip , frame synchronization , rake receiver , pulse compression , Received Signal Strength Indication , error detection and correction , etc., are only performed by demodulators, although any specific demodulator may perform only some or none of these techniques.

Many things can act as a demodulator, if they pass the radio waves on nonlinearly .

[ 2 ] AM radio [ edit ] An AM signal encodes the information into the carrier wave by varying its amplitude in direct sympathy with the analogue signal to be sent. There are two methods used to demodulate AM signals : The envelope detector is a very simple method of demodulation that does not require a coherent demodulator. It consists of a rectifier (anything that will pass current in one direction only) or other non-linear component that enhances one half of the received signal over the other and a low-pass filter. The rectifier may be in the form of a single diode or may be more complex . Many natural substances exhibit this rectification behaviour, which is why it was the earliest modulation and demodulation technique used in radio. The filter is usually an RC low-pass type but the filter function can sometimes be achieved by relying on the limited frequency response of the circuitry following the rectifier. The crystal set exploits the simplicity of AM modulation to produce a receiver with very few parts, using the crystal as the rectifier and the limited frequency response of the headphones as the filter.

The product detector multiplies the incoming signal by the signal of a local oscillator with the same frequency and phase as the carrier of the incoming signal. After filtering, the original audio signal will result.

SSB is a form of AM in which the carrier is reduced or suppressed entirely , which require coherent demodulation.  For further reading, see sideband .

FM radio [ edit ] Example of QPSK carrier recovery phase error causing a fixed rotational offset of the received symbol constellation , X, relative to the intended constellation, O.

Frequency modulation (FM) has numerous advantages over AM such as better fidelity and noise immunity. However, it is much more complex to both modulate and demodulate a carrier wave with FM, and AM predates it by several decades.

There are several common types of FM demodulators: The quadrature detector , which phase shifts the signal by 90 degrees and multiplies it with the unshifted version. One of the terms that drops out from this operation is the original information signal, which is selected and amplified.

The signal is fed into a PLL and the error signal is used as the demodulated signal.

The most common is a Foster–Seeley discriminator .  This is composed of an electronic filter which decreases the amplitude of some frequencies relative to others, followed by an AM demodulator.  If the filter response changes linearly with frequency, the final analog output will be proportional to the input frequency, as desired.

A variant of the Foster–Seeley discriminator called the ratio detector [ 3 ] Another method uses two AM demodulators, one tuned to the high end of the band and the other to the low end, and feed the outputs into a difference amplifier.

[ citation needed ] Using a digital signal processor , as used in software-defined radio .

PM [ edit ] Main article: Phase modulation Receiver structure for QPSK. The matched filters can be replaced with correlators. Each detection device uses a reference threshold value to determine whether a 1 or 0 is detected.

QAM [ edit ] Main article: Quadrature amplitude modulation § Demodulation QAM demodulation requires a coherent receiver. It uses two product detectors whose local reference signals are a quarter cycle apart in phase: one for the in-phase component and one for the quadrature component. The demodulator keeps these product detectors tuned to a continuous or intermittent pilot signal.

See also [ edit ] Detection theory Detector (radio) Fax demodulator References [ edit ] ^ "Demodulator - Definitions from Dictionary.com" . dictionary.reference.com . Retrieved 2008-05-16 .

^ Ghostly voices , New Scientist, 2 October 1999 , retrieved 2017-04-25 ^ "The ratio detector" External links [ edit ] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Communication Systems/Coherent Receivers Demodulation chapter on All About Circuits v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐9v285
Cached time: 20250812014040
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.325 seconds
Real time usage: 0.435 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1182/1000000
Revision size: 8795/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 54666/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2398/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 29624/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.205/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5493030/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  349.829      1 -total
 22.50%   78.728      1 Template:Reflist
 18.81%   65.801      1 Template:Modulation_techniques
 18.02%   63.022      1 Template:Cite_web
 15.11%   52.844      1 Template:Short_description
 14.34%   50.157      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 13.31%   46.560      1 Template:Ambox
 12.71%   44.456      1 Template:Telecommunications
 12.24%   42.833      1 Template:Navbox
  9.01%   31.517      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:66926:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014040 and revision id 1301524812. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Demodulation&oldid=1301524812 " Category : Demodulation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 08:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Demodulation 25 languages Add topic

