Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Process 3 Legacy 4 De-Romanization 5 Examples 6 Heritage 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Romanization (cultural) 31 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cultural assimilation of peripheral populations by the Roman Republic/Empire For other uses, see Romanization (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Romanianization .

Romanization or Latinization ( Romanisation or Latinisation ), in the historical and cultural meanings of both terms, indicate different historical processes, such as acculturation , integration and assimilation of newly incorporated and peripheral populations by the Roman Republic and the later Roman Empire . The terms were used in ancient Roman historiography and traditional Italian historiography until the Fascist period, when the various processes were called the " civilizing of barbarians ".

[ citation needed ] Characteristics [ edit ] The Roman Empire at its greatest extent Acculturation proceeded from the top down, with the upper classes adopting Roman culture first and the old ways lingering longest among peasants in outlying countryside and rural areas.

[ 1 ] Hostages played an important part in this process, as elite children, from Mauretania to Gaul , were taken to be raised and educated in Rome.

[ 2 ] Ancient Roman historiography and traditional Italian historiography confidently identified the different processes involved with a "civilization of barbarians". Modern historians take a more nuanced view: by making their peace with Rome, local elites could make their position more secure and reinforce their prestige. New themes include the study of personal and group values and the construction of identity, which is the personal aspect of ethnogenesis . The transitions operated differently in different provinces; as Blagg and Millett point out [ 3 ] even a Roman province may be too broad a canvas to generalize.

One characteristic of cultural Romanization was the creation of many hundreds of Roman coloniae in the territory of the Roman Republic and the subsequent Roman Empire. Until Trajan , colonies were created by using retired veteran soldiers, mainly from the Italian peninsula, who promoted Roman customs and laws, with the use of Latin .

About 400 towns (of the Roman Empire) are known to have possessed the rank of colonia. During the empire, colonies were showcases of Roman culture and examples of the Roman way of life. The native population of the provinces could see how they were expected to live. Because of this function, the promotion of a town to the status of "Colonia civium Romanorum" implied that all citizens received full citizen rights and dedicated a temple to the Capitoline triad: Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, the deities venerated in the temple of Jupiter Best and Biggest on the Capitol in Rome. Livius [ 4 ] It has been estimated that at the beginning of the empire, about 750,000 Italians lived in the provinces.

[ 5 ] Julius Caesar , Mark Antony and Augustus settled many of their veterans in colonies: in Italy, and the provinces. The colonies that were established in Italy until 14 BCE have been studied by Keppie (1983). In his account of the achievements of his long reign, Res Gestae Divi Augusti ( The Deeds of the Divine Augustus ), Augustus stated that he had settled 120,000 soldiers in twenty colonies in Italy in 31 BCE, then 100,000 men in colonies in Spain and southern Gaul in 14 BCE, followed by another 96,000 in 2 BCE.

[ 6 ] Brian Campbell also states "From 49 to 32 BCE about 420,000 Italians were recruited", which would thus be the veteran (citizen) stock that was largely sent to the provinces (colonies) during Augustus. The Lex Calpurnia, however, also allowed citizenship to be granted for distinguished bravery. For example, the 1,000 socii from Camerinum after Vercellae 101 BCE (Plutarch Mar. XXXVIII) and the auxiliary (later Legio XXII Deiotariana ) after Zela , got Roman citizenship. By the time of Augustus, the legions consisted mostly of ethnic Latins/Italics and Cisalpine Gauls.

[ 7 ] However, Romanization did not always result in the extinction of all aspects of native cultures even when there was extensive acculturation. Many non-Latin provincial languages survived the entire period while sustaining considerable Latin influence, including the ancestor languages of Welsh, Albanian , Basque and Berber . Where there was language replacement, in some cases, such as Italy, it took place in the early imperial stage, while in others, native languages only totally succumbed to Latin after the fall of the Empire, as was likely the case with Gaulish. The Gaulish language is thought to have survived into the 6th century in France, despite considerable Romanization of the local material culture.

[ 8 ] The last record of spoken Gaulish deemed to be plausibly credible [ 8 ] was when Gregory of Tours wrote in the 6th century ( c.

560 –575) that a shrine in Auvergne which "is called Vasso Galatae in the Gallic tongue" was destroyed and burnt to the ground.

[ 9 ] Coexisting with Latin, Gaulish helped shape the Vulgar Latin dialects that developed into French, with effects including loanwords and calques (including oui , [ 10 ] the word for "yes"), [ 11 ] [ 10 ] sound changes, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] and influences in conjugation and word order.

[ 11 ] [ 10 ] [ 14 ] Process [ edit ] The very existence of Romanization is a source of contention among modern archaeologists .

[ 15 ] One of the first approaches, which now can be regarded as the "traditional" approach, was taken by Francis Haverfield .

[ 16 ] He saw this process beginning in primarily post-conquest societies (such as Britain and Gaul ), where direct Roman policy from the top promoted an increase in the Roman population of the province through the establishment of veteran colonies.

[ 17 ] The coloniae would have spoken Latin and been citizens of Rome following their army tenure (See Roman citizenship ). Haverfield thus assumes this would have a Romanizing effect upon the native communities.

This thought process, fueled though it was by early 20th century standards of imperialism and cultural change, forms the basis for the modern understanding of Romanization. However, recent scholarship has devoted itself to providing alternate models of how native populations adopted Roman culture and has questioned the extent to which it was accepted or resisted.

Non-interventionist model [ 18 ] – Native elites were encouraged to increase social standing through association with the powerful conqueror, be it in dress, language, housing or food consumption. This would have provided them with associated power. The establishment of a civil administration system is quickly imposed to solidify the permanence of Roman rule.

Discrepant identity [ 19 ] – No uniformity of identity that can accurately be described as traditional Romanization. Fundamental differences within a province are visible through economics, religion and identity. Not all provincials supported Rome and not all elites wanted to be like the Roman upper classes.

Acculturation [ 20 ] – Aspects of both native and Roman cultures are joined together, as can be seen in the Roman acceptance, and adoption of, non- Classical religious practices. The inclusion of Isis , Epona , Britannia and Dolichenus into the pantheon are evidence.

Creolization [ 21 ] – Romanization occurs as a result of negotiation between different elements of non- egalitarian societies and so material culture is ambiguous.

Legacy [ edit ] Main article: Legacy of the Roman Empire Romance languages in Europe Roman names were adopted by some, and the Latin language was spread, which was greatly facilitated by the fact that many cultures were mostly oral (particularly for the Gauls and Iberians ). Anyone who wanted to deal (through writing) with the bureaucracy and/or with the Roman market had to write in Latin. The extent of the adoption is subject to ongoing debate, as the native languages were certainly spoken after the conquests. Moreover, in the eastern half of the Empire, Latin had to compete with Greek , which largely kept its position as lingua franca and even spread to new areas. Latin became prominent in certain areas around new veteran colonies like Berytus .

The local customary laws were supplanted in part by Roman law , with its institutions regarding property and inheritance.

Typically-Roman institutions, such as public baths , the imperial cult and gladiator fights, were adopted.

Gradually, the conquered would see themselves as Romans. The process was supported by the Roman Republic and then by the Roman Empire .

The entire process was facilitated by the Indo-European origin of most of the languages and by the similarity of the gods of many ancient cultures. They also already had trade relations and contacts with one another through the seafaring Mediterranean cultures like the Phoenicians and the Greeks .

Romanization was largely effective in the western half of the empire, where native civilizations were weaker. In the Hellenized east, ancient civilizations like those of Ancient Egypt , Anatolia , the Balkans , Syria , and Palestine effectively resisted all but its most superficial effects. When the Empire was divided, the east, with mainly Greek culture, was marked by the increasing strength of specifically Greek culture and language to the detriment of the Latin language and other Romanizing influences, but its citizens continued to regard themselves as Romans.

While Britain certainly was Romanized, its approximation to the Roman culture seems to have been smaller than that of Gaul. The most Romanized regions, as demonstrated by Dott. Bernward Tewes and Barbara Woitas of the computing center of the Catholic University Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, were Italy, the Iberian Peninsula , Gaul , southern Germany and Dalmatia .

[ 22 ] Romanization in most of those regions remains such a powerful cultural influence in most aspects of life today that they are described as "Latin countries" and "Latin American countries". That is most evident in European countries in which Romance languages are spoken and former colonies that have inherited the languages and other Roman influences. According to Theodor Mommsen , cultural Romanization was more complete in those areas that developed a "neolatin language" (like Spanish, French, Italian, Portuguese, and Romanian). The same process later developed in the recent centuries' colonial empires.

De-Romanization [ edit ] The regions of Levant and Mesopotamia were re-Semiticized by the Arab conquests of the Rashidun and the Umayyad Caliphates and into the Abbasid Caliphate after centuries of Roman rule. The conquests reversed the Romanization and the Hellenization of the native Semitic peoples .

Slavic migrations to Southeastern Europe also contributed to the de-Romanization of the Balkans, and the rapid demographic spread of the Slavs was followed by a population exchange, mixing and language shift to and from Slavic .

Examples [ edit ] Romanization of Anatolia Romanization of Hispania Heritage [ edit ] Latinization of names List of cities founded by the Romans Spread of the Latin script Historiography of Romanization See also [ edit ] Ancient Rome portal Romanitas Roman citizenship Latin rights Notes [ edit ] ^ The identification of countryfolk as pagani is discussed at paganism .

^ Leonard A. Curchin, The Romanization of Central Spain: complexity, diversity, and change in a Provincial Hintellrfreshsrland , 2004, p. 130.

^ T. F. C. Blagg and M. Millett, eds., The Early Roman Empire in the West 1999, p. 43.

^ Coloniae ^ Scheidel, "Demography", 49–50, 64, 64 n. 114, citing P. A. Brunt, Italian Manpower 225 B.C.–A.D. 14 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987), 263.

^ Pat Southern - The Roman Army: A Social and Institutional History (2006/Oxford Uni.) ^ B. Campbell The Roman Army, 31 BC–AD 337 p.9 ^ a b Laurence Hélix (2011).

Histoire de la langue française . Ellipses Edition Marketing S.A. p. 7.

ISBN 978-2-7298-6470-5 .

Le déclin du Gaulois et sa disparition ne s'expliquent pas seulement par des pratiques culturelles spécifiques: Lorsque les Romains conduits par César envahirent la Gaule, au 1er siecle avant J.-C., celle-ci romanisa de manière progressive et profonde. Pendant près de 500 ans, la fameuse période gallo-romaine, le gaulois et le latin parlé coexistèrent; au VIe siècle encore; le temoignage de Grégoire de Tours atteste la survivance de la langue gauloise.

^ Hist. Franc.

, book I, 32 Veniens vero Arvernos, delubrum illud, quod Gallica lingua Vasso Galatæ vocant, incendit, diruit, atque subvertit.

And coming to Clermont [to the Arverni ] he set on fire, overthrew and destroyed that shrine which they call Vasso Galatæ in the Gallic tongue.

^ a b c Matasovic, Ranko (2007). "Insular Celtic as a Language Area".

Papers from the Workshop within the Framework of the XIII International Congress of Celtic Studies : 106.

^ a b Savignac, Jean-Paul (2004).

Dictionnaire Français-Gaulois . Paris: La Différence. p. 26.

^ Henri Guiter, "Sur le substrat gaulois dans la Romania", in Munus amicitae. Studia linguistica in honorem Witoldi Manczak septuagenarii , eds., Anna Bochnakowa & Stanislan Widlak, Krakow, 1995.

^ Eugeen Roegiest, Vers les sources des langues romanes: Un itinéraire linguistique à travers la Romania (Leuven, Belgium: Acco, 2006), 83.

^ Adams, J. N. (2007). "Chapter V -- Regionalisms in provincial texts: Gaul".

The Regional Diversification of Latin 200 BC – AD 600 . Cambridge. p.

279 –289.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511482977 .

ISBN 9780511482977 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Mattingly, D. J., 2004, "Being Roman: Expressing Identity in a provincial setting", Journal of Roman Archaeology Vol. 17, pp 5–26 ^ Haverfield, F., 1912, The Romanization of Roman Britain , Oxford: Clarendon Press ^ MacKendrick, P. L (1952). "Roman Colonization".

Phoenix .

6 (4): 139– 146.

doi : 10.2307/1086829 .

JSTOR 1086829 .

^ Millet, M., 1990, "Romanization: historical issues and archaeological interpretation", in Blagg, T. and Millett, M. (Eds.), The Early Roman Empire in the West , Oxford: Oxbow Books, pp. 35–44 ^ Mattingly, D. J., 2004, "Being Roman: Expressing Identity in a provincial setting", Journal of Roman Archaeology Vol. 17, pp. 13 ^ Webster, J., 1997 "Necessary Comparisons: A Post-Colonial Approach to Religious Syncretism in the Roman Provinces", World Archaeology Vol 28 No 3, pp. 324–338 ^ Webster, J., 2001, "Creolizing the Roman Provinces", American Journal of Archaeology Vol 105 No. 2, pp. 209–225, ^ "Epigraphik-Datenbank Clauss Slaby EDCS, unter Mitarbeit von Anne Kolb" .

References [ edit ] Adrian Goldsworthy (2003).

The Complete Roman Army . Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-05124-5 .

Francisco Marco Simón, "Religion and Religious Practices of the Ancient Celts of the Iberian Peninsula" in e-Keltoi: The Celts in the Iberian Peninsula , 6 287–345 ( online ) Interpretatio and the Romanization of Celtic deities.

Mommsen, Theodore.

The Provinces of the Roman Empire Barnes & Noble (re-edition). New York, 2004 Susanne Pilhofer: "Romanisierung in Kilikien? Das Zeugnis der Inschriften" ( Quellen und Forschungen zur Antiken Welt 46), Munich 2006.

Further reading [ edit ] Redfern, Rebecca C.; Dewitte, Sharon N. (2010).

"A new approach to the study of Romanization in Britain: A regional perspective of cultural change in late Iron Age and Roman Dorset using the Siler and Gompertz-Makeham models of mortality" .

American Journal of Physical Anthropology .

144 (2): 269– 285.

doi : 10.1002/ajpa.21400 .

PMC 3097515 .

PMID 20925081 .

v t e Ancient Rome topics Outline Timeline Index History Foundation Kingdom overthrow Republic Empire History Pax Romana Principate Dominate Western Empire fall historiography of the fall Byzantine Empire decline fall Later Roman Empire History Constitution History Kingdom Republic Empire Late Empire Senate Legislative assemblies Curiate Centuriate Tribal Plebeian Executive magistrates SPQR Law Twelve Tables Mos maiorum Citizenship Auctoritas Imperium Status Litigation Government Curia Forum Cursus honorum Collegiality Emperor Legatus Dux Officium Praefectus Vicarius Vigintisexviri Lictor Magister militum Imperator Princeps senatus Pontifex maximus Augustus Caesar Tetrarch Optimates and populares Province Magistrates Ordinary Consul Censor Praetor Tribune Tribune of the plebs Military tribune Quaestor Aedile Promagistrate Governor Extraordinary Rex Interrex Dictator Magister equitum Decemviri Consular tribune Triumvir Military History Borders Establishment Structure Campaigns Political control Strategy Engineering Frontiers and fortifications castra Technology Army Legion Infantry tactics Personal equipment Siege engines Siege in Ancient Rome Navy Auxiliaries Decorations and punishments Hippika gymnasia Economy Agriculture Deforestation Commerce Finance Currency Republican currency Imperial currency Culture Architecture Art Bathing Calendar Clothing Cosmetics Cuisine Education Family Pater familias Folklore Hairstyles Literature Music Mythology Religion Deities Romanization Romans Sexuality Spectacles Theatre Toys and games Wine Society Patricians Plebs Conflict of the Orders Secessio plebis Equites Gens Tribes Assembly Patronage Naming conventions Demography Women Marriage Adoption Slavery Bagaudae Technology Amphitheatres Aqueducts Bridges Circuses Civil engineering Concrete Domes Metallurgy Numerals Roads Sanitation Ships Temples Theatres Thermae Latin History Alphabet Versions Old Classical Vulgar Late Medieval Renaissance Neo-Latin Contemporary Ecclesiastical Romance languages Writers Latin Aelius Donatus Ammianus Marcellinus Appuleius Asconius Pedianus Augustine Aurelius Victor Ausonius Boëthius Caesar Catullus Cassiodorus Censorinus Cicero Claudian Columella Cornelius Nepos Ennius Eutropius Fabius Pictor Sextus Pompeius Festus Rufus Festus Florus Frontinus Fronto Fulgentius Gellius Horace Hydatius Hyginus Jerome Jordanes Julius Paulus Justin Juvenal Lactantius Livy Lucan Lucretius Macrobius Marcellus Empiricus Marcus Aurelius Manilius Martial Nicolaus Damascenus Nonius Marcellus Obsequens Orosius Ovid Petronius Phaedrus Plautus Pliny the Elder Pliny the Younger Pomponius Mela Priscian Propertius Quadrigarius Quintilian Quintus Curtius Rufus Sallust Seneca the Elder Seneca the Younger Servius Sidonius Apollinaris Silius Italicus Statius Suetonius Symmachus Tacitus Terence Tertullian Tibullus Valerius Antias Valerius Maximus Varro Velleius Paterculus Verrius Flaccus Vergil Vitruvius Greek Aelian Aëtius of Amida Appian Arrian Cassius Dio Diodorus Siculus Diogenes Laërtius Dionysius of Halicarnassus Dioscorides Eusebius of Caesaria Galen Herodian Josephus Julian Libanius Lucian Pausanias Philostratus Phlegon of Tralles Photius Plutarch Polyaenus Polybius Porphyrius Priscus Procopius Simplicius of Cilicia Sozomen Stephanus Byzantinus Strabo Themistius Theodoret Zonaras Zosimus Major cities Alexandria Antioch Aquileia Berytus Bononia Carthage Constantinopolis Eboracum Leptis Magna Londinium Lugdunum Lutetia Mediolanum Pompeii Ravenna Roma Smyrna Vindobona Volubilis Lists and other topics Cities and towns Climate Consuls Dictators Distinguished women Dynasties Emperors Empresses Fiction Film Generals Gentes Geographers Institutions Laws Legacy Legions Magistri equitum Nomina Pontifices maximi Praetors Quaestors Tribunes Roman–Iranian relations External wars and battles Civil wars and revolts v t e Germanic peoples Ethnolinguistic group of Northern European origin primarily identified as speakers of Germanic languages History Nordic Bronze Age Germania Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Romano-Germanic culture Germanic Iron Age Viking Age Early culture Architecture Art Calendar Clothing Family Festivals Folklore Proto-Germanic folklore Anglo-Saxon mythology Continental Germanic mythology Norse mythology ) Funerary practices Anglo-Saxon Norse Law Anglo-Saxon Norse Literature Anglo-Saxon Norse Names Gothic Numbers Paganism Anglo-Saxon Gothic Norse Rings Scripts Gothic alphabet Runes Sippe Symbology Warfare Anglo-Saxon Gothic and Vandal Viking Languages Germanic parent language Proto-Germanic language East Germanic languages North Germanic languages West Germanic languages Groups Alemanni Brisgavi Bucinobantes Lentienses Raetovari Adrabaecampi Angles Anglo-Saxons Ambrones Ampsivarii Angrivarii Armalausi Auiones Avarpi Baemi Baiuvarii Banochaemae Bastarnae Batavi Belgae Germani cisrhenani Atuatuci Caeroesi Condrusi Eburones Paemani Segni Morini Nervii Bateinoi Betasii Brondings Bructeri Burgundians Buri Cananefates Caritni Casuari Chaedini Chaemae Chamavi Chali Charudes Chasuarii Chattuarii Chatti Chauci Cherusci Cimbri Cobandi Corconti Cugerni Danes Dauciones Dulgubnii Favonae Firaesi Fosi Franks Ripuarian Franks Salian Franks Frisiavones Frisii Gambrivii Geats Gepids Goths Crimean Goths Greuthungi Gutones Ostrogoths Thervingi Thracian Goths Visigoths Gutes Harii Hermunduri Heruli Hilleviones Ingaevones Irminones Istvaeones Jutes Juthungi Lacringi Lemovii Lombards Heaðobards Lugii Diduni Helisii Helveconae Manimi Nahanarvali Marcomanni Marsacii Marsi Mattiaci Nemetes Njars Nuithones Osi Quadi Reudigni Rugii Rugini Saxons Semnones Sicambri Sciri Sitones Suarines Suebi Sunici Swedes Taifals Tencteri Teutons Thelir Thuringii Toxandri Treveri Triboci Tubantes Tulingi Tungri Ubii Usipetes Vagoth Vandals Hasdingi Silingi Vangiones Varisci Victohali Vidivarii Vinoviloth Warini Christianization Gothic Christianity Christianization of the Franks Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England Christianization of Scandinavia Christianization of Iceland Category v t e Cultural assimilation Africanisation Albanisation Americanisation immigrants names Native Americans Anglicisation Arabisation Armenians Berbers Blacks Jews Araucanisation Azerbaijanisation surnames Talysh Belarusisation soft Bengalisation placenames Bosniakisation Bulgarisation Canadianisation Celticisation Chilenisation Colombianisation Creolisation Croatisation Czechisation Dutchification Estonianisation Europeanisation Westernisation Finnicisation Francisation Brussels Gaelicisation Georgification Germanisation Hawaiianisation Hellenisation Hispanicisation or Castilianisation Filipinos Indianisation placenames Indigenisation Indonesation Israelisation names Italianisation Japanisation Japanification Javanisation Jewish assimilation Kazakhisation Koreanisation Kurdification Latvianization Lithuanisation Magyarisation or Hungarianisation Macedonianisation Malayisation Mexicanisation Mongolisation Montenegrinisation Norwegianisation Pakistanisation Pashtunisation Northern Afghanistan Persianisation societies Polonisation Romanianisation Romanisation or Latinisation names Russification Finland Saffronisation Sanskritisation Serbianisation Sinhalisation Sinicisation Manchus Tibet Vietnam Slavicisation Slovakisation Sovietisation Swahilisation Swedification Talibanisation Taiwanisation Tamilisation Thaification Turkification placenames surnames Turkmenisation Ukrainisation Uzbekisation Vietnamisation Westernisation Wolofisation Zairianisation Assimilation by religions Christianisation Hinduisation Islamisation Judaisation Assimilation by writings Cyrillisation Soviet Union Romanisation of the writings Soviet Union Opposite trends De-arabisation De-communisation De-stalinisation Dehellenization of Christianity De-nazification De-russification Korenizatsiia Latinisation Ukraine De-sinicisation Negation of the Diaspora Vergangenheitsbewältigung Related concepts Cultural genocide Cultural globalisation Cultural imperialism Dominant culture Forced assimilation Forced religious conversion Globalisation Identity politics Internal colonialism Jewish assimilation Language shift Melting pot Monoculturalism v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐66fbf767c9‐b4b8k
Cached time: 20250814120258
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.560 seconds
Real time usage: 0.734 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2110/1000000
Revision size: 17644/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 145366/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2346/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 74637/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.266/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6902787/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  480.681      1 -total
 25.75%  123.767      1 Template:Reflist
 22.45%  107.902      7 Template:Navbox
 19.49%   93.681      4 Template:Cite_book
 17.74%   85.278      1 Template:Ancient_Rome_topics
 13.64%   65.558      1 Template:Short_description
 10.24%   49.232      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.95%   33.401      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.77%   32.526      1 Template:Citation_needed
  5.84%   28.059      1 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3676364:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814120258 and revision id 1284561510. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Romanization_(cultural)&oldid=1284561510 " Categories : Society of ancient Rome Culture of ancient Rome Roman assimilation Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 This page was last edited on 8 April 2025, at 11:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Romanization (cultural) 31 languages Add topic

