Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pattern 2 Examples 3 See also 4 Bibliography 5 References Toggle the table of contents Post hoc ergo propter hoc 40 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Pälzisch Polski Português Română Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fallacy of assumption of causality based on sequence of events This article is about the informal fallacy. For the West Wing episode, see Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc (The West Wing) . For other uses, see Post hoc .

Post hoc ergo propter hoc ( Latin : 'after this, therefore because of this') is an informal fallacy that states "Since event Y followed event X, event Y must have been caused by event X." It is a fallacy in which an event is presumed to have been caused by a closely preceding event merely on the grounds of temporal succession. This type of reasoning is fallacious because mere temporal succession does not establish a causal connection. It is often shortened simply to post hoc fallacy . A logical fallacy of the questionable cause variety, it is subtly different from the fallacy cum hoc ergo propter hoc ('with this, therefore because of this'), in which two events occur simultaneously or the chronological ordering is insignificant or unknown. Post hoc is a logical fallacy in which one event seems to be the cause of a later event because it occurred earlier.

[ 1 ] Post hoc is a particularly tempting error because correlation sometimes appears to suggest causality . The fallacy lies in a conclusion based solely on the order of events, rather than taking into account other factors potentially responsible for the result that might rule out the connection.

[ 2 ] A simple example is "The rooster crows immediately before sunrise ; therefore the rooster causes the sun to rise." [ 3 ] Pattern [ edit ] The form of the post hoc fallacy is expressed as follows: A occurred, then B occurred.

Therefore, A caused B .

When B is undesirable, this pattern is often combined with the formal fallacy of denying the antecedent , assuming the logical inverse holds: believing that avoiding A will prevent B .

[ 4 ] Examples [ edit ] A tenant moves into an apartment and the building's furnace develops a fault. The manager blames the tenant's arrival for the malfunction. One event merely followed the other, in the absence of causality.

[ 5 ] Brazilian footballer Pelé blamed a dip in his playing performance on having given his playing shirt to a fan. His play recovered after a friend, sent to retrieve the shirt from the fan, returned a shirt claimed to be the original (though it was actually just the shirt Pelé had worn during his previous poor performance, as the original could not be tracked down).

[ 6 ] Reporting of coincidental vaccine adverse events , where people have a health complaint after being vaccinated and assume it was caused by the vaccination.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Apophenia – Tendency to perceive connections between unrelated things Affirming the consequent – Type of fallacious argument (logical fallacy) Association fallacy – Formal fallacy Cargo cult – New religious movement Causal inference – Branch of statistics concerned with inferring causal relationships between variables Coincidence – Concurrence of events with no connection Confirmation bias – Bias confirming existing attitudes Correlation does not imply causation – Refutation of a logical fallacy Jumping to conclusions – Psychological term Magical thinking – Belief in the connection of unrelated events Superstition – Belief or behavior that is considered irrational or supernatural Survivorship bias – Logical error, form of selection bias Surrogate endpoint – Biomarker proxy outcome measure Temporality – Concept in philosophy Texas sharpshooter fallacy Bibliography [ edit ] Woods, J. H., Walton, D. N. (1977). Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc.

Mommsen, J. K. F. (2013). Wider Das Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc - Primary Source Edition. United States: BiblioLife.

Woods, J., Walton, D. (2019). Fallacies: Selected Papers 1972–1982. Germany: De Gruyter.

References [ edit ] ^ Grouse, Lawrence (2016).

"Post hoc ergo propter hoc" .

Journal of Thoracic Disease .

8 (7): E511 – E512 .

doi : 10.21037/jtd.2016.04.49 .

ISSN 2072-1439 .

PMC 4958779 .

PMID 27499984 .

^ "post hoc" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 2021-08-28 .

^ "Correlation vs Causation" .

KnowledgeSpace . 2015-10-09 . Retrieved 2021-08-28 .

^ Summers, Jesse S. (24 March 2017).

"Post hoc ergo propter hoc : some benefits of rationalization" .

Philosophical Explorations .

20 (sup1): 21– 36.

doi : 10.1080/13869795.2017.1287292 .

S2CID 151401300 .

^ Damer, T Edward (1995).

Attacking Faulty Reasoning: A Practical Guide to Fallacy-Free Arguments (3rd ed.).

Belmont, CA : Wadsworth Publishing. p. 131.

ISBN 978-0-534-21750-1 .

OCLC 30319422 .

^ Macaskill, Sandy (2009-02-25).

"Top 10: Football superstitions to rival Arsenal's Kolo Toure" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 2010-08-26.

^ Manktelow, K. I. (2012).

Thinking and Reasoning: An Introduction to the Psychology of Reason, Judgment and Decision Making . Psychology Press. p. 119.

ISBN 9781841697413 .

v t e Common fallacies ( list ) Formal In propositional logic Affirming a disjunct Affirming the consequent Denying the antecedent Argument from fallacy Masked man Mathematical fallacy In quantificational logic Existential Illicit conversion Proof by example Quantifier shift Syllogistic fallacy Affirmative conclusion from a negative premise Negative conclusion from affirmative premises Exclusive premises Existential Necessity Four terms Illicit major Illicit minor Undistributed middle Informal Equivocation Equivocation False equivalence False attribution Moral equivalence Quoting out of context Loki's Wager No true Scotsman Reification Map–territory relation Question-begging Circular reasoning / Begging the question Loaded language Leading question Compound question / Loaded question / Complex question No true Scotsman Correlative-based False dilemma Perfect solution Denying the correlative Suppressed correlative Illicit transference Composition Division Ecological Secundum quid Accident Converse accident Faulty generalization Anecdotal evidence Sampling bias Cherry picking McNamara Base rate / Conjunction Double counting False analogy Slothful induction Overwhelming exception Ambiguity Accent False precision Moving the goalposts Quoting out of context Slippery slope Sorites paradox Syntactic ambiguity Questionable cause Animistic Furtive Correlation implies causation Cum hoc Post hoc Gambler's Inverse Regression Single cause Slippery slope Texas sharpshooter Appeals Law/Legality Stone / Proof by assertion Consequences Argumentum ad baculum Wishful thinking Emotion Children Fear Flattery Novelty Pity Ridicule In-group favoritism Invented here / Not invented here Island mentality Loyalty Parade of horribles Spite Stirring symbols Wisdom of repugnance Genetic fallacy Ad hominem Appeal to motive Association Reductio ad Hitlerum Reductio ad Stalinum Bulverism Poisoning the well Tone Tu quoque Whataboutism Authority Accomplishment Ipse dixit Poverty / Wealth Etymology Nature Tradition / Novelty Chronological snobbery Other fallacies of relevance Arguments Ad nauseam Sealioning Argument from anecdote Argument from silence Argument to moderation Argumentum ad populum Cliché The Four Great Errors I'm entitled to my opinion Ignoratio elenchi Invincible ignorance Moralistic / Naturalistic Motte-and-bailey fallacy Psychologist's fallacy Rationalization Red herring Two wrongs make a right Special pleading Straw man Category v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Post_hoc_ergo_propter_hoc&oldid=1286721866 " Categories : Causal fallacies Latin logical phrases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Post hoc ergo propter hoc 40 languages Add topic

