Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Early career 2.2 Focus on the Family 2.3 Ted Bundy interview 2.4 Shift to political activity 2.5 Dr. James Dobson Family Institute 3 Personal life 4 Awards 5 Social views Toggle Social views subsection 5.1 Views on marriage 5.2 Views on schooling 5.3 Views on discipline of children 5.4 Views on tolerance and diversity 5.5 Views on homosexuality 5.6 Views on mass shootings 5.7 Views on abortion 5.8 Views on gender 5.8.1 Gendered language in the Bible 6 Political and social influence Toggle Political and social influence subsection 6.1 Social influence 6.2 Political influence 7 Ecumenical relations 8 Criticism 9 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 9.1 Books as sole author 9.2 Books with others 9.3 Notable articles and reports 10 See also 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Notes 11.2 Citations 11.3 Bibliography 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents James Dobson 13 languages Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Português Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Evangelical Christian psychologist, author, and radio broadcaster For other people named James Dobson, see James Dobson (disambiguation) .

James Dobson Personal life Born James Clayton Dobson Jr.

( 1936-04-21 ) April 21, 1936 (age 89) Shreveport, Louisiana , U.S.

Spouse Shirley Deere ​ ( m.

1960) ​ Children 2 Notable work(s) Marriage Under Fire Dare to Discipline The Strong-Willed Child Education Point Loma Nazarene University ( BA ) University of Southern California ( MA , PhD ) Occupation Psychologist Author Radio Broadcaster Religious life Religion Evangelical Christian Founder of Family Research Council Focus on the Family Family Policy Alliance Website Official website James Clayton Dobson Jr.

[ a ] (born April 21, 1936) is an American evangelical Christian author, psychologist , and founder of Focus on the Family (FotF), which he led from 1977 until 2010. In the 1980s, he was ranked as one of the most influential spokesmen for conservative social positions in American public life.

[ 1 ] Although never an ordained minister , he was called "the nation's most influential evangelical leader" by The New York Times while Slate portrayed him as a successor to evangelical leaders Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] As part of his former role in the organization he produced the daily radio program Focus on the Family , which the organization has said was broadcast in more than a dozen languages and on over 7,000 stations worldwide, and reportedly heard daily by more than 220 million people in 164 countries.

Focus on the Family was also carried by about 60 U.S. television stations daily.

[ 5 ] In 2010, he launched the radio broadcast Family Talk with Dr. James Dobson .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Dobson advocates for " family values "—the instruction of children in heterosexuality and traditional gender roles , which he believes are mandated by the Christian Bible . The goal of this is to promote heterosexual marriage, which he views as a cornerstone of civilization that must be protected from the dangers of feminism and the LGBT rights movement. Dobson seeks to equip his audience to fight in the American culture war , which he calls the "Civil War of Values".

His writing career started as an assistant to Paul Popenoe . After Dobson's rise to prominence through promoting corporal punishment of disobedient children in the 1970s, he became a founder of purity culture in the 1990s. He has promoted his ideas via his various Focus on the Family affiliated organizations, the Family Research Council which he founded in 1981, Family Policy Alliance which he founded in 2004, the Dr. James Dobson Family Institute which he founded in 2010, and a network of US state-based lobbying organizations called Family Policy Councils .

Early life and education James Dobson was born to Myrtle Georgia (née Dillingham) and James C. Dobson Sr. on April 21, 1936, in Shreveport, Louisiana .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] From his earliest childhood, religion played a central part in his life. He once told a reporter that he learned to pray before he learned to talk, and says he gave his life to Jesus at the age of three, in response to an altar call by his father.

[ 10 ] He is the son, grandson, and great-grandson of Church of the Nazarene ministers.

[ 11 ] His parents were traveling evangelists; as a child, Dobson often stayed with family members while his parents were out traveling.

[ 12 ] Like most Nazarenes, they forbade dancing and going to movies. Young Jimmie Lee, as he was called, concentrated on his studies.

[ 13 ] As a teenager, he was rebellious, though he eventually found a close relationship with his father.

[ 12 ] Dobson's mother was intolerant of "sassiness" and would strike her child with whatever object came to hand, including a shoe or belt; she once gave Dobson a "massive blow" with a girdle outfitted with straps and buckles.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Dobson studied academic psychology and came to believe that he was being called to become a Christian counselor or perhaps a Christian psychologist.

[ 10 ] He attended Pasadena College (now Point Loma Nazarene University ) as an undergraduate, where he met his wife, Shirley, and served as captain of the school's tennis team. Dobson graduated in 1958, served in the National Guard for six months, and began working at Children's Hospital of Los Angeles.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] In 1967, Dobson received his doctorate in psychology from the University of Southern California .

[ 19 ] Career Early career In 1967, he became an Associate Clinical Professor of Pediatrics at the University of Southern California School of Medicine for 14 years.

[ 19 ] At USC he was exposed to troubled youth and the counterculture of the 1960s . He found it "a distressing time to be so young" because society offered him no moral absolutes he felt he could rely upon.

Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War was blossoming into a widespread rejection of authority, which Dobson viewed as "a sudden disintegration of moral and ethical principles" among Americans his age and the younger people he saw in clinical practice. This convinced him that "the institution of the family was disintegrating." [ 20 ] Based on these experiences, in 1970 Dobson published Dare to Discipline . The book encouraged parents to assert their authority over their children, particularly by corporal punishment. Dobson saw children as rebellious and inherently sinful and believed a rejection of authority to be the source of societal problems.

[ 12 ] He wrote that "Respect for leadership is the glue that holds social organization together. Without it there is chaos, violence, and insecurity for everyone." [ 21 ] He spent 17 years on the staff of the Children's Hospital of Los Angeles in the Division of Child Development and Medical Genetics. For a time, Dobson worked as an assistant to Paul Popenoe and counselor at Popenoe's Institute of Family Relations, a marriage-counseling center, in Los Angeles .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Popenoe counseled couples on the importance of same-race marriage and adherence to gender norms for the purpose of eugenics . Under Popenoe, Dobson published about male-female differences and the dangers of feminism.

[ 24 ] When the American Psychological Association de-pathologized homosexuality by removing it from their list of mental disorders in 1973, Dobson resigned from the organization in protest.

[ 25 ] In 1976, he took a sabbatical from USC and Children's Hospital; he never returned.

With funding from a Christian publisher, he began to broadcast his ideas on the radio and in public lectures. Saying that he feared to repeat the mistakes of his own absentee father by being away on the lecture circuit, Dobson video recorded and distributed his lectures. He sent a representative around the country to solicit funding from evangelical businessmen and distribute the videos. A video about absent fathers titled Where's Dad?

had 100 million views by the early 1980s.

[ 26 ] Focus on the Family In 1977, he founded Focus on the Family .

[ 27 ] He grew the organization into a multimedia empire by the mid-1990s, including 10 radio programs, 11 magazines, numerous videos, and basketball camps, and program of faxing suggested sermon topics and bulletin fillers to thousands of churches every week.

[ 28 ] In 1995, the organization's budget was more than $100 million annually.

[ 29 ] Jimmy Carter organized a White House Conference on Families in 1979–1980 that explicitly included a "diversity of families" with various structures.

[ 30 ] Dobson objected to this, believing that only his preferred notion of the traditional family — one headed by a male breadwinner married to a female caregiver — should be endorsed by the conference. He also objected to the fact that he was not invited to the planning for the event. At Dobson's urging, his listeners wrote 80,000 letters to the White House asking for Dobson to be invited, which he eventually was. This demonstrated to Dobson his power to rally his followers for political ends.

[ 31 ] Beginning in 1980, Dobson built networks of political activists and founded lobbying organizations that advocated against LGBT rights and opposed legal abortion, among other socially conservative policy goals. He nurtured relationships with conservative politicians, such as Ronald Reagan . He was among the founders of Family Research Council in 1981, a federal lobbying organization classified as a hate group, and Family Policy Councils that lobby at the level of state government. When Focus on the Family moved to Colorado Springs in 1991, the city started to be called "the Vatican of the Religious Right " with Dobson imagined as an evangelical pope.

[ 32 ] Focus on the Family established an ex-gay program called Love Won Out in 1998. The program promoted conversion therapy , the pseudoscientific practice of attempting to make gay people straight. Dobson increased his promotion of Love Won Out in 2000 upon discovering that opposition to gay marriage was helping the Christian Right gain members and voters.

[ 33 ] State-level affiliates of FotF drafted gay marriage bans in several states, starting with Nebraska Initiative 416 in 2000.

[ 34 ] Dobson broadcast that gay marriage was turning children from faithful Christian homes against God. His arguments caused large evangelical turnouts in support of the gay marriage prohibitions, resulting in defense of marriage amendments to thirty U.S. state constitutions.

[ 35 ] Dobson stepped down as president and CEO of Focus on the Family in 2003, and resigned from the position of chairman of the board in February 2009.

[ 36 ] Dobson explained his departure as twofold: firstly, to allow a smooth transfer of leadership to the next generation, and in this case, to Jim Daly whom he directly appointed as his replacement. And secondly, because he and Daly had divergent views on policy, "especially when it comes to confronting those who would weaken the family and undermine our faith." [ 37 ] After he stepped down, Focus on the Family hired an orthodoxy expert to maintain Dobson's message.

[ 38 ] Free to become more explicitly political without imperiling Focus on the Family's tax exemptions, Dobson rededicated himself primarily to lobbying instead of advice to families. While Daly attempted to appeal to a new generation of evangelicals with softened messages on abortion and homosexuality, Dobson remained hard-line. Focus on the Family removed archives of Dobson's writing from their headquarters and website.

[ 39 ] Ted Bundy interview Dobson interviewed serial killer Ted Bundy on-camera the day before Bundy's execution on January 24, 1989. The interview became controversial because Bundy was given an opportunity to attempt to explain his actions (the rape and murder of 30 young women). Bundy claimed in the interview (in a reversal of his previous stance) that violent pornography played a significant role in molding and crystallizing his fantasies. In May 1989, during an interview with John Tanner, a Republican Florida prosecutor, Dobson called for Bundy to be forgiven. The Bundy tapes gave Focus on the Family revenues of over $1 million, $600,000 of which it donated to anti-pornography groups and to anti-abortion groups.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Shift to political activity In 2004, Dobson founded Family Policy Alliance , a lobbying arm of his media empire. With a more permissive tax status than Focus on the Family, it is allowed to directly fundraise for political campaigns.

[ 42 ] The Alliance also coordinates the action of Dobson's network of state-based Family Policy Councils. Together, these organizations seek to encode traditional gender roles into public policy and law.

[ 43 ] They consider LGBT rights to be a threatening " LGBT agenda ." [ 44 ] Throughout its existence, Dobson has attacked the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), a US government program to fight AIDS worldwide. In 2006, he claimed that "80 percent of this money is going toward terrible programs that are immoral as well as ineffective. For example, to promote condom distribution, people associated with these government programs have dressed up like condoms and created ceramic sculptures of male genitalia." [ 45 ] He renewed his attack in 2023, falsely claiming that PEPFAR funds abortions.

[ 46 ] Focus on the Family received a grant of $49,505 through PEPFAR in 2017 to operate an abstinence-only purity pledge program.

[ 47 ] Dr. James Dobson Family Institute In 2010, Dobson founded the Dr. James Dobson Family Institute, [ 48 ] a non-profit organization that produces his radio program, Dr. James Dobson's Family Talk . On this program, he speaks about his views, such as attributing mass shootings to "the LGBTQ movement" destroying the family.

[ 49 ] He stepped away from leadership of the Dr. James Dobson Family Institute in 2022, naming Joe Waresak the new president. He continues to broadcast his radio show.

[ 50 ] Dobson frequently appears as a guest on the Fox News Channel .

[ 51 ] Personal life Dobson married Shirley Deere on August 26, 1960. The couple have two children, Danae and Ryan.

[ 52 ] Dobson turned control of some of Focus on the Family's youth-oriented magazine titles over to his son Ryan Dobson in 2009.

[ 53 ] Danae Dobson received a golden key necklace as a gift from her father when she voiced her commitment to sexual purity at age ten. James Dobson encouraged other parents to give similar gifts.

[ 54 ] Awards At the invitation of Presidents and Attorneys General, [ 55 ] Dobson has also served on government advisory panels and testified at several government hearings. He was given the "Layman of the Year" award by the National Association of Evangelicals in 1982, "The Children's Friend" honor by Childhelp USA (an advocate agency against child abuse ) in 1987, and the Humanitarian Award by the California Psychological Association in 1988. In 2005, Dobson received an honorary doctorate (his 16th) [ citation needed ] from Indiana Wesleyan University and was inducted into IWU's Society of World Changers , while speaking at the university's Academic Convocation.

[ 56 ] [ 5 ] In 2008, Dobson's Focus on the Family program was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame to controversy from secular listeners opposed to Dobson's views, along with those supporting LGBTQ rights.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Social views This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Views on marriage James Dobson is a strong proponent of marriage defined as "one where husband and wife are lawfully married, are committed to each other for life," and have a homemaker mother and breadwinner father.

[ 63 ] According to his view, women are not deemed inferior to men because both are created in God's image, but each gender has biblically mandated roles.

[ 64 ] [ non-primary source needed ] He recommends that married women with children under the age of 18 focus on mothering, rather than work outside the home.

[ 65 ] Dobson views marriage as a transaction in which women exchange sex for protection: [ 66 ] The natural sex appeal of girls serves as their primary source of bargaining power in the game of life. In exchange for feminine affection and love, a man accepts a girl as his lifetime responsibility-supplying her needs and caring for her welfare. This sexual aspect of the marital agreement can hardly be denied.

[ 66 ] — James Dobson, Dare to Discipline (1970) He advises wives to use their social and sexual skills to coerce their husbands into becoming good partners. By doing this, according to Dobson, women will transform male lust into love, and male destructive impulses into useful accomplishments. Hence heterosexual marriage is the cornerstone of civilization, in Dobson's view, when women fulfill their role of civilizing their husbands.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] In his 2004 book Marriage Under Fire , Dobson suggests that heterosexual marriage rates in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden have been falling, and that this is due to the recognition of same-sex relationships by those countries during the 1990s. He remarks that the "institution of marriage in those countries is rapidly dying" as a result, with most young people cohabiting or choosing to remain single (living alone) and illegitimacy rates rising in some Norwegian counties up to 80%.

[ 68 ] Dobson writes that "every civilization in the world" has been built upon marriage.

[ 69 ] He also believes that homosexuality is neither a choice nor genetic, but is caused by external factors during early childhood.

[ 70 ] He anecdotally cites as evidence the life of actress Anne Heche , [ 71 ] [ 72 ] who was previously in a relationship with Ellen DeGeneres . Criticizing "the realities of judicial tyranny", Dobson has written that "[t]here is no issue today that is more significant to our culture than the defense of the family. Not even the war on terror eclipses it." [ 73 ] Views on schooling Focus on the Family supports [ 74 ] private school vouchers and tax credits for religious schools. According to the Focus on the Family website, Dobson believes that parents are ultimately responsible for their children's education, and encourages parents to visit their children's schools to ask questions and to join the PTA so that they may voice their opinions.

[ 75 ] Dobson opposes sex education curricula that are not abstinence -only.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] According to People for the American Way , Focus on the Family material has been used to challenge a book or curriculum taught in public schools.

[ 55 ] Critics, such as People for the American Way, allege that Focus on the Family encourages Christian teachers to establish prayer groups in public schools.

[ 55 ] [ 78 ] Dobson supports student-led prayer in public schools , [ 55 ] and believes that allowing student-led Christian prayer in schools does not violate the First Amendment to the United States Constitution .

[ 79 ] Views on discipline of children In his book Dare to Discipline , Dobson advocates the spanking of children as young as fifteen months and up to eight years old when they misbehave, using switches or belts kept on the child's dresser as a reminder of authority.

[ 80 ] In Dobson's opinion, parents must uphold their authority and do so consistently: "When you are defiantly challenged, win decisively." [ 81 ] Dobson says corporal punishment should end with the child asking for forgiveness and receiving a hug.

[ 82 ] After a spanking is a good time to have a "heart to heart" talk with a child, according to Dobson: "After the emotional ventilation, the child will often want to crumple at the breast of his parent" which provides an opportunity to re-bond and express love to the child.

[ 83 ] Though Dare to Discipline was not overtly political, Dobson considered his parenting techniques to be the solution to the social unrest of the 1960s. The book was a rebuttal to Benjamin Spock , whose parenting ideas were more permissive.

[ 80 ] [ 84 ] By returning to the authoritarian parenting style popular in prior eras, Dobson hoped to preserve order, obedience, and social hierarchy. The book quickly sold over two million copies, establishing Dobson as a trusted authority among parents bewildered by the rapid changes of the era.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 24 ] In The Strong-Willed Child , Dobson draws an analogy between the defiance of a family pet and that of a small child, and concludes that "just as surely as a dog will occasionally challenge the authority of his leaders, so will a little child—only more so." [ 87 ] The Strong-Willed Child says that if authority is portrayed correctly to a child, the child will understand how to interact with other authority figures: By learning to yield to the loving authority ... of his parents, a child learns to submit to other forms of authority which will confront him later in his life—his teachers, school principal, police, neighbors and employers.

[ 88 ] If allowed to challenge parental authority, Dobson says, children would challenge God's authority when they grew older. Hence, rebellion must be punished to protect the child's salvation . Believing that "pain is a marvelous purifier" Dobson recommended corporal punishment as the most effective way to keep the child subordinate to adults. The parent should model both divine mercy and wrath to prepare the inherently sinful child for a relationship with God.

[ 89 ] Dobson warned of the dire consequences of failing to discipline one's children: " Eli, the priest , permitted his sons to desecrate the temple. All three were put to death." [ 90 ] He warns against "harsh spanking" because "It is not necessary to beat the child into submission; a little bit of pain goes a long way for a young child. However, the spanking should be of sufficient magnitude to cause the child to cry genuinely." [ 81 ] In a 1997 book, he warns that "discipline must not be harsh and destructive to the child's spirit." [ 91 ] Dobson considers disciplining children to be a necessary but unpleasant part of raising children that should only be carried out by qualified parents: Anyone who has ever abused a child—or has ever felt himself losing control during a spanking—should not expose the child to that tragedy. Anyone who has a violent temper that at times becomes unmanageable should not use that approach. Anyone who secretly 'enjoys' the administration of corporal punishment should not be the one to implement it.

[ 92 ] When asked "How long do you think a child should be allowed to cry after being punished? Is there a limit?" Dobson responded: Yes, I believe there should be a limit. As long as the tears represent a genuine release of emotion, they should be permitted to fall. But crying quickly changes from inner sobbing to an expression of protest ... Real crying usually lasts two minutes or less but may continue for five. After that point, the child is merely complaining, and the change can be recognized in the tone and intensity of his voice. I would require him to stop the protest crying, usually by offering him a little more of whatever caused the original tears. In younger children, crying can easily be stopped by getting them interested in something else.

[ 93 ] Sociologists John Bartkowski and Christopher Ellison have stated that Dobson's views "diverge sharply from those recommended by contemporary mainstream experts" and are not based on any sort of empirical testing , but rather are nothing more than expressions of his religious doctrines of " biblical literalism and 'authority-mindedness.

' " [ 94 ] In the 1980s Penelope Leach wrote that Dobson's approach is ineffective because, rather than establishing parental authority, spanking only communicates parental frustration and weakness.

[ 95 ] Although childrearing experts have discredited corporal punishment, Dobson has not moderated his view. In 2015 he wrote that, when spanking fails to make a child obey, the problem may be that the parent is not hitting hard enough or frequently enough.

[ 96 ] Views on tolerance and diversity In the winter of 2004–2005, the We Are Family Foundation sent American elementary schools approximately 60,000 copies of a free DVD using popular cartoon characters (especially SpongeBob SquarePants ) to "promote tolerance and diversity." [ 97 ] Dobson contended that tolerance and diversity are "buzzwords" that the We Are Family Foundation misused as part of a "hidden agenda" to promote homosexuality .

[ 98 ] Kate Zernik noted Dobson asserting: "tolerance and its first cousin, diversity, 'are almost always buzzwords for homosexual advocacy.

' " [ 99 ] He stated on the Focus on the Family website that "childhood symbols are apparently being hijacked to promote an agenda that involves teaching homosexual propaganda to children." [ 100 ] He offered as evidence the association of many leading LGBT rights organizations, including GLAAD , GLSEN , HRC , and PFLAG , with the We Are Family Foundation as shown by links which he claims once existed on their website.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] The We Are Family Foundation countered that Dobson had mistaken their organization with "an unrelated Web site belonging to another group called 'We Are Family,' which supports gay youth." [ 103 ] Dobson countered: I want to be clear: the We Are Family Foundation—the organization that sponsored the video featuring SpongeBob and the other characters was, until this flap occurred, making available a variety of explicitly pro-homosexual materials on its Web site. It has since endeavored to hide that fact, but my concerns are as legitimate today as they were when I first expressed them in January.

[ 101 ] In September 2005, Tolerance.org published a follow-up message advertising the DVD's continued availability, including We Are Family Foundation president Nancy Hunt's speculation that many of the DVDs may be "still sitting in boxes, unused, because of Dobson's vitriolic attack." [ 98 ] Views on homosexuality In Dobson's view, homosexuality results from influences in a child's environment rather than an inborn trait . He states that homosexual behavior, specifically "unwanted same-sex attraction", has been and can be " overcome " through understanding developmental models for homosexuality and choosing to heal the complex developmental issues which led to same-sex attraction.

[ 72 ] Focus on the Family ministry sponsors [ 74 ] the monthly conference Love Won Out , where participants hear "powerful stories of ex-gay men and women." [ 70 ] Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays (P-FLAG) has protested against the conference in Orlando, questioning both its methodology and supposed success.

[ 104 ] In regards to the conference, Dobson has stated that "Gay activists come with preconceived notions about who we are and what we believe and about the hate that boils from within, which is simply not true. Regardless of what the media might say, Focus on the Family has no interest in promoting hatred toward homosexuals or anyone else. We also don't wish to deprive them of their basic constitutional rights ... The Constitution applies to all of us." [ 105 ] Dobson strongly opposes the movement to legitimize same-sex relationships.

[ citation needed ] In his book Bringing Up Boys , Dobson states, "[T]he disorder is not typically 'chosen.' Homosexuals deeply resent being told that they selected this same-sex inclination in pursuit of sexual excitement or some other motive. It is unfair, and I don't blame them for being irritated by that assumption. Who among us would knowingly choose a path that would result in alienation from family, rejection by friends, disdain from the heterosexual world, exposure to sexually transmitted diseases such as AIDS and tuberculosis, and even a shorter lifespan?" [ 106 ] Critics have stated that Dobson's views on homosexuality do not represent the mainstream views of the mental health community, with Dan Gilgoff referring to the positions of the American Psychiatric Association and the American Psychological Association on homosexuality.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] Sociologist Judith Stacey criticized Dobson for claiming that sociological studies show that gay couples do not make good parents. She stated that Dobson's claim "is a direct misrepresentation of my research." [ 109 ] In response to Dobson's claim that "there have been more than ten thousand studies that have showed that children do best when they are raised with a mother and a father who are committed to each other," [ citation needed ] Stacey replied that "[a]ll of those studies that Dobson is referring to are studies that did not include gay or lesbian parents as part of the research base." [ This quote needs a citation ] Dobson objected to a bill expanding the prohibition of sexual orientation -based discrimination in the areas of "public accommodation, housing practices, family planning services and twenty other areas." He said that, were such a bill passed, public businesses could no longer separate locker rooms and bathrooms by gender, which he claimed would lead to a situation where "every woman and little girl will have to fear that a predator , bisexual , cross-dresser or even a homosexual or heterosexual male might walk in and relieve himself in their presence." [ 110 ] [ 111 ] In 2017, Dobson was among the first to sign the Nashville Statement , written by the Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood .

[ 112 ] The statement specifies conservative evangelical views on gender roles and sexuality, condemning LGBT-affirming Christians : "We affirm that it is sinful to approve of homosexual immorality or transgenderism and that such approval constitutes an essential departure from Christian faithfulness and witness." [ 113 ] Views on mass shootings In 2012, in a broadcast titled "A Nation Shaken by the Sandy Hook Tragedy ", Dobson said that the mass shooting was a judgement by God because of American acceptance of gay marriage and legal abortion.

[ 114 ] Similarly, Dobson said the 2019 El Paso shooting and mass shootings in general happen because "the LGBTQ movement is closing in on the God-inspired and established institution of the family." [ 49 ] Views on abortion Early in his career, Dobson appeared to accept abortion. He wrote a forward for a 1973 book, Sex is a Parent Affair , that takes a nonjudgemental stance toward abortion because "the Bible is silent on the subject" except for some interpretations of Exodus 21:22–23 which "may indicate a developing embryo or fetus was not regarded as a full human being." In general, the evangelical movement did not speak much about abortion until the 1980s.

[ 115 ] Starting in the 1980s, Dobson became an implacable enemy of legal abortion, and a major force in the anti-abortion movement .

[ 116 ] His message centered upon biblically moral mothers who sacrificed for their children; he chastised unmarried mothers or rebellious teenagers who selfishly treated unwanted pregnancy as an inconvenience rather than a sacred duty. He broadcast interviews with women who kept pregnancies because their trust in God overcame their own emotions and desires.

[ 117 ] For example, he published a story celebrating Jane Stillson, who chose to finish a pregnancy even though it prevented her from completing her treatment for cancer, thus risking her life.

[ 118 ] Dobson contends that abortion invites women to reject God, diverts women from their natural role as mothers, and prevents more Christians from coming into the world. Ending abortion, in his view, would redeem society by binding women to their divine role.

[ 119 ] Focus on the Family and its allied lobbying organizations are among the US's most powerful advocates for restrictions on abortion access.

Views on gender Dobson views the gender binary as fundamental to humanity; he believes God created men and women to differ "in every cell of their bodies." [ 120 ] These complementary differences make them well-suited to traditional gender roles .

[ 121 ] "Males and females differ biochemically, anatomically, and emotionally", according to Dobson. Men like to "hunt and fish and hike in the wilderness" while women prefer to "stay at home and wait for them." Because men have a fragile ego and women are emotionally vulnerable, "men derive self-esteem by being respected; women feel worthy when they are loved." Men and women are obligated to adhere to the "time-honored roles of protector and protected." [ 122 ] The effects of hormonal differences, he argues, make women more suited for the home.

[ 123 ] Though created for traditional gender roles, people are not born following these roles. The roles must be taught, Dobson says, and must be defended from anyone who questions them.  Dobson argues that confused gender relationships in a household result in homosexuality if a child displaces their sexual feelings onto the same-sex parent. Hence, parents should model a romance-like relationship with their opposite-sex child, according to Dobson, with the ultimate goal of steering the child toward heterosexual marriage as an adult.

[ 121 ] Dobson encourages "daddy–daughter dating" in which fathers and daughters set aside time for special activities together. Because he believes heterosexuality must be cultivated, Dobson intended these romanticized attachments to model proper heterosexual partnership to girls age six or younger.

[ 124 ] An employee of Dobson's created the first purity ball — a father-daughter dance event promoting female chastity — in 1998. Dobson promoted the purity balls on his radio show.

[ 125 ] Along with other fundamentalist figures such as Billy Graham , Dobson is considered a founder of purity culture , a Christian subculture in which sexual immorality by women or LGBT people is considered a national threat.

[ 126 ] Dobson considers transgender people a threat, writing in 2016 that "a married man with any gumption" would defend his wife's privacy in the bathroom from "a strange-looking man, dressed like a woman." He seemed to romanticize a time in the past in when men were masculine enough to shoot trans women.

[ 127 ] He also considers feminists a threat because they question the natural leadership of men. In his 1975 book What Wives Wish Their Husbands Knew About Women he denounces the "feminist propaganda" of strong female characters in movies, complaining when men are shown as inferior to a "confident superchick." [ 128 ] [ 129 ] This is dangerous, he says, because the true role of women is to harness the superior energy of men.

[ 130 ] Gendered language in the Bible In response to a 1997 article in World magazine claiming that the New International Version of the Bible was going to be printed with gender-neutral language , Dobson called a meeting at Focus on the Family headquarters of influential men in the religious publishing business. The group drafted the Colorado Springs Guidelines , which require Bible translations to use male-default language such as the word man to designate the human race.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ unreliable source?

] As a result, plans for the gender-neutral Bible version were halted. When Dobson discovered his own Odyssey Bible used gender-neutral language, he discontinued it and offered refunds.

[ 132 ] According to World , Dobson's 1997 meeting eventually led to the publication of the English Standard Version in 2001, which avoids gender-neutral language.

[ citation needed ] Along with over a hundred other evangelical figures, in 2002 Dobson opposed publication of Today's New International Version because of the " political correctness " of the translation and the publisher's rejection of the Colorado Springs Guidelines.

[ 134 ] [ 133 ] Political and social influence Dobson's social and political opinions are widely read among many evangelical church congregations in the United States; he is also highly influential within the United States Republican Party .

[ 135 ] Among other conservative causes, his lobbying contributed significantly to banning same-sex marriage across many US states.

[ 136 ] Social influence Dobson's books on corporal punishment helped to legitimize the practice, providing it with theological grounding for Christian readers. When opposition to physical discipline became widespread in the 1980s and 1990s in American society, conservative Protestants emerged as perhaps the most ardent remaining supporters of corporal punishment. This support was bolstered by "authority-centered" parenting techniques advised in Dobson's books.

[ 14 ] Dobson frequently cautions parents to use corporal punishment only in a limited and empathetic way. Theologian Donald Eric Capps and psychologist Adah Maurer argued in the 1990s that, in practice, parents frequently use indiscriminate violence against children. They argue Dobson's work provides parents with self-serving theological rationalizations for their violent outbursts. Capps and Maurer conclude that the popularity of corporal punishment in this era damaged children in ways that may last into adulthood.

[ 14 ] Throughout his career at Focus on the Family, Dobson argued for gender role instruction. He believed that gender and sexuality were not fixed from birth, but required careful cultivation. He sought to provide boys with outlets for their natural aggression, and to teach girls how to develop romantic partnerships, which they use to channel and refine male destructive impulses into civilized behavior. Thus the feminist and LGBT rights movements, because they seek to disturb gender roles, are a threat not only to family harmony but to national strength.

[ 137 ] To preserve pious gender roles, Dobson distributed Christian-targeted psychological advice. His daily radio program Focus on the Family was (according to his organization) broadcast in more than a dozen languages and on over 7,000 stations worldwide, and reportedly heard daily by more than 220 million people in 164 countries.

[ 5 ] [ 55 ] During the 1960s and 1970s effort to legalize abortion, journalism often reported the plight of women in need of abortion, such as Sherri Finkbine . Dobson, together with Francis Schaeffer and others, shifted the public conversation away from the suffering of women, toward the suffering of the fetus and the selfishness of women who seek abortion.

[ 116 ] Through his books and broadcasts, Dobson sought to prepare parents to fight in the American culture wars , a conflict in which Dobson described that "parents of faith are at war with culture" [ 138 ] and which he has labeled a "Civil War of Values".

[ 139 ] Dobson has wielded significant influence over parents and politically conservative Christians, and, in the 1990s, a reportedly significant segment of this dedicated following were women who worked inside the home.

[ 138 ] Around two thousand radio stations aired Dobson's program to an audience of six to ten million by the early 2000s. With over two million addresses on his mailing list, his organization launched a publishing house.

Richard Land called him "the most influential evangelical leader in America" at that time, saying his influence was comparable to Billy Graham in the 1960s and 1970s.

[ 140 ] He is a founder of purity culture , a nationwide chastity movement through which he significantly shaped American attitudes about sex and gender, [ 141 ] and Alliance Defending Freedom .

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] Dobson is a member of the Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood . He is a supporter of the evangelical men's parachurch organization Promise Keepers and was a contributor to their 1994 book The Seven Promises of a Promise Keeper .

[ 66 ] Political influence Dobson at the Values Voters conference in Washington, D.C.

, 2007 Dobson has chosen to exercise political influence behind the scenes, as "political fixer." [ 144 ] This helps him to maintain his credibility with his audience. He has never run for office or acted as the public head of a primarily political organization.

[ 145 ] Starting in 1980, Dobson began to build a network of conservative activists.

[ 32 ] In 1981, he founded the Family Research Council as a political arm through which " social conservative causes" could achieve greater political influence.

[ 146 ] Dobson was appointed by U.S. President Ronald Reagan to the National Advisory Committee on Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention in 1982, where he served for two years.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Through the 1980s, he coordinated the creation of Family Policy Councils in most US states, lobbying organizations that act on the level of state politics.

[ 149 ] By the 1990s, Dobson had amassed a sizeable network of conservative politicians, many of whom he met with regularly.

[ 138 ] Beginning in the same decade, Dobson and his vast activist organization helped pass state-level bans on gay marriage across the US.

[ 149 ] His top legislative goal was prohibiting gay marriage at the federal level, with a constitutional amendment. In 2005, he told his biographer "my greatest concern is for the relentless attack by homosexual activists who are determined to destroy the institution of marriage." [ 150 ] Dobson was an ally of Judge Roy Moore starting in the early 1990s.

[ 151 ] He rallied his audience in support of the judge in 1997 [ 25 ] and again in 2003 [ 152 ] because of the Moore's refusal to remove a Ten Commandments display from the Alabama Judicial Building . Viewing Moore as "a man of proven character and integrity" Dobson endorsed Moore's political campaigns until 2017, [ 151 ] when allegations came to light of Moore's sexual misconduct toward teen girls.

In late 2004, Dobson led a campaign to block the appointment of Arlen Specter to head of the Senate Judiciary Committee because of Specter's pro-abortion rights stance.

[ 153 ] Responding to a question by Fox News personality Alan Colmes on whether he wanted the Republican Party to be known as a "big-tent party", he replied, "I don't want to be in the big tent ... I think the party ought to stand for something." [ 51 ] In 2006, Focus on the Family spent more than a half million dollars to promote a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage in its home state of Colorado .

[ 154 ] Dobson founded a fundraising and lobbying arm of FotF called Focus on the Family Action, now called Family Policy Alliance . As a 501(c)(4) organization, it faces fewer IRS restrictions on political activity than FotF. In the organization's first six months of existence, it raised nearly nine million dollars in support of six Republican candidates for competitive US Senate seats. All six won their races.

[ 42 ] A May 2005 article by Chris Hedges in Harper's Magazine described Dobson as "perhaps the most powerful figure in the Dominionist movement" and "a crucial player in getting out the Christian vote for George W. Bush ." [ 155 ] In November 2004, Dobson was described by the online magazine Slate as "America's most influential evangelical leader." [ 4 ] The article stated "Forget Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson , who in their dotage have marginalized themselves with gaffes ... Dobson is now America's most influential evangelical leader, with a following reportedly greater than that of either Falwell or Robertson at his peak ... Dobson may have delivered Bush his victories in Ohio and Florida ." [ 4 ] Further, "He's already leveraging his new power. When a thank-you call came from the White House , Dobson issued the staffer a blunt warning that Bush "needs to be more aggressive" about pressing the religious right 's anti-abortion , anti- gay rights agenda, or it would "pay a price in four years". Dobson has sometimes complained that the Republican Party may take the votes of social conservatives for granted, and has suggested that evangelicals may withhold support from the GOP if the party does not more strongly support conservative family issues.

[ 55 ] However, in 2006, Dobson said that, while "there is disillusionment out there with Republicans" and "that worries me greatly", he nonetheless suggested voters turn out and vote Republican in 2006.

[ 156 ] "My first inclination was to sit this one out", but according to The New York Times , Dobson then added that "he had changed his mind when he looked at who would become the leaders of Congressional committees if the Democrats took over." [ 146 ] Dobson garnered national media attention once again in February 2008 after releasing a statement in the wake of Senator John McCain 's expected success in the so-called " Super Tuesday " Republican primary elections . In his statement, Dobson said: "I cannot, and will not, vote for Senator John McCain, as a matter of conscience," and indicated that he would refrain from voting altogether if McCain were to become the Republican candidate, echoing other conservative commentators' concerns about the Senator's conservatism.

[ 157 ] He endorsed Mike Huckabee for president.

[ 158 ] After McCain selected an anti-abortion candidate, Sarah Palin , as his running mate, Dobson said that he was more enthusiastic in his support for the Republican ticket.

[ 159 ] When Palin's 17-year-old daughter 's pregnancy was revealed, Dobson issued a press release commending Palin's stance, saying, We have always encouraged the parents to love and support their children and always advised the girls to see their pregnancies through, even though there will of course be challenges along the way. That is what the Palins are doing, and they should be commended once again for not just talking about their pro-life and pro-family values, but living them out even in the midst of trying circumstances.

[ 160 ] On June 24, 2008, Dobson criticized statements made by U.S. presidential candidate Barack Obama in Obama's 2006 "Call to Renewal" address. Dobson stated that Obama was "distorting the traditional understanding of the Bible to fit his own world view." [ 161 ] [ 162 ] On October 23, 2008, Dobson published a "Letter from 2012 in Obama's America" that proposed that an Obama presidency could lead to: mandated homosexual teachings across all schools; the banning of firearms in entire states; the end of the Boy Scouts , home schooling , Christian school groups, Christian adoption agencies, and talk radio ; pornography on prime-time and daytime television; mandatory bonuses for gay soldiers; terrorist attacks across America; the nuclear bombing of Tel Aviv ; the conquering of most of Eastern Europe by Russia ; the end of health care for Americans over 80; out-of-control gasoline prices; and complete economic disaster in the United States, among other catastrophes.

[ 163 ] In the days after the 2008 presidential election , Dobson stated on his radio program that he was mourning the Obama election, claiming that Obama supported infanticide , would be responsible for the deaths of millions of unborn children, and was "going to appoint the most liberal justices to the Supreme Court , perhaps, that we've ever had." [ 164 ] [ 165 ] Dobson supports intelligent design and has spoken at conferences on the subject, and frequently criticizes evolution .

[ 166 ] In 2007, Dobson was one of 25 evangelicals who called for the ouster of Rev.

Richard Cizik from his position at the National Association of Evangelicals because Cizik had taken a stance urging evangelicals to take global warming seriously.

[ 167 ] On June 13, 2007, the National Right to Life Committee ousted Colorado Right to Life after the latter ran a full-page ad criticizing Dobson.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] On May 30, 2010, Dobson delivered the pre-race invocation at the NASCAR Coca-Cola 600 automobile race, raising criticism about his association with a sport associated with sponsors and activities which would not meet his definition of family-friendly .

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] At a National Day of Prayer event in the U.S. Capitol, Dobson called Barack Obama "the abortion president". He said, "President Obama, before he was elected, made it very clear that he wanted to be the abortion president. He didn't make any bones about it. This is something that he really was going to promote and support, and he has done that, and in a sense he is the abortion president." Among others, Rep.

Janice Hahn complained because Dobson used the National Day of Prayer for partisan purposes. She said, "Dobson just blew a hole into this idea of being a nonpartisan National Day of Prayer. It was very disturbing to me ... and really a shame. James Dobson hijacked the National Day of Prayer—this nonpartisan, nonpolitical National Day of Prayer—to promote his own distorted political agenda." [ 172 ] Dobson endorsed Ted Cruz in the 2016 Republican primaries [ 173 ] as well as Trump in the general election against Hillary Clinton .

[ 174 ] In 2016, Dobson was one of the Trump Administration 's evangelical faith advisors.

[ 175 ] In 2020, Dobson worked alongside other conservative evangelicals and evangelical organizations, including Jim Daly and Focus on the Family , to support the reelection of President Donald Trump.

[ 176 ] He echoed his support of the President throughout the impeachment proceedings earlier that year.

[ 177 ] Dobson praised the 2022 U.S. Supreme Court case Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization , which overruled Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey , saying, "Praise God! We have just received the news for which we have been praying and working!" [ 178 ] Ecumenical relations Dobson and Charles Colson were two participants in a 2000 conference at the Vatican on the global economy's impact on families. During the conference, the two Protestants met with Pope John Paul II . Dobson later told Catholic News Service that though he has theological differences with Roman Catholicism , "when it comes to the family, there is far more agreement than disagreement, and with regard to moral issues from abortion to premarital sex, safe-sex ideology and homosexuality, I find more in common with Catholics than with some of my evangelical brothers and sisters." [ 179 ] In November 2009, Dobson signed an ecumenical statement known as the Manhattan Declaration calling on evangelicals, Catholics and Eastern Orthodox Christians not to comply with rules and laws permitting abortion, same-sex marriage and other matters that go against their religious consciences.

[ 180 ] Criticism U.S. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop , a fellow evangelical Christian who wanted Dobson as an ally in his battle against the AIDS crisis , was deeply disappointed when Dobson embraced pseudoscientific and homophobic claims about AIDS. "The Christian activity in reference to AIDS of both D. James Kennedy and Jim Dobson is reprehensible," Koop said in 1989. He viewed the AIDS crisis as "an opportunity for Christian service" that Dobson was squandering.

[ 181 ] In her 2020 book Jesus and John Wayne , Calvin University professor Kristin Kobes Du Mez criticizes the ideal of Christian masculinity created by Dobson, Mark Driscoll and others: "It was a vision that promised protection for women but left women without defense, one that worshiped power and turned a blind eye to justice, and one that transformed the Jesus of the Gospels into an image of their own making." [ 182 ] Don Jacobson, who published books by Dobson and other conservative Christian authors at his Multnomah Press, later rejected the Christian nationalism his press had helped cultivate. After reading historical Christian justifications for murder and conquest of American Indians , he came to view American exceptionalism as incompatible with Christian love .

[ 183 ] Gil Alexander-Moegerle, a former Focus on the Family executive and radio show co-host, wrote the highly critical book James Dobson's War on America in 1997. In it, he says that Dobson's loving, caring public persona is a sham; the real Dobson is racist, sexist, homophobic, materialistic, power-hungry, and shameless. He says that the Nazarene religious concept of entire sanctification is key to understanding Dobson's views: "James Dobson believes that he has been entirely sanctified, morally perfected, that he does not and cannot sin. Now you know why he and moralists like him make a life of condemning what he believes to be the sins of others. He is perfect." [ 184 ] Some fundamentalist Christians consider Dobson a heretic for presenting secular concepts from psychology and self-help literature as though they are justified by the Bible.

[ 66 ] Theologian Donald Eric Capps contends that Dobson's corporal punishment techniques exploit children by turning their natural need to be loved against them. Dobson's advice to "break the will" of the child is a recipe for child abuse, according to Capps, and is antithetical to loving one's child. He also argues that corporal punishment may sexualize children. For evidence of this, he points to Dobson's vivid childhood recollection of being beaten with his mother's girdle. Capps believed that using physical pain to heighten a child's relationship to God is "perverted." [ 66 ] Publications Dobson has authored or co-authored 36 books, including: Books as sole author Dobson, James C. (1970).

Dare to Discipline .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-842-3063-0-7 .

Dobson, James C. (1975).

What Wives Wish Their Husbands Knew About Women .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-84237-8960 .

Dobson, James (1980).

Preparing for Adolescence . Vision House.

ISBN 0-88449-112-9 .

Dobson, James (1982).

Dr. Dobson Answers Your Questions About Raising Children .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-8423-0620-X .

Dobson, James C. (1984).

Emotions: Can You Trust Them?

.

Bantam Books .

ISBN 0-553-25751-X .

Dobson, James C. (1986).

Dr. Dobson Answers Your Questions about Feelings and Self-Esteem .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-8423-0621-8 .

Dobson, James C. (1986).

Temper Your Child's Tantrums .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-8423-6994-5 .

Dobson, James (1987).

Parenting Isn't for Cowards: Dealing Confidently With the Frustrations of Child-Rearing . Word.

ISBN 0-8499-0630-X .

Dobson, James C. (1992).

The Strong-Willed Child . Living Books.

ISBN 0-8423-2335-X .

Dobson, James (1995).

Straight Talk: What Men Should Know, What Women Need to Understand —Rev.and exp.ed .

Thomas Nelson .

ISBN 0-8499-3858-9 .

Dobson, James C. (1996).

The New Dare to Discipline .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-8423-0506-8 .

Dobson, James C. (1997).

Solid Answers .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-8423-0623-4 .

Dobson, James C. (2000).

The Complete Marriage and Family Home Reference Guide .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-8423-5267-8 .

Dobson, James (2000).

Straight Talk to Men .

Thomas Nelson .

ISBN 0-8499-4210-1 .

Dobson, James (2000).

Life on the Edge .

Thomas Nelson .

ISBN 0-8499-0927-9 .

Dobson, James (2001).

The New Hide or Seek: Building Confidence in Your Child . Revell.

ISBN 0-8007-5680-0 .

Dobson, James C. (2001).

When God Doesn't Make Sense . Living Books.

ISBN 0-8423-7062-5 .

Dobson, James C. (2002).

Bringing Up Boys: Practical Advice and Encouragement for Those Shaping the Next Generation of Men .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-8423-5266-X .

Dobson, James C. (2003).

Parents' Answer Book . Living Books.

ISBN 0-8423-8716-1 .

Dobson, James C. (2004).

Romantic Love: How to Be Head Over Heels and Still Land on Your Feet . Regal Books.

ISBN 0-8307-3238-1 .

Dobson, James (2004).

Dr. James Dobson on Parenting . World Publishing.

ISBN 0-88486-339-5 .

Dobson, James (2004).

Love for a Lifetime: Building a Marriage That Will Go the Distance . Multnomah Books.

ISBN 1-59052-087-4 .

Dobson, James C. (2007).

Love Must Be Tough: New Hope for Families in Crisis .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 978-1-4143-1745-8 .

Dobson, James C. (2007).

The New Strong-Willed Child .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 978-1-4143-1363-4 .

Dobson, James C. (2007).

Stories of Heart and Home .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 978-1-4143-1747-2 .

Dobson, James C. (2010).

Bringing Up Girls: Practical Advice and Encouragement for Those Shaping the Next Generation of Women .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 978-1-77036-544-5 .

Books with others Paul C. Reisser (October 1, 1999). Melissa R. Cox; Vinita Hampton Wright (eds.).

The Focus on the Family Complete Book of Baby and Child Care .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 0-8423-3512-9 .

(Foreword) Sutherland, Mark I.; William J. Federer; Roy Moore ; James Dobson; Alan Keyes ; Ed Meese ; Phyllis Schlafly ; Matthew D. Staver; Alan Sears (July 4, 2005).

Judicial Tyranny The New Kings of America . Amerisearch.

ISBN 0-9753455-6-7 .

Dobson, James C.; Shirley Dobson (April 16, 2007).

Marriage Under Fire : Why We Must Win This Battle .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 978-1-4143-1756-4 .

Dobson, James C.; Shirley Dobson (April 16, 2007).

Night Light A Devotional for Couples .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 978-1-4143-1749-6 .

Dobson, James C.; Shirley Dobson (April 20, 2007).

Night Light for Parents A Devotional .

Tyndale House .

ISBN 978-1-4143-1751-9 .

Dobson, James C; Kurt Bruner (January 15, 2013).

Fatherless . FaithWords.

ISBN 978-1-4555-1311-6 .

Dobson, James C; Kurt Bruner (October 1, 2013).

Childless . FaithWords.

ISBN 978-1-4555-1315-4 .

Dobson, James C; Kurt Bruner (May 6, 2014).

Godless . FaithWords.

ISBN 978-1-4555-1316-1 .

Notable articles and reports Dobson served on the committee that wrote the Meese Report on pornography .

[ 185 ] Dobson, James C. (December 12, 2006).

"Two Mommies Is One Too Many" .

Time . Archived from the original on December 13, 2006 . Retrieved June 21, 2008 .

See also Portals : Biography Psychology Christianity Radio Politics Conservatism References Notes ^ He is commonly referred to as "Jim Dobson".

Citations ^ Detwiler, Fritz (1999).

Standing on the Premises of God The Christian Right's Fight to Redefine America's Public Schools . NYU Press. p. 68.

ISBN 978-0-8147-1914-5 .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2023 . Retrieved January 4, 2021 .

^ Kirkpatrick, David (January 1, 2005).

"Evangelical Leader Threatens to Use His Political Muscle Against Some Democrats" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2018 . Retrieved August 18, 2016 .

^ Olsen, Ted (February 21, 2005).

"Who's Driving This Thing?" .

Christianity Today .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2008 . Retrieved September 5, 2008 .

^ a b c Crowley, Michael (November 12, 2004).

"James Dobson: The Religious Right's New Kingmaker" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2004 . Retrieved August 18, 2016 .

^ a b c "Press Biographies > Dr. James Dobson" .

Focus on the Family . Archived from the original on March 29, 2007 . Retrieved May 9, 2007 .

^ " "Family Talk" Is Largest Launch In Christian Radio History - Media Center - Ambassador Advertising Agency - We Connect Ministry and Media" . Ambassadoradvertising.com. May 5, 2010. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013 . Retrieved October 16, 2010 .

^ "James Dobson delivers final broadcast for Focus on Family" .

USA Today . Associated Press. February 26, 2010.

Archived from the original on October 29, 2010 . Retrieved October 16, 2010 .

^ Stammer, Larry B. (November 2, 1995).

"A Man of Millions : Broadcaster James Dobson Has Become a Leading Name in Evangelical Circles--and the Politicians Have Noticed" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved June 24, 2023 .

^ "James C Dobson" .

San Benito History . Archived from the original on March 20, 2013 . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ a b Apostolidis, Paul (May 2000).

Stations of the Cross Adorno and Christian Right Radio . Duke University Press. p. 22.

ISBN 9780822381006 .

^ Gerson, Michael (May 4, 1998).

"A Righteous Indignation" .

U.S. News & World Report (Reprint). Archived from the original on June 9, 2007 – via SkepticTank.org.

^ a b c Du Mez 2020 , p. 78.

^ Stepp, Laura (August 8, 1990).

"The Empire Built on Family and Faith: Psychologist James C. Dobson, Bringing His Evangelical Focus to Politics" .

Washington Post . pp. C1–3.

ProQuest 140162655 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2017 . Retrieved July 6, 2017 .

^ a b c Bartkowski, John P. (December 1995).

"Spare the Rod..., or Spare the Child? Divergent Perspectives on Conservative Protestant Child Discipline" .

Review of Religious Research .

37 (2): 97– 116.

doi : 10.2307/3512395 .

JSTOR 3512395 .

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 26.

^ Buss, Dale (2005).

Family Man: the Biography of Dr. James Dobson . Wheaton, Ill.: Tyndale House. p. 27.

ISBN 9780842381918 – via Internet Archive.

^ "Jim Dobson" . Institute for the Study of American Evangelicals, Wheaton College. Archived from the original on March 15, 2011 . Retrieved December 6, 2010 .

^ Du Mez 2020 , p. 79.

^ a b Hankins, Barry (2008).

American Evangelicals: A Contemporary History of a Mainstream Religious Movement . Critical Issues in History. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-7425-4989-0 – via Internet Archive.

^ Gilgoff 2007 , p. 21–22.

^ Cited in Du Mez 2020 , p. 79 ^ Popenoe, David (2005). "Chapter 14: Remembering My Father: An Intellectual Portrait of 'The Man Who Saved Marriages' ".

War Over the Family . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-7658-0259-0 .

^ Brenner, Suzanne (June 2022).

"The Ethics of Marriage in American Evangelicalism" .

Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute .

28 (2): 424.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9655.13701 .

ISSN 1359-0987 .

^ a b Farley, Audrey Clare (May 12, 2021).

"The Eugenics Roots of Evangelical Family Values" .

Religion and Politics . Archived from the original on June 17, 2023 . Retrieved June 17, 2023 .

^ a b Ridgely 2016 , p. 29.

^ Du Mez 2020 , p. 81.

^ Balmer, Randall Herbert (2004).

Encyclopedia of Evangelicalism (Revised and expanded ed.). Baylor University Press. p. 265.

ISBN 9781932792041 – via Internet Archive.

^ Roberts, Steven V. (April 25, 1995). "The Heavy Hitter".

U.S. News & World Report .

118 (16): 34.

Like a religious version of Walt Disney, Dobson started with a small idea and built it into a multimedia empire: 10 radio shows, 11 magazines (including specialty publications for doctors, teachers and single parents), bestselling books, film strips and videos of all kinds. Then there are the basketball camps and the curriculum guides, the church bulletin fillers and suggested sermon topics, faxed weekly to thousands of pastors.

^ Du Mez 2020 , p. 85.

^ White House Conference on Families; Listening to America's Families (PDF) (Report). Baltimore/Minneapolis/Los Angeles: White House Conference on Families, Washington, D.C. June 1980.

Diversity of Families: American families are pluralistic in nature. Our discussion of issues will reflect an understanding of and respect for cultural, ethnic and regional differences as well as differences in structure and lifestyle.

Dobson is pictured in the Research Forum section.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 180.

^ a b Stephens 2019 , p. 4–5.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 189.

^ Baker, Tess N. (January 12, 2001).

"Family Council Celebrates" .

Lincoln Journal Star – via Newspapers.com.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 207.

^ "James Dobson resigns as Focus on the Family chair" .

NBC News . Associated Press. February 27, 2009.

Archived from the original on January 5, 2018 . Retrieved January 5, 2018 .

^ "The Rest of the Story" .

Dr. James Dobson . October 7, 2013. Archived from the original on August 17, 2013 . Retrieved October 7, 2013 .

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 33.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 41–44.

^ Aynesworth, Hugh (January 24, 1999). "Bundy lore lives decade after killer was put to death".

The Washington Times .

^ Blumenthal, Max (2009).

Republican Gomorrah Inside the Movement that Shattered the Party . Nation Books. p.

77 .

ISBN 978-1-56858-398-3 – via Internet Archive.

^ a b Gilgoff 2007 , p. 14–15.

^ Brenneman 2014 , p. 135-136.

^ Winters, Nathan; Hudgens, Nicole.

"Who can you trust?" .

Family Policy Alliance . Archived from the original on July 26, 2022.

LGBTQ advocates stated they only wanted to be treated the same as everyone else, not as an abnormal part of society. In the 21st century things have changed considerably. More high-profile individuals have come out as LGBTQ and more groups have surfaced to advocate for their cause. The LGBTQ movement has successfully taken over the debate terminology (e.g., you are cisgender, not simply male or female; we've all adopted LGBTQ, not LGBT and even add +), the media have become loud advocates for the LGBTQ cause, and businesses have been shamed into jumping on the bandwagon and virtue signaling they are not only nondiscriminatory, but sometimes unbelievably promoting of the LGBTQ lifestyle. Those who wish to speak out against anything having to do with LGBTQ talking points are labeled homophobic, ignorant, or part of a hate group and are shamed by the media. The entertainment industry is bending over backwards to show how inclusive and accepting they are. In broadcast television, roughly 10.2% of all regular expected series characters identify as LGBT. For movies, the LGBT percentage has ranged from 14%-17% in recent years, with the percentage rising each year. That said, LGBT-identifying Americans comprise only 5.6 percent of the American public, per a recent Gallup poll. Agenda. You think?

^ Smart, Theo (June 23, 2006).

"Casting the first stone: the US Christian right's war on the Global Fund" .

aidsmap .

^ Cullinan, Kerry (June 20, 2023).

"Lives Are At Risk as Anti-Abortion Groups Attack HIV Programme PEPFAR" .

Health Policy Watch .

^ "Project Grant" .

USA Spending . Archived from the original on June 23, 2023 . Retrieved June 23, 2023 .

^ "Dr. Dobson's Ministry & History" .

Dr. James Dobson . Archived from the original on December 18, 2013 . Retrieved December 16, 2013 .

Dr. Dobson felt God directing him to start a new ministry, which he did in March 2010, to continue the important work of strengthening families, speaking into the culture, and spreading the gospel of Jesus Christ. He called the new organization Family Talk.

^ a b Dobson, James C. (September 2019).

"Dr. Dobson's September Newsletter" .

Dr. James Dobson .

^ Chamberlain, Dale (November 11, 2022).

"Dr. James Dobson Family Institute Names New President To Succeed Dobson" .

Church Leaders .

^ a b "What Will a New Bush Term Mean for the American Family?" .

Fox News . November 15, 2004. Archived from the original on June 11, 2008 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

^ Goodstein, Laurie (January 16, 2010).

"Radio Show for Focus on the Family Founder" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2022 . Retrieved May 9, 2022 .

^ Draper, Electra (March 26, 2009).

"Dobson's "rebel" son gets on board" .

The Denver Post .

^ Moslener 2015 , p. 103.

^ a b c d e f "Focus on the Family" .

People For the American Way . 2004. Archived from the original on October 11, 2006 . Retrieved October 10, 2006 .

^ "Year in Review" (PDF) .

Triangle . Vol. 86, no. 3. Indiana Wesleyan University. 2005. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 14, 2006 . Retrieved October 11, 2008 .

^ "Dobson wins out for Hall induction" .

Chicago Tribune . July 25, 2008. pp.

2– 10 . Retrieved May 22, 2025 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Williams, Devon (May 1, 2008).

"Dr. Dobson's Broadcast Nominated to Radio Hall of Fame" .

CitizenLink . Archived from the original on May 3, 2008 . Retrieved July 25, 2008 .

^ Barna, Mark (July 21, 2008).

"Dobson garners hall of fame honor" .

The Gazette . Archived from the original on July 27, 2008 . Retrieved July 25, 2008 .

^ "Dr. Dobson Blasted by Gay Activist" .

CitizenLink . July 11, 2008. Archived from the original on August 17, 2008 . Retrieved July 25, 2008 .

^ Besen, Wayne (July 9, 2008).

"TWO Launches Drive to Keep James Dobson Out of the Radio Hall of Fame" .

PR Newswire . Retrieved July 25, 2008 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ "Focus On The Family" . Radio Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on July 7, 2012 . Retrieved May 24, 2011 .

^ Dobson, James C.; Bauer, Gary L. (1994).

Children at Risk . pp. 119, 122.

^ Dobson, James (2001).

"Why Boys Are So Different" .

Focus on the Family . Archived from the original on October 6, 2007 . Retrieved September 7, 2007 .

^ Dobson, James.

"Is it important for mothers to stay home during the teen years?" . Focus on the Family . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c d e f Johnson, Eithne (1998).

"Dr. Dobson's Advice to Christian Women: The Story of Strategic Motherhood" .

Social Text (57): 55– 82.

doi : 10.2307/466881 .

JSTOR 466881 .

^ Moslener 2015 , p. 98–99.

^ Dobson 2004 , p. 9.

^ Dobson, James C.

Marriage under fire: why we must win this war.

Sisters, Or. : Multnomah Publishers, 2004. quoted in McManus, Mike and Harriet McManus.

Living together: myths, risks, and answers Archived January 19, 2023, at the Wayback Machine . New York: Simon and Schuster, 2008.

^ a b King, Larry (November 22, 2006).

"Interview With Dr. James Dobson" . CNN.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2011 . Retrieved November 13, 2010 .

^ Johnson, Alex (June 23, 2005).

" 'Healed' by God: Evangelical group sponsors conference on nature of gays" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on November 23, 2019 . Retrieved June 21, 2008 .

^ a b Schmader, David (June 30, 2005). "Jesus Hates You; Christians Rationalize Bigotry at "Love Won Out" ".

The Stranger . Vol. 14, no. 42. p. 16.

^ Dobson 2004 , p. 85.

^ a b "James Dobson Signs Off At Focus On The Family" . Morning Edition. NPR. February 26, 2010.

Archived from the original on March 1, 2010 . Retrieved October 16, 2010 .

^ "What can parents do to improve public schools?" . Focus on the Family . Retrieved June 21, 2008 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Dobson, James (2010).

Bringing Up Girls . Carol Stream, Ill.: Tyndale House. pp.

161– 163, 174– 175.

ISBN 978-1-4143-0127-3 – via Internet Archive .

^ Dobson 2001 , pp. 76, 128.

^ Zirin, Dave (July 28, 2006).

"You Can Keep the Faith" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved June 21, 2008 .

^ Stammer, Larry B.; Colvin, Richard Lee (August 31, 1995). "Foes Target Amendment on Prayer in Schools; Beliefs: Citing Federal Guidelines, Activists and Some Religious Leaders say a Change in Constitution is Unneeded".

Los Angeles Times . p. 3.

'We do not support teacher-led, state-mediated school prayer, but we do believe that students have the same religious rights as other people,' said Alan Crippen of 'Focus on the Family,' a major evangelical Christian broadcast and publications ministry founded by psychologist James Dobson.

^ a b Balmer, Randall (August 2007).

"The Wizard of Colorado Springs" . Sojourners Magazine. Archived from the original on June 13, 2008 . Retrieved June 26, 2008 .

...his breakthrough book, Dare to Discipline, ... challenged the permissive child-rearing techniques of Benjamin Spock. The book, published in 1970, encouraged parents to spank their children with belts or switches and to leave such items on the child's dresser to remind her of the consequences of challenging authority.

^ a b Dobson, James C. (February 1977).

Dare to Discipline . Bantam. p. 23.

ISBN 9780553228410 .

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 36.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 64.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 28.

^ Du Mez 2020 , pp. 78, 80.

^ Cook, Judith A. (August 5, 1984).

"Success story: Focus on the Family - Christian group dedicated to preservation of the home" .

Monrovia News-Post . Monrovia, California. pp.

1– 2 . Retrieved November 11, 2024 .

^ Dobson 1978 , p. 6.

^ Dobson 1978 , p. 235.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 59,61.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 58.

^ Dobson, James C. (1997).

Solid Answers: America's foremost family counselor responds to tough questions facing today's families . Wheaton, Illinois: Tyndale House Publishers. p. 130.

ISBN 9780842306232 .

^ Dobson, James (November 21, 2004).

"Good-Natured Child Needs His Share of Parents' Attention" . Focus on the Family.

Archived from the original on June 12, 2008 . Retrieved June 21, 2008 .

^ "Discipline problems" . Archived from the original on December 12, 2005 . Retrieved May 4, 2008 .

^ Bartkowski, John P.; Ellison, Christopher G. (1995). "Divergent Models of Childrearing in Popular Manuals: Conservative Protestants vs. the Mainstream Experts".

Sociology of Religion .

56 (1): 21– 34.

doi : 10.2307/3712036 .

JSTOR 3712036 .

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 62.

^ Dobson, James (November 9, 2015).

"5 Reasons Why Spanking Fails" .

Dr. James Dobson .

^ "US right attacks SpongeBob video" .

BBC News . January 20, 2005.

Archived from the original on March 23, 2007 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

^ a b " 'We Are Family' DVD Still Available" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . September 6, 2005. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

^ Zernike, Kate (January 30, 2005).

"Buzzwords; Hello, Synergy, Begone, Crisis" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2012 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

^ "Religious Right Attacks Tolerance Pledge" . Southern Poverty Law Center. March 2005. Archived from the original on July 13, 2007 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

^ a b Chang, Pauline J. (January 28, 2005).

"Dobson clarifies Pro-Gay SpongeBob Video Controversy" .

The Christian Post . Archived from the original on July 21, 2012 . Retrieved May 9, 2018 .

^ "Dr. Dobson Takes on Media over 'SpongeBob' Controversy" .

CitizenLink . Archived from the original on October 5, 2005.

^ Kirkpatrick, David D.

(January 20, 2005).

"Conservatives Pick Soft Target: A Cartoon Sponge" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 10, 2008 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

^ "Orlando Sentinel: Gay activists to protest Orlando event, notion that homosexuality is 'curable' " .

Truthwinsout.org . June 6, 2008. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008 . Retrieved September 5, 2008 .

^ Kwon, Lillian (March 19, 2008).

"Gays Still Looking for Love from Christians" .

The Christian Post . Archived from the original on January 2, 2013 . Retrieved May 26, 2018 .

^ Dobson 2001 , pp. 115–116.

^ Gilgoff, Dan (2008).

The Jesus Machine How James Dobson, Focus on the Family, and Evangelical America Are Winning the Culture War .

Macmillan Publishers . p. 56.

ISBN 9780312378448 .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2023 . Retrieved January 4, 2021 .

^ Dudley, Jonathan (2011).

Broken Words The Misfortunes of Science and Scripture in Evangelical Politics .

Random House . p. 69.

ISBN 9780385525268 .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2023 . Retrieved January 4, 2021 .

^ Paulson, Steven K. (July 17, 2006).

"Gay rights group: Dobson manipulated research" .

Boston Globe . Archived from the original on March 4, 2009.

^ Ingold, John (May 30, 2008).

"Anti-bias measure inked: Governor signs bill covering sexual orientation, religious beliefs" .

The Denver Post .

Archived from the original on June 9, 2008 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

^ Welte, Rachel (May 22, 2008).

"Controversial ad offends transgendered community" .

Colorado Connection . Archived from the original on July 8, 2011 . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ Meyer, Holly (August 30, 2017).

"What is the Nashville Statement and why are people talking about it?" .

The Tennessean . Retrieved May 23, 2025 .

^ "Nashville Statement" .

Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood .

^ Garcia, Elena (December 18, 2012).

"James Dobson: Connecticut Shooting a Result of God Allowing Judgment to Fall on America" .

The Christian Post .

^ Claiborne, Shane (2023).

Rethinking Life: Embracing the Sacredness of Every Person . Zondervan. pp.

193– 202.

ISBN 9780310363910 – via Google Books .

^ a b Ridgely 2016 , p. 196.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 198–199.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 201.

^ Ridgely 2016 , p. 200.

^ Du Mez 2020 , p. 82.

^ a b Moslener 2015 , p. 96–98.

^ Du Mez 2020 , pp. 82–83.

^ Stephens 2019 , pp. 36–37.

^ Moslener 2015 , p. 98.

^ Moslener 2015 , p. 184.

^ Moslener 2015 , p. 167.

^ Ring, Trudy (June 1, 2016).

"James Dobson: Be a Man, Shoot a Trans Woman in the Bathroom" .

The Advocate .

^ Du Mez 2020 , p. 83.

^ Dobson, James (1975).

What Wives Wish Their Husbands Knew About Women . Wheaton, Illinois: Tyndale House. pp.

140– 141 – via Internet Archive .

^ Du Mez 2020 , p. 84.

^ LeBlanc, Doug; Rabey, Steve (July 1997). "Bible Translators Deny Gender Agenda".

Christianity Today . Vol. 41, no. 8. p. 62.

^ a b Olasky, Susan (July 2021).

"Translation manipulation: In 1997 WORLD uncovered a plan to reshape the most popular English translation of the Bible" .

World .

^ a b Stephens 2019 , pp. 44–45.

^ Toalston, Art (February 6, 2002), "James Dobson joins critics of gender-neutral NIV revision" , Baptist Press ^ Gibbon, Jeani Hunt (September–October 2005). "Listening to Dr. Dobson".

Tikkun .

20 (5): 11.

Dobson is one of the single most important religious intellectuals and political leaders in America today, and many people take his words very seriously. When Dobson makes such a statement, it is the Evangelical equivalent of a Vatican Decree that is meant to communicate a policy position not only to church goers, but to social conservatives as a whole-specifically, the Republican Party.

^ Soule, Sarah A. (November 2004). "Going to the Chapel? Same-Sex Marriage Bans in the United States, 1973–2000".

Social Problems .

51 (4). Oxford University Press: 469.

doi : 10.1525/sp.2004.51.4.453 .

^ Moslener 2015 , p. 99.

^ a b c Perkes, Sue Lia (August 12, 1995).

"Search & rescue: James Dobson's Christian ministry seeks to deliver families from 'destruction' at the hands of a liberal society" .

The Arizona Republic . Phoenix, Arizona. pp.

D6 – D7 . Retrieved November 11, 2024 .

^ Moslener 2015 , p. 101–102.

^ Du Mez 2020 , p. 86.

^ Moslener 2015 , p. 102–108,167.

^ O'Hara, Mary Emily (April 8, 2017).

"This Law Firm Is Linked to Anti-Transgender Bathroom Bills Across the Country" .

NBC .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2017.

^ "Alliance Defending Freedom" .

Southern Poverty Law Center .

^ Gilgoff 2007 , p. 8.

^ Gilgoff 2007 , p. 7–10.

^ a b Kirkpatrick, David D. (May 13, 2004).

"The 2004 Campaign: Evangelical Christians—Warily, a Religious Leader Lifts His Voice in Politics" .

The New York Times . p. A22.

Archived from the original on January 19, 2023 . Retrieved February 16, 2017 .

^ Cook, Judith A. (August 5, 1984).

"Focus on the Family grows by leaps, bounds" .

Monrovia News-Post . Monrovia, California. p. A-2.

In addition, Dr. Dobson has been appointed to the National Advisory Committee on Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention and serves in various other consulting positions.

^ Barna, Mark (February 25, 2010).

"Timeline of James Dobson's career" .

The Gazette .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2024 . Retrieved November 11, 2024 .

^ a b Gilgoff 2007 , p. 4.

^ Gilgoff 2007 , p. 11.

^ a b Gattis, Paul (August 12, 2017).

"Evangelical leader James Dobson makes endorsement in Alabama Senate race" .

AL.com .

^ "Commandments In The Closet" .

CBS News . August 29, 2003.

^ "Conservative leader targets Specter" . CNN. November 9, 2004. Archived from the original on April 17, 2008 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

^ "$500,000 to fight gay marriage Focus backing state amendment" .

The Gazette . Archived from the original on November 10, 2018 – via Highbeam .

^ Hedges, Chris (May 2005).

"Feeling the hate with the National Religious Broadcasters" .

Harper's Magazine .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2007 . Retrieved April 11, 2007 .

(subscription required, reprinted here.

Archived 2007-12-11 at the Wayback Machine ) ^ Kirkpatrick, David D. (September 25, 2006).

"Christian Conservatives Look to Re-energize Base" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2023 . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ Stoddard, Ed (February 5, 2008).

"Super Tuesday: Dobson delivers blow to McCain candidacy" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on May 12, 2008 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

^ Gorski, Eric (February 8, 2008).

"Evangelical leader James Dobson endorses Mike Huckabee for GOP presidential nod" .

Wilmington Star-News . Associated Press . Retrieved May 23, 2025 .

^ MacAskill, Ewen; Ed Pilkington (September 1, 2008).

"US politics: McCain defends running mate's experience" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on September 2, 2013 . Retrieved September 1, 2008 .

^ Tapper, Jake (September 1, 2008).

"Dobson on Bristol Palin's Pregnancy" .

ABC News . Archived from the original on September 2, 2008 . Retrieved September 1, 2008 .

^ Mooney, Alexander (June 24, 2008).

"Dobson accuses Obama of 'distorting' Bible" . CNN.

Archived from the original on July 10, 2012 . Retrieved January 1, 2012 .

^ Obama, Barack (June 28, 2006).

" 'Call to Renewal' Keynote Address" . Archived from the original on January 4, 2009 . Retrieved June 25, 2008 .

^ Dobson, James (October 23, 2008).

"Letter from 2012 in Obama's America" (PDF) .

Focus on the Family Action . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 31, 2008 . Retrieved November 26, 2008 .

^ Ertelt, Steven (November 7, 2008).

"James Dobson Mourns Obama Victory, Forecasts Significant Abortion Promotion" .

LifeNews.com . Archived from the original on November 27, 2008 . Retrieved November 26, 2008 .

^ "Dobson claims Obama election sets pro-lifers back severely" .

Baptist News Global . November 6, 2008.

Archived from the original on January 19, 2023 . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

^ Forrest, Barbara ; Gross, Paul R.

(2004).

Creationism's Trojan Horse: The Wedge of Intelligent Design . p. 270.

^ Cooperman, Alan (March 3, 2007).

"Evangelical Angers Peers With Call for Action on Global Warming" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 7, 2008 . Retrieved June 19, 2008 .

^ Zeller, Shawn (July 10, 2007).

"A Right-to-Life Rift in Colorado" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 26, 2021 . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ "Open Letter to Dr. James Dobson" .

Colorado Right to Life . Archived from the original on September 18, 2010 . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ Chambers, Mike (May 26, 2010).

"No Coca-Cola 600 for me" .

Denver Post . Archived from the original on June 2, 2010 . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ Fogarty, Dan (May 30, 2010).

"Controversial Evangelical Leader Conducts Prayer At Coca-Cola 600" .

Sports Grid . Archived from the original on June 1, 2010 . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ Ashtari, Shadee (May 1, 2014) "Janice Hahn Walks Out Of Event After James Dobson Calls Obama The 'Abortion President'." The Huffington Post . (Retrieved 5-1-2014.) ^ Eschliman, Bob.

"Dr. James Dobson Makes His Presidential Endorsement" .

Charisma News .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2021 . Retrieved August 27, 2020 .

^ Zylstra, Sarah Eekhoff (August 4, 2016).

"Dobson Explains Why He Called Trump a 'Baby Christian' " .

Christianity Today .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2020 . Retrieved August 27, 2020 .

^ Shellnutt, Kate; Eekhoff Zylstra, Sarah (June 22, 2016).

"Who's Who of Trump's 'Tremendous' Faith Advisers" .

Christianity Today . Retrieved May 24, 2025 .

^ Rabey, Steve (October 4, 2020).

"Focus on the Family, James Dobson Family Institute among Colorado Springs ministries pushing to reelect Trump" .

The Gazette .

Archived from the original on October 5, 2020 . Retrieved October 5, 2020 .

^ Gore, Leada (December 23, 2019).

"Dr. James Dobson responds to 'Christianity Today's' call for Trump removal" .

AL.com .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 5, 2020 .

^ Olmstead, Molly (June 24, 2022).

"How the Christian Right Is Responding to the Supreme Court Decision Overturning Roe" .

Slate Magazine .

Archived from the original on July 5, 2022 . Retrieved July 5, 2022 .

^ Olsen, Ted (December 2000).

"James Dobson Charles Colson Head to Vatican Meet with Pope" .

Christianity Today .

Archived from the original on September 7, 2009 . Retrieved October 10, 2009 .

^ "Manhattan Declaration: A Call of Christian Conscience" .

DeMoss News . 2009. Archived from the original on September 1, 2013 . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ "Koop Criticizes Evangelical Leaders on AIDS Stands" .

Los Angeles Times . June 10, 1989.

^ Du Mez 2020 , p. 294.

^ Du Mez 2020 , pp. 303, 343.

^ Welsome, Eileen (August 28, 2010).

"And on the Eighth Day, Dr. Dobson Created Himself" .

5280 .

^ "Commissioner Biographies" . July 1986.

Archived from the original on May 18, 2008 . Retrieved June 20, 2008 .

Bibliography Brenneman, Todd (2014).

Homespun Gospel: The Triumph of Sentimentality in Contemporary American Evangelicalism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199988983 .

Dobson, James C. (1978).

The strong-willed child . Tyndale House.

ISBN 0842359249 .

OCLC 1036957322 – via Internet Archive .

Dobson, James (2001).

Bringing up Boys . Wheaton, Ill.: Tyndale House.

ISBN 978-0-8423-5266-6 – via Internet Archive .

Dobson, James (2004).

Marriage Under Fire: Why We Must Win This War . Multnomah Publishers.

ISBN 9781590524312 – via Internet Archive .

Du Mez, Kristin Kobes (2020).

Jesus and John Wayne: How White Evangelicals Corrupted a Faith and Fractured a Nation . Liveright Publishing Corporation.

ISBN 9781631499050 .

OCLC 1120090251 .

Gilgoff, Dan (2007).

The Jesus Machine: How James Dobson, Focus on the Family, and Evangelical America Are Winning the Culture War . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 9781429917094 – via Google Books .

Moslener, Sara (2015).

Virgin Nation: Sexual Purity and American Adolescence . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199987764.003.0007 .

ISBN 9780199987764 .

Stephens, Hilde Løvdal (2019).

Family Matters: James Dobson and Focus on the Family's Crusade for the Christian Home . Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.

ISBN 9780817320331 .

OCLC 1096236320 – via Google Books .

Ridgely, Susan B. (2016).

Practicing What the Doctor Preached: At Home with Focus on the Family . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199755073.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780190619107 .

Further reading Apostolidis, Paul.

Stations of the Cross: Adorno and Christian Right Radio (2000).

excerpt and text search , analysis of Dobson's radio programs Alexander-Moegerle, Gil (1997).

James Dobson's War on America . Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.

ISBN 1-57392-122-X .

Gilgoff, Dan (April 29, 2008).

The Jesus Machine How James Dobson, Focus on the Family, and Evangelical America are Winning the Culture War . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0-312-37844-8 .

Løvdal, Hilde, Family Matters: James Dobson and the Focus on the Family's Message to American Evangelicals, 1970–2010 (PhD dissertation, University of Oslo, Norway, 2012).

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to James Dobson .

Wikiquote has quotations related to James Dobson .

Dr. James Dobson's Family Talk Appearances on C-SPAN "And on the Eighth Day, Dr. Dobson Created Himself" – article by Eileen Welsome in 5280 Magazine v t e Focus on the Family People James Dobson Donald P. Hodel Jim Daly Ministries JellyTelly Adventures in Odyssey The Last Chance Detectives Day of Dialogue Unlocking the Mystery of Life Brio Love Won Out McGee and Me!

Issues School prayer Corporal punishment Anti-abortion Intelligent design Affiliated organizations National Day of Prayer Task Force ProtectMarriage.com Focus on the Family Canada Focus on the Family Singapore v t e Alliance Defending Freedom Founders Bill Bright Larry Burkett James Dobson D. James Kennedy Marlin Maddoux Leaders Presidents and CEOs Alan Sears Michael Farris Kristen Waggoner Others Chapman B. Cox Marjorie Dannenfelser Charles W. Pickering See also Blackstone Legal Fellowship Day of Dialogue Pulpit Freedom Sunday God's Not Dead List of court cases v t e Andrews McMeel Universal Andrews McMeel Andrews McMeel Syndication Universal Press Syndicate Uclick Atlantic Syndication Comic strips (current) Adam@home Argyle Sweater Baldo Biographic Breaking Cat News C'est la Vie Close to Home Compu-toon Cornered Crankshaft Doonesbury The Duplex The 5th Wave Fluff FoxTrot Fred Basset The Fusco Brothers Garfield Gaturro Ginger Meggs In the Bleachers Judge Dredd La Cucaracha Liō The Lockhorns Loose Parts Mike du Jour Mutt and Jeff (reruns) Nancy New Adventures of Queen Victoria Non Sequitur Off the Mark Overboard Peanuts (reruns) Pearls Before Swine Phoebe and Her Unicorn Pibgorn Pickles Pooch Café Real Life Adventures Red and Rover Stone Soup Tank McNamara Thatababy Tiny Sepuku Tom the Dancing Bug Wallace the Brave Ziggy Comic strips (historical) The Boondocks Brainwaves Calvin and Hobbes Cathy Citizen Dog Cleats Condorito Cul de Sac Dilbert Downstown Encyclopedia Brown The Far Side For Better or For Worse Geech Ink Pen James Bond Kelly & Duke Kudzu Lucky Cow Maintaining Mullets PreTeena Ronaldinho Gaucho W. T. Duck Van Von Hunter Where I'm Coming From You Can with Beakman and Jax Editorial cartoons Lalo Alcaraz Tony Auth Bad Reporter Stuart Carlson Mike Lester Glenn McCoy Pat Oliphant Ted Rall Ben Sargent Tom Toles Kerry Waghorn Lifestyle Ask the Headhunter Dear Abby Focus on the Family On Ethics News of the Weird Scott Burns Other Earthweek Hidato The Independent Magic Eye The Mini Page The Motley Fool Timothy Parker Religion News Service Wonderword Zweihänder Grim & Perilous RPG v t e Social conservatism in the United States Issues and ideas Anti-abortion Anti-LGBTQ ( Gay agenda ) Anti-pornography movement Culture of life Culture war Consistent life ethic Eminent domain Euthanasia Familialism Family values Gender roles Organized religion Parental rights movement Prohibition of drugs Public morality Religious liberty School prayer Friendly separation of church and state Advocates Abbott Ashcroft Bachmann Baldwin Bannon Barton Bennett Brownback Bryant Boebert Boykin Bozell III Buchanan Cameron Carlson Carson Coburn Colson Cruz DeLay DeMint DeSantis Dice Dobson Donohue D'Souza Falwell Sr.

Falwell Jr.

Frist George Gingrich Gohmert Harris Helms Hostettler Huckabee Johnson Jones Kennedy Keyes King Kirk Knowles LaHaye LaHaye Limbaugh Lott McCarthy Moore Owens Palin Parsley Pence (Greg) Pence (Mike) Perkins Peroutka Perry Phillips Prager Raichik Reed Robertson Robinson Ruzicka Santorum Scarborough Schlafly Schundler Scott Shapiro Stenzel Stuckey Tancredo Tatum Greene Thomas Trump Uihlein Walsh Groups American Principles Project Concerned Women for America Eagle Forum Faith and Freedom Coalition Family Research Council Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Heritage Foundation Moms for Liberty Moral Majority National Center on Sexual Exploitation National Organization for Marriage National Right to Life Committee Parents Television and Media Council Traditional Values Coalition Political parties American Solidarity Party Constitution Party Prohibition Party Republican Party Related Christian democracy Christian nationalism Christian right Culture war Factions in the Republican Party LGBT conservatism in the United States Manhattan Declaration Paleoconservatism Reactionary Social justice Straight pride Conservatism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐666f86d675‐55xgn
Cached time: 20250817043608
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.453 seconds
Real time usage: 2.728 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18523/1000000
Revision size: 121552/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 496141/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21676/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 654873/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.573/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13698575/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2288.543      1 -total
 37.30%  853.637      2 Template:Reflist
 17.72%  405.604     61 Template:Cite_book
 14.47%  331.237     58 Template:Cite_web
 10.93%  250.029     63 Template:Sfn
  9.54%  218.266     40 Template:Cite_news
  9.43%  215.760      1 Template:Infobox_religious_biography
  8.03%  183.839      1 Template:Infobox
  7.27%  166.490      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  3.01%   68.951      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:46230:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043608 and revision id 1304083962. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_Dobson&oldid=1304083962 " Categories : 1936 births Living people 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American psychologists 20th-century evangelicals 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American psychologists 21st-century evangelicals Activists from California Alliance Defending Freedom people American anti-abortion activists American evangelicals American evangelists American founders American radio personalities American radio producers California Republicans Christians from California Christians from Colorado Christians from Louisiana American Evangelical writers Focus on the Family people Intelligent design advocates Leaders of Christian parachurch organizations Louisiana Republicans Point Loma Nazarene Sea Lions men's tennis players Promise Keepers University of Southern California alumni University of Southern California faculty Writers from Shreveport, Louisiana Hidden categories: CS1 maint: url-status All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from August 2018 CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from September 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2019 Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from June 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 Articles with unsourced quotes All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 21:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James Dobson 13 languages Add topic

