Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature Toggle Nomenclature subsection 1.1 Components 1.2 Types 1.3 Cylinder assemblies 2 Materials 3 Design Toggle Design subsection 3.1 Pressure rating 4 Manufacturing processes Toggle Manufacturing processes subsection 4.1 Type 1 seamless metal cylinders 4.1.1 Aluminium 4.1.2 Steel 4.1.2.1 Drawn from plate 4.1.2.2 Spun from seamless tube 4.1.2.3 Forged from billet 4.1.2.4 Cylinder neck 4.1.3 Type 2 hoop wrapped metal liner 4.1.4 Type 3 fully wrapped thin metal liner 4.1.5 Type 4 fully wrapped plastic liner 4.1.6 Welded gas cylinders 5 Regulations and testing 6 Valve connections Toggle Valve connections subsection 6.1 Neck thread 6.2 Valve 6.3 Connection 6.4 Regulator 7 Safety and standards Toggle Safety and standards subsection 7.1 International and national standards 7.2 Transportation 7.2.1 International air 7.2.2 Europe 7.2.3 United States 7.3 Color coding 7.3.1 Medical gas cylinder color code Indian standard 7.4 Permanent markings 8 Filling Toggle Filling subsection 8.1 Filling by pressure 8.1.1 Charging pressure 8.2 Filling by mass 8.3 Pre-filling inspection of the cylinder 9 Common sizes 10 Gas storage tubes 11 Gas storage banks Toggle Gas storage banks subsection 11.1 Gas storage quads 12 See also 13 References 14 Sources 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Gas cylinder 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Gas storage bank ) Cylindrical container for storing pressurised gas For the mechanical devices used to impart a force from a pressurized gas, see pneumatic cylinder . For the large structures used to store town gas, see gas holder .

Industrial compressed gas cylinders used for oxy-fuel welding and cutting of steel .

A gas cylinder is a pressure vessel for storage and containment of gases at above atmospheric pressure . Gas storage cylinders may also be called bottles . Inside the cylinder the stored contents may be in a state of compressed gas, vapor over liquid, supercritical fluid , or dissolved in a substrate material, depending on the physical characteristics of the contents. A typical gas cylinder design is elongated, standing upright on a flattened or dished bottom end or foot ring, with the cylinder valve screwed into the internal neck thread at the top for connecting to the filling or receiving apparatus.

[ 1 ] Nomenclature [ edit ] Gas cylinders may be grouped by several characteristics, such as construction method, material, pressure group, class of contents, transportability, and re-usability.

[ 2 ] The size of a pressurised gas container that may be classed as a gas cylinder is typically 0.5 litres to 150 litres. Smaller containers may be termed gas cartridges, and larger may be termed gas tubes, tanks, or other specific type of pressure vessel. A gas cylinder is used to store gas or liquefied gas at pressures above normal atmospheric pressure.

[ 2 ] In South Africa, a gas storage cylinder implies a refillable transportable container with a water capacity volume of up to 150 litres. Refillable transportable cylindrical containers from 150 to 3,000 litres water capacity are referred to as tubes.

[ 1 ] A pressure receptacle is a general term for cylinders, bundles, tubes and pressure drums for the storage and transportation of compressed or liquefied gases with a water capacity from 0,5 L to 3000 L, and may be refillable or non refillable. Alternative terms include "transportable gas containers" and "transportable pressure containers".

[ 3 ] In the United States, " bottled gas " typically refers to liquefied petroleum gas . "Bottled gas" is sometimes used in medical supply, especially for portable high pressure oxygen cylinders . Packaged industrial gases are frequently called "cylinder gas", though "bottled gas" is sometimes used. The term propane tank is also used for cylinders for propane.

[ citation needed ] The United Kingdom and other parts of Europe more commonly refer to "bottled gas" when discussing any usage, whether industrial, medical, or liquefied petroleum. In contrast, what is called liquefied petroleum gas in the United States is known generically in the United Kingdom as "LPG" and it may be ordered by using one of several trade names , or specifically as butane or propane , depending on the required heat output.

[ citation needed ] The term cylinder in this context is sometimes confused with tank , the latter being an open-top or vented container that stores liquids under gravity, though the term scuba tank is commonly used to refer to a compressed gas cylinder used for breathing gas supply to an underwater breathing apparatus .

Components [ edit ] Cylinder – Either the shell or the complete assembly of shell and all accessories directly attached to the shell, depending on context.

Shell – The pressure vessel as a whole, excepting accessories.

Shoulder – The end of the shell with a neck or boss into which the valve is fitted.

[ 4 ] Neck – A coaxial cylindrical extension of the shoulder with a threaded hole into which the cylinder valve or a gas pipe connection is fitted.

[ 5 ] Boss – A sturdy insert, usually in the centre of the shoulder, into which a valve or gas pipe connection is fitted.

[ 5 ] Base or foot – The end of the shell opposite the shoulder.

[ 5 ] Liner – The core on which filament windings are laid. The core may be structural (usually metal), and share the pressure loads, or purely to separate composite wrapping from the cylinder contents, (metal or engineering plastic).

[ 5 ] Cylinder valve – a shutoff valve directly coupled to the cylinder shell at the neck or boss which is opened to allow gas flow into or out of the cylinder, and closed to prevent such flow. It usually has a threaded inlet/outlet opening to which other equipment can be connected, but in some cases may have an integral pressure regulator on the outlet side, and a separate inlet opening for filling.

[ 4 ] Foot ring – A permanently attached ring fitted to the base on which the cylinder can stand.

[ 1 ] Valve guard – A fitting (cap or collar) screwed or clamped to the shoulder, defending the valve from impact during transport, and in some cases, when in use.

[ 1 ] Permanent markings – Information identifying the cylinder and its specification, stamped into the outside of the shoulder on metal cylinders.

[ 6 ] On composite cylinders permanent makings can be a printed label encapsulated under the resin or covered by a permanent transparent coating on the shoulder or side wall of the cylinder.

[ 7 ] Types [ edit ] Since fibre-composite materials have been used to reinforce pressure vessels, various types of cylinder distinguished by the construction method and materials used have been defined: [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Type 1: Metal only . Mostly seamless forged metal, but for lower working pressure, e.g.

, liquefied butane, welded steel vessels are also used.

[ 9 ] Type 2: Metal vessel, hoop wrapped with a fibre composite only around the cylindrical part of the "cylinder". (Geometrically there is a need for twice the tensile strength on the cylindrical region in comparison to the spherical caps of the cylinder.) [ 9 ] Type 3: Thin metal liner (that keeps the vessel gas tight, but does not contribute to the strength) fully wrapped with fibre composite material.

[ 9 ] Type 4: Metal-free liner of plastic, fully wrapped with fibre composite material. The neck of the  cylinder which includes the thread for the valve is a metal insert.

[ 9 ] Cylinder assemblies [ edit ] Assemblies comprising a group of cylinders mounted together  for combined use or transport: Bank – A group of cylinders connected to a gas distribution system for bulk storage, where the individual cylinders may be used together or separately, but are not necessarily supported by a structure which can be used to transport them as a group.

Cascade – A bank when used in cascade .

Quad or bundle, also occasionally gas pack or gas battery – A bank of high pressure gas storage cylinders, typically mounted upright on a rectangular frame for transport, and manifolded together.

[ 10 ] A pallet is a similar appearing group of cylinders on a lifting frame with no functional connections. The maximum combined cylinder volume for a bundle is 3000 litres for non-toxic gases and 1000 litres for toxic gases. Gas bundles are specified by ISO 10961:2019 Gas cylinders — Cylinder bundles — Design, manufacture, testing and inspection.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Rack – A structure to hold cylinders safely upright or horizontal while in use, for transport, or in storage.

Materials [ edit ] For a detailed discussion about the materials for gas cylinders, see Pressure vessel § Construction materials .

All-metal cylinders are the most rugged and usually the most economical option, but are relatively heavy. Steel is generally the most resistant to rough handling and most economical, and is often lighter than aluminium for the same working pressure, capacity, and form factor due to its higher specific strength. The inspection interval of industrial steel cylinders has increased from 5 or 6 years to 10 years.

Diving cylinders that are used in water must be inspected more often; intervals tend to range between 1 and 5 years. Steel cylinders may continue to be used indefinitely providing they pass periodic inspection and testing.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] When they were found to have inherent structural problems, certain steel and aluminium alloys were withdrawn from service, or discontinued from new production, while existing cylinders may require different inspection or testing, but remain in service provided they pass these tests.

[ citation needed ] For very high pressures, composites have a greater mass advantage. Due to the very high tensile strength of carbon fiber reinforced polymer , these vessels can be very light, but are more expensive to manufacture.

[ 15 ] Filament wound composite cylinders are used in fire fighting breathing apparatus, high altitude climbing, and oxygen first aid equipment because of their low weight, but are rarely used for diving, due to their high positive buoyancy . They are occasionally used when portability for accessing the dive site is critical, such as in cave diving where the water surface is far from the cave entrance.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Composite cylinders certified to ISO-11119-2 or ISO-11119-3 may only be used for underwater applications if they are manufactured in accordance with the requirements for underwater use and are marked "UW".

[ 18 ] Cylinders reinforced with or made from a fibre reinforced material usually must be inspected more frequently than metal cylinders, e.g.

, every 5 instead of 10 years, and must be inspected more thoroughly than metal cylinders as they are more susceptible to impact damage. They may also have a limited service life.

[ citation needed ] Fibre composite cylinders were originally specified for a limited life span of 15, 20 or 30 years, but this has been extended when they proved to be suitable for longer service.

[ citation needed ] Design [ edit ] The primary design focus for seamless metal (steel and aluminium) high pressure cylinders is on cylindrical wall thickness. This is calculated using the Lamé-von Mises formula for thick walled cylinders. Where the application may impose significant bending, torsional or local loads, these stresses must also be considered. Cylinder ends are generally approximately hemispherical, and require consideration for openings for internal inspection, filling and access to the contents.

[ 19 ] a A corrosion allowance may be added to the design thiskness to allow for surface corrosion over the service life where applicable, and the stresses are generally limited so that the test pressure stress is within the fatigue limit for steel cylinders.

[ 13 ] The end dome thickness is usually determined by manufacturing process constraints, and for forged and spun ends the thickness tends to be greater than the cylindrical wall, though the pressure stresses in a spherical shell are roughly half those in a cylinder, making the ends much heavier than they need to be to theoretically withstand the pressure load. This extra thickness makes the ends relatively strong and able to support local stress concentrations due to stamp markings and neck threads. In seamless metal cylinders the thicker end wall and relatively small internal volume of the ends make the ends considerably heavier than the cylindrical section for the internal volume contribution, so this type of cylinder tends to be lighter  per unit volume when the cylindrical part is longer.

Thin-walled cylinder (for wall thickness less than 0.1 of the outside radius) stress. See: Cylinder stress#Thin-walled assumption Thick-walled cylinder (for any wall thickness) stress. See: Cylinder stress#Thick-walled vessels This section needs expansion with: describe stress distribution and design calculations for these types. You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) Pressure rating [ edit ] See also: Diving cylinder § Pressure rating The thickness of the cylinder wall is a function of the material the pressure and the diameter. The thickness of the ends is also affected by the manufacturing process.

Working pressure is the pressure that the cylinder is designed to withstand under working conditions at the nominal reference temperature.

Test pressure is the pressure the cylinder must withstand periodically when tested for revalidation. Hydrostatic test pressure (TP) is specified by the manufacturing standard. For seamless metal high-pressure cylinders, this is usually 1.5 × working pressure, or in the United States, 1.67 × working pressure.

[ 1 ] Developed pressure: Cylinder working pressure is specified at a reference temperature, usually 15 °C or 20 °C, and cylinders also have a specified maximum safe working temperature, often 65 °C.

[ 1 ] The actual pressure in the cylinder will vary with temperature, as described by the gas laws, but this is acceptable in terms of the standards provided that the developed pressure when corrected to the reference temperature does not exceed the specified working pressure stamped on the cylinder. This allows cylinders to be safely and legally filled to a pressure that is higher than the specified working pressure when the filling temperature is greater than the reference temperature, but not more than 65 °C, provided that the filling pressure does not exceed the developed pressure for that temperature, and cylinders filled according to this provision will be at the correct working pressure when cooled to the reference temperature.

[ 1 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) Manufacturing processes [ edit ] Type 1 seamless metal cylinders [ edit ] See also: Cold extrusion and Seamless pipe The Type 1 pressure vessel is a seamless cylinder normally made of cold-extruded aluminum or forged steel .

[ 20 ] The pressure vessel comprises a cylindrical section of even wall thickness, with a thicker base at one end, and domed shoulder with a central neck to attach a cylinder valve or manifold at the other end.

Occasionally other materials may be used.

Inconel has been used for non-magnetic and highly corrosion resistant oxygen compatible spherical high-pressure gas containers for the US Navy's Mk-15 and Mk-16 mixed gas rebreathers, and a few other military rebreathers.

Aluminium [ edit ] Most aluminum cylinders are flat bottomed, allowing them to stand upright on a level surface, but some were manufactured with domed bottoms. Aluminum cylinders are usually manufactured by cold extrusion of aluminum billets in a process which first presses the walls and base, then trims the top edge of the cylinder walls, followed by press forming the shoulder and neck. The final structural process is machining the neck outer surface, boring and cutting the neck threads and O-ring groove. The cylinder is then heat-treated, tested and stamped with the required permanent markings. The extrusion process forms the bottom to match the shape of the die, so a curved or flat bottom can be chosen to fit the requirements of the end user.

[ 21 ] Section of die with billet inserted Cold extrusion process Extrusion product before trimming Section after closure of the top end Section showing machined areas of the neck in detail Hydrostatic test Steel [ edit ] Animation showing two stages of deep drawing of a steel plate to a cup, and a similar cup to a diving cylinder blank with domed bottom Steel cylinders are often used because they are harder and more resistant to external surface impact and abrasion damage, and can tolerate higher temperatures without affecting material properties. They also may have a lower mass than aluminium cylinders with the same gas capacity , due to considerably higher specific strength . Steel cylinders are more susceptible than aluminium to external corrosion, particularly in seawater, and may be galvanized or coated with corrosion barrier paints to resist corrosion damage. It is not difficult to monitor external corrosion, and repair the paint when damaged, and steel cylinders which are well maintained have a long service life, often longer than aluminium cylinders, as they are not susceptible to fatigue damage when filled within their safe working pressure limits and re-validated to the appropriate test pressure.

[ 13 ] Steel cylinders are manufactured with domed (convex) and dished (concave) bottoms. The dished profile allows them to stand upright on a horizontal surface, and is the standard shape for industrial cylinders. The cylinders used for emergency gas supply on diving bells are often this shape, and commonly have a water capacity of about 50 litres. Domed bottoms give a larger volume for the same cylinder mass, and are the standard for scuba cylinders up to 18 litres water capacity, though some concave bottomed cylinders have been marketed for scuba. Domed end industrial cylinders may be fitted with a press-fitted foot ring to allow upright standing.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Steel alloys used for gas cylinder manufacture are authorised by the manufacturing standard. For example, the US standard DOT 3AA requires the use of open-hearth, basic oxygen, or electric steel of uniform quality. Approved alloys include 4130X, NE-8630, 9115, 9125, Carbon-boron and Intermediate manganese, with specified constituents, including manganese and carbon, and molybdenum, chromium, boron, nickel or zirconium.

[ 24 ] Drawn from plate [ edit ] Steel cylinders may be manufactured from steel plate discs stamped from annealed plate or coil, which are lubricated and cold drawn to a cylindrical cup form, by a hydraulic press, this is annealed and drawn again in two or three stages, until the final diameter and wall thickness is reached. They generally have a domed base if intended for the scuba market, so they cannot stand up by themselves. For industrial use a dished base allows the cylinder to stand on the end on a flat surface. After forming the base and side walls, the top of the cylinder is trimmed to length, heated and hot spun to form the shoulder and close the neck. This process thickens the material of the shoulder. The cylinder is heat-treated by quenching and tempering to provide the best strength and toughness. The cylinders are machined to provide the neck thread and o-ring seat (if applicable), then chemically cleaned or shot-blasted inside and out to remove mill scale . After inspection and hydrostatic testing they are stamped with the required permanent markings, followed by external coating with a corrosion barrier paint or hot dip galvanising and final inspection.

[ 25 ] [ 5 ] Spun from seamless tube [ edit ] A related method is to start with seamless steel tube of a suitable diameter and wall thickness, manufactured by a process such as the Mannesmann process , and to close both ends by the hot spinning process. This method is particularly suited to high pressure gas storage tubes , which usually have a threaded neck opening at both ends, so that both ends are processed alike. When a neck opening is only required at one end, the base is spun first and dressed inside for a uniform smooth surface, then the process of closing the shoulder and forming the neck is the same as for the pressed plate method.

[ 5 ] Forged from billet [ edit ] An alternative production method is backward extrusion of a heated steel billet, similar to the cold extrusion process for aluminium cylinders, followed by hot drawing and bottom forming to reduce wall thickness, and trimming of the top edge in preparation for shoulder and neck formation by hot spinning. The other processes are much the same for all production methods.

[ 26 ] [ 5 ] Cylinder neck [ edit ] The neck of the cylinder is the part of the end which is shaped as a narrow concentric cylinder, and internally threaded to fit a cylinder valve. There are several standards for neck threads, which include parallel threads where the seal is by an O-ring gasket, and taper threads which seal along the contact surface by deformation of the contact surfaces, and on thread tape or sealing compound .

[ 4 ] Type 2 hoop wrapped metal liner [ edit ] Type 2 is hoop wrapped with fibre reinforced resin over the cylindrical part of the cylinder, where circumferential load is highest. The fibres share the circumferential load with the metal core, and achieve a significant weight saving due to efficient stress distribution and high specific strength and stiffness of the composite. The core is a seamless metal cylinder, manufactured in any of the ways suitable for a type 1 cylinder, but with thinner walls, as they only carry about half the load, mainly the axial load. Hoop winding is at an angle to the length axis of close to 90°, so the fibres carry negligible axial load.

[ 5 ] Type 3 fully wrapped thin metal liner [ edit ] Type 3 is wrapped over the entire cylinder except for the neck, and the metal liner is mainly to make the cylinder gas tight, so very little load is carried by the liner.

Winding angles are optimised to carry all the loads (axial and circumferential) from the pressurised gas in the cylinder. Only the neck metal is exposed on the outside. This construction can save in the order of 30% of the mass compared with type 2, as the fibre composite has a higher specific strength than the metal of the type 2 liner that it replaces.

[ 5 ] Type 4 fully wrapped plastic liner [ edit ] Type 4 is wrapped in the same way as type 3, but the liner is non-metallic. A metal neck boss is fitted to the shoulder of the plastic liner before winding, and this carries the neck threads for the cylinder valve. The outside of the neck of the insert is not covered by the fibre wrapping, and may have axial ridges to engage with a wrench or clamp for torsional support when fitting or removing the cylinder valve. There is a mass reduction compared with type 3 due to the lower density of the plastic liner.

[ 5 ] Welded gas cylinders [ edit ] See also: Fusion welding and Rolling A welded gas cylinder comprises two or more shell components joined by welding. The most commonly used material is steel, but stainless steel, aluminium and other alloys can be used when they are better suited to the application. Steel is strong, resistant to physical damage, easy to weld, relatively low cost, and usually adequate for corrosion resistance, and provides an economical product.

The components of the shell are usually domed ends, and often a rolled cylindrical centre section. The ends are usually domed by cold pressing from a circular blank, and may be drawn in two or more stages to get the final shape, which is generally semi-elliptical in section. The end blank is typically punched from sheet, drawn to the required section, edges trimmed to size and necked for overlap where appropriate, and hole(s) for the neck and other fittings punched. The neck boss is inserted from the concave side and welded in place before shell assembly.

[ 27 ] Smaller cylinders are typically assembled from a top and bottom dome, with an equatorial weld seam. Larger cylinders with a longer cylindrical body comprise dished ends circumferentially welded to a rolled central cylindrical section with a single longitudinal welded seam. Welding is typically automated gas metal arc welding .

[ 27 ] Typical accessories which are welded to the outside of the cylinder include a foot ring, a valve guard with lifting handles, and a neck boss threaded for the valve. Occasionally other through-shell and external fittings are also welded on.

[ 27 ] After welding, the assembly may be heat treated for stress-relief and to improve mechanical characteristics, cleaned by shotblasting , and coated with a protective and decorative coating. Testing and inspection for quality control will take place at various stages of production.

[ 27 ] Regulations and testing [ edit ] The transportation of high-pressure cylinders is regulated by many governments throughout the world. Various levels of testing are generally required by the governing authority for the country in which it is to be transported while filled. In the United States, this authority is the United States Department of Transportation (DOT). Similarly in the UK, the European transport regulations (ADR) are implemented by the Department for Transport (DfT). For Canada, this authority is Transport Canada (TC). Cylinders may have additional requirements placed on design and or performance from independent testing agencies such as Underwriters Laboratories (UL). Each manufacturer of high-pressure cylinders is required to have an independent quality agent that will inspect the product for quality and safety.

Within the UK the " competent authority " — the Department for Transport (DfT) — implements the regulations and appointment of authorised cylinder testers is conducted by United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS), who make recommendations to the Vehicle Certification Agency (VCA) for approval of individual bodies.

There are a variety of tests that may be performed on various cylinders. Some of the most common types of tests are hydrostatic test , burst test, ultimate tensile strength , Charpy impact test and pressure cycling.

During the manufacturing process, vital information is usually stamped or permanently marked on the cylinder. This information usually includes the type of cylinder, the working or service pressure, the serial number, date of manufacture, the manufacture's registered code and sometimes the test pressure. Other information may also be stamped, depending on the regulation requirements.

High-pressure cylinders that are used multiple times — as most are — can be hydrostatically or ultrasonically tested and visually examined every few years.

[ 28 ] In the United States, hydrostatic or ultrasonic testing is required either every five years or every ten years, depending on cylinder and its service.

Valve connections [ edit ] A gas regulator attached to a nitrogen cylinder. From right — cylinder valve, cylinder pressure gauge, pressure control valve (yellow) on regulator (green), outlet pressure gauge, 3-way outlet terminated by needle valves.

Neck thread [ edit ] See also: Diving cylinder § Cylinder neck , and Pressure vessel § Penetration thread Cylinder neck thread can be to any one of several standards. Both taper thread sealed with thread tape and parallel thread sealed with an O-ring have been found satisfactory for high pressure service, but each has advantages and disadvantages for specific use cases, and if there are no regulatory requirements, the type may be chosen to suit the application.

[ 4 ] A tapered thread provides simple assembly, but requires high torque for establishing a reliable seal, which causes high radial forces in the  neck, and has a limited number of times it can be used before it is excessively deformed. This can be extended a bit by always returning the same fitting to the same cylinder, and avoiding over-tightening.

[ 4 ] In Australia, Europe and North America, tapered neck threads are generally preferred for inert, flammable, corrosive and toxic gases, but when aluminium cylinders are used for oxygen service to United States Department of Transportation (DOT) or Transport Canada (TC) specifications in North America, the cylinders must have parallel thread. DOT and TC allow UN pressure vessels to have tapered or parallel threaded openings. In the US, 49 CFR Part 171.11 applies, and in Canada, CSA B340-18 and CSA B341-18. In Europe and other parts of the world, tapered thread is preferred for cylinder inlets for oxidising gases.

[ 4 ] Scuba cylinders typically have a much shorter interval between internal inspections, so the use of tapered thread is less satisfactory due to the limited number of times a tapered thread valve can be re-used before it wears out, [ 4 ] so parallel thread is generally used for this application.

[ 1 ] Parallel thread can be tightened sufficiently to form a good seal with the O-ring without lubrication, which is an advantage when the lubricant may react with the O-ring or the contents. Repeated secure installations are possible with different combinations of valve and cylinder provided they have compatible thread and correct O-ring seals. Parallel thread is more likely to give the technician warning of residual internal pressure by leaking or extruding the O-ring before catastrophic failure when the O-ring seal is broken during removal of the valve. The O-ring size must be correct for the combination of cylinder and valve, and the material must be compatible with the contents and any lubricant used.

[ 4 ] Valve [ edit ] Gas cylinders usually have an angle stop valve at one end, and the cylinder is usually oriented so the valve is on top. During storage, transportation, and handling when the gas is not in use, a cap may be screwed over the protruding valve to protect it from damage or breaking off in case the cylinder were to fall over. Instead of a cap, cylinders sometimes have a protective collar or neck ring around the valve assembly which has an opening for access to fit a regulator or other fitting to the valve outlet, and access to operate the valve. Installation of valves for high pressure aluminum alloy cylinders is described in the guidelines: CGA V-11, Guideline for the Installation of Valves into High Pressure Aluminum Alloy Cylinders and ISO 13341, Transportable gas cylinders—Fitting of valves to gas cylinders.

[ 4 ] Connection [ edit ] The valves on industrial, medical and diving cylinders usually have threads or connection geometries of different handedness, sizes and types that depend on the category of gas, making it more difficult to mistakenly misuse a gas. For example, a hydrogen cylinder valve outlet does not fit an oxygen regulator and supply line, which could result in catastrophe. Some fittings use a right-hand thread, while others use a left-hand thread ; left-hand thread fittings are usually identifiable by notches or grooves cut into them, and are usually used for flammable gases.

In the United States, valve connections are sometimes referred to as CGA connections , since the Compressed Gas Association (CGA) publishes guidelines on what connections to use for what gasses. For example, an argon cylinder may have a "CGA 580" connection on the valve. High purity gases sometimes use CGA-DISS (" Diameter Index Safety System ") connections.

Common cylinder valve connections Gas type CGA valve outlet (USA) Acetylene 510 Air, breathing 346, 347 Air, industrial 590 Argon 580, 718, 680 (3,500 psi), 677 (6,000 psi) Butane 510 Carbon dioxide 320, 716 Carbon monoxide 350, 724 Chlorine 660, 728 Helium 580, 718, 680 (3,500 psi) Hydrogen 350, 724, 695 (3,500 psi) Methane 350 Neon 580, 718 Nitrogen 580, 718, 680 (3,500 psi), 677 (6,000 psi) Nitrous oxide 326, 712 Oxygen 540, 714 Oxygen mixtures (>23.5%) 296 Propane 510 Xenon 580, 718 Medical gases may use the Pin Index Safety System to prevent incorrect connection of gases to services.

In the European Union, DIN connections are more common than in the United States.

In the UK, the British Standards Institution sets the standards. Included among the standards is the use left-hand threaded valves for flammable gas cylinders (most commonly brass, BS4, valves for non-corrosive cylinder contents or stainless steel, BS15, valves for corrosive contents). Non flammable gas cylinders are fitted with right-hand threaded valves (most commonly brass, BS3, valves for non-corrosive components or stainless steel, BS14, valves for corrosive contents).

[ 29 ] Common cylinder valve connections Gas type BS valve outlet (UK) [ 29 ] Acetylene 2, 4 Air, breathing 3 Air, industrial 3 Argon 3 Butane 4 Carbon dioxide 8 Carbon monoxide 4 Chlorine 6 Helium 3 Hydrogen 4 Methane 4 Neon 3 Nitrogen 3 Nitrous oxide 13 Oxygen 3 Oxygen mixtures (>23.5%) Other guides apply Propane 4 Xenon 3 Regulator [ edit ] Main article: Pressure regulator When the gas in the cylinder is to be used at low pressure, the cap is taken off and a pressure-regulating assembly is attached to the stop valve. This attachment typically has a pressure regulator with upstream (inlet) and downstream (outlet) pressure gauges and a further downstream needle valve and outlet connection. For gases that remain gaseous under ambient storage conditions, the upstream pressure gauge can be used to estimate how much gas is left in the cylinder according to pressure. For gases that are liquid under storage, e.g., propane, the outlet pressure is dependent on the vapor pressure of the gas, and does not fall until the cylinder is nearly exhausted, although it will vary according to the temperature of the cylinder contents. The regulator is adjusted to control the downstream pressure, which will limit the maximum flow of gas out of the cylinder at the pressure shown by the downstream gauge. For some purposes, such as shielding gas for arc welding, the regulator will also have a flowmeter on the downstream side.

The regulator outlet connection is attached to whatever needs the gas supply.

Safety and standards [ edit ] It would be safer to have cylinders individually anchored in a cool place, rather than chained in a cluster in the sun, as seen here.

Because the contents are under pressure and are sometimes hazardous materials , handling bottled gases is regulated. Regulations may include chaining bottles to prevent falling and damaging the valve, proper ventilation to prevent injury or death in case of leaks and signage to indicate the potential hazards. If a compressed gas cylinder falls over, causing the valve block to be sheared off, the rapid release of high-pressure gas may cause the cylinder to be violently accelerated, potentially causing property damage, injury, or death. To prevent this, cylinders are normally secured to a fixed object or transport cart with a strap or chain. They can also be stored in a safety cabinet .

In a fire, the pressure in a gas cylinder rises in direct proportion to its temperature . If the internal pressure exceeds the mechanical limitations of the cylinder and there are no means to safely vent the pressurized gas to the atmosphere, the vessel will fail mechanically. If the vessel contents are flammable, this event may result in a "fireball".

[ 30 ] Oxidisers such as oxygen and fluorine will produce a similar effect by accelerating combustion in the area affected. If the cylinder's contents are liquid, but become a gas at ambient conditions, this is commonly referred to as a boiling liquid expanding vapour explosion (BLEVE).

[ 31 ] Medical gas cylinders in the UK and some other countries have a fusible plug of Wood's metal in the valve block between the valve seat and the cylinder.

[ citation needed ] This plug melts at a comparatively low temperature (70 °C) and allows the contents of the cylinder to escape to the surroundings before the cylinder is significantly weakened by the heat, lessening the risk of explosion.

[ 32 ] Fusible plugs are also used on some acetylene cylinders.

[ 33 ] More common pressure relief devices are a simple burst disc installed in the base of the valve between the cylinder and the valve seat. A burst disc is a small metal gasket engineered to rupture at a pre-determined pressure. Some burst discs are backed with a low-melting-point metal, so that the valve must be exposed to excessive heat before the burst disc can rupture.

[ citation needed ] The Compressed Gas Association publishes a number of booklets and pamphlets on safe handling and use of bottled gases.

International and national standards [ edit ] See also: American Standard Safety System There is a wide range of standards relating to the manufacture, use and testing of pressurised gas cylinders and related components. Some examples are listed here.

ISO 11439 : Gas cylinders — High-pressure cylinders for the on-board storage of natural gas as a fuel for automotive vehicles [ 34 ] ISO 15500-5: Road vehicles — Compressed natural gas (CNG) fuel system components — Part 5: Manual cylinder valve [ 35 ] [ 36 ] US DOT CFR Title 49, part 178, Subpart C — Specification for Cylinders [ 37 ] US DOT Aluminum Tank Alloy 6351-T6 amendment for SCUBA, SCBA, Oxygen Service — Visual Eddy inspection [ 38 ] AS 2896-2011:Medical gas systems—Installation and testing of non-flammable medical gas pipeline systems pipeline systems (Australian Standards).

EN 1964-3 – Transportable gas cylinders. Specification for the design and construction of refillable transportable seamless steel gas cylinders of water capacities capacity from 0,5 litre up to 150 litre [ 39 ] ISO 9809-1: Gas Cylinders–Refillable Seamless Steel Gas Cylinders–Design, Construction and Testing–Part 1: Quenched and Tempered Steel Cylinders with Tensile Strength less than 1 100 Mpa ISO 9809-2: Gas Cylinders–Refillable Seamless Steel Gas Cylinders–Design, Construction and Testing–Part 2: Quenched and Tempered Steel Cylinders with Tensile Strength Greater than or Equal to 1 100 Mpa ISO 9809-3: Gas Cylinders–Refillable Seamless Steel Gas Cylinders–Design, Construction and Testing–Part 3: Normalized Steel Cylinders EN ISO 11120 – Gas cylinders. Refillable seamless steel tubes of water capacity between 150 l and 3000 l. Design, construction and testing (ISO 11120:2015) [ 39 ] EN 1975 – Transportable gas cylinders. Specification for the design and construction of refillable transportable seamless aluminium and aluminium alloy gas cylinders of capacity from 0,5 litre up to 150 litre [ 39 ] EN 84/526/EEC – Aluminium high pressure gas cylinder design [ 39 ] EN 12245 – Transportable gas cylinders Fully wrapped composite cylinders [ 39 ] ISO 11119-1 Gas cylinders — Design, construction and testing of refillable composite gas cylinders and tubes — Part 1: Hoop wrapped fibre reinforced composite gas cylinders and tubes up to 450  l [ 39 ] HOAL — Home Office Aluminium — UK seamless aluminium high pressure cylinder manufacturing standards HOAL1, HOAL2, HOAL3 and HOAL4 (superseded) in HE30/AA6082 or AA6351 alloys.

[ 40 ] Transportation [ edit ] See also: Diving cylinder § Transportation Gas cylinders are classified by the UN as dangerous goods for transportation purposes (US: Hazardous materials). Selecting the Proper Shipping Name (well known by the abbreviation PSN) is a way to help ensure that the dangerous goods offered for transport accurately represent the hazards.

[ 41 ] IATA Dangerous Goods Regulations (DGR) 55th Edition defines the Proper Shipping Name as "the name to be used to describe a particular article or substance in all shipping documents and notifications and,  where appropriate, on packagings".

[ 41 ] The International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code (IMDG Code) defines the Proper Shipping Name as "that portion of the entry most accurately describing the goods in the Dangerous Goods List which is shown in upper-case characters (plus any letters which form an integral part of the name)." [ 41 ] This section needs expansion with: Cover different situations for toxic and corrosive gases. You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) Diving gas cylinders: Hazardous materials descriptions and proper shipping names (PSN) [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Hazard class or division Identification numbers Label codes Quantity limitations Air, compressed 2.2 UN1002 2.2 Passenger aircraft/rail:  75 kg Cargo aircraft only: 150 kg Argon, compressed 2.2 UN1006 2.2 Helium, compressed 2.2 UN1046 2.2 Nitrogen, compressed 2.2 UN1066 2.2 Oxygen, compressed 2.2 UN1072 2.2, 5.1 Compressed gas N.O.S. (not otherwise specified) e.g. normoxic and hypoxic Heliox and Trimix 2.2 UN1956 2.2 Compressed gas, oxidising, N.O.S e.g. Nitrox 2.2 UN3156 2.2, 5.1 International air [ edit ] International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Technical Instructions for the Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air states that provided that pressure in diving cylinders is less than 200 kilopascals (2 bar; 29 psi), these can be carried as checked in or carry-on baggage. It maybe necessary to empty the cylinder to verify this. Once emptied, the cylinder valve should be closed to prevent moisture entering the cylinder. Security restrictions implemented by individual countries may further limit or forbid the carriage of some items permitted by ICAO, and airlines and security screening agencies have the right to refuse the carriage of certain items.

[ 45 ] Europe [ edit ] Since 1996 the carriage of dangerous goods legislation of the UK has been harmonized with that of Europe.

[ 46 ] Road transport The 2009 (amended 2011) UK Carriage of Dangerous Goods and Use of Transportable Pressure Equipment Regulations (CDG Regulations) implement the European Agreement Concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road (ADR). Dangerous goods to be carried internationally in road vehicles must comply with standards for the packaging and labelling of the dangerous goods, and appropriate construction and operating standards for the vehicles and crew.

[ 43 ] [ 46 ] The regulations cover transportation of gas cylinders in a vehicle in a commercial environment. Transportation of pressurised diving gas cylinders with a combined water capacity of less than 1000 litres on a vehicle for personal use is exempt from ADR.

[ 43 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Transport of gas cylinders in a vehicle, for commercial purposes, must follow basic legal safety requirements and, unless specifically exempted, must comply with ADR. The driver of the vehicle is legally responsible for the safety of the vehicle and any load being carried, and insurance for the vehicle should include cover for the carriage of dangerous goods.

[ 43 ] [ 46 ] Diving gases, including compressed air, oxygen, nitrox, heliox, trimix, helium and argon, are non-toxic, non flammable, and may be oxidizer or asphyxiant, and are rated in Transport category 3.

[ 46 ] The threshold quantity for these gases is 1000 litres combined water capacity of the cylinders. Pressure must be within the rated working pressure of the cylinder.
Empty air cylinders at atmospheric pressure are rated in Transport category 4, and there is no threshold quantity.

[ 43 ] [ 46 ] Commercial loads below the 1000 litres threshold level are exempt from some of the requirements of ADR, but must comply with basic legal and safety requirements, including: [ 46 ] Driver training [ 46 ] Cylinders should be transported in open vehicles, open containers or trailers, with a gas-tight bulkhead separating driver from load. If cylinders must be carried inside a vehicle it must be well ventilated.

[ 46 ] Ventilation. Where gas cylinders are carried inside a vehicle, in the same space as people, the windows should be kept open to allow air to circulate.

[ 46 ] Cylinders must be secured so that they cannot move during transport. They shall not project beyond the sides or ends of the vehicle. It is recommended that cylinders are transported vertically, secured in an appropriate pallet.

[ 46 ] Cylinder valves must be closed whilst in transit and checked that there are no leaks. Where applicable, protective valve caps and covers should be fitted to cylinders before transporting. Cylinders should not be transported with equipment attached to the valve outlet (regulators, hoses etc.).

[ 46 ] A fire extinguisher is required on the vehicle.

[ 46 ] Gas cylinders may only be transported if they are in-date for periodic inspection and test, except they may be transported when out of date for inspection, testing or disposal.

[ 46 ] Cylinders should be kept cool (at ambient temperatures) and not stowed in places where they will be exposed to sources of excessive heat.

[ 46 ] Product identification labels attached to cylinders to identify the contents and provide safety advice must not be removed or defaced.

[ 46 ] It is not necessary to mark and label the vehicle if carrying dangerous goods below the threshold level. The use of hazard labels can assist the emergency services, and they may be displayed, but all hazard labels must be removed when the relevant dangerous goods are not being transported.

[ 46 ] When the journey is complete the gas cylinders should be immediately unloaded from the vehicle.

[ 46 ] All loads above the threshold must comply with the full requirements of ADR.

[ 43 ] [ 46 ] United States [ edit ] Transportation of hazardous materials for commercial purposes [ 48 ] in the USA is regulated by Code of Federal Regulations Title 49 - Transportation, (abbreviated 49 CFR).

[ 49 ] A cylinder containing 200 kPa (29.0 psig/43.8 psia) or greater at 20 °C (68 °F) of non-flammable, nonpoisonous compressed gas, and being transported for commercial purposes is classified as HAZMAT (hazardous materials) in terms of 49 CFR 173.115(b) (1).

[ 50 ] Cylinders manufactured to DOT standards or special permits (exemptions)issued by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration and filled to the authorized working pressure are legal for commercial transport in the USA under the provisions and conditions of the regulations.

[ 49 ] [ 51 ] Cylinders manufactured outside the USA may be transported under a special permit, and these have been issued for solid metal and composite cylinders with working pressures of up to 300 bar (4400 psi) by several manufacturers.

[ 52 ] Commercial transportation of breathing gas cylinders with a combined weight of more than 1000 pounds may only be done by a commercial HAZMAT transportation company. Transport of cylinders with a combined weight of less than 1000 pounds requires a manifest, the cylinders must have been tested and inspected to federal standards, and the contents marked on each cylinder. Transportation must be done in a safe manner, with the cylinders restrained from movement. No special licence is required. DOT regulations require content labels for all cylinders under the regulations, but according to PSI, labelling of breathing air will not be enforced. Oxygen or non-air oxidizing (O 2 ≥ 23.5% ) mixtures must be labelled. Private (non-commercial) transport of scuba cylinders is not covered by this regulation.

[ 53 ] Empty scuba tanks or scuba tanks pressurized at less than 200 kPa are not restricted as hazardous materials.

[ 54 ] Scuba cylinders are only allowed in checked baggage or as a carry-on if the cylinder valve is completely disconnected from the cylinder and the cylinder has an open end to allow for a visual inspection inside.

[ 55 ] Color coding [ edit ] ISO Cylinder Colour Coding for Different (medical) Gases Gas cylinders are often color-coded , but the codes are not standard across different jurisdictions, and sometimes are not regulated. Cylinder color can not safely be used for positive product identification; cylinders have labels to identify the gas they contain.

Medical gas cylinder color code Indian standard [ edit ] The Indian Standard for Gas Cylinder Color Code applies to the identification of the contents of gas cylinders intended for medical use. Each cylinder shall be painted externally in the colours corresponding to its gaseous contents.

[ 56 ] Permanent markings [ edit ] The shoulder of the cylinder carries stamp markings providing required information about the cylinder.

[ 57 ] Stamp markings on an American manufacture aluminum 40 cu ft 3000 psi cylinder Stamp markings on an American manufacture aluminum 80 cu ft 3000 psi cylinder Stamp markings on a British-manufacture aluminium 12.2-litre 232-bar cylinder Stamp markings on an Italian manufacture steel 7-litre 300-bar cylinder Universally required markings include: Identification of the manufacturer [ 57 ] Manufacturing standard , which will identify the material specification [ 57 ] Serial number [ 57 ] Date of manufacture [ 57 ] Charging pressure [ 57 ] Capacityref name="ISO 13769" /> Mark of the accredited testing agency [ 57 ] Date of each re-validation test [ 57 ] A variety of other markings may be required by national regulations, or may be optional.

[ 57 ] This section needs expansion with: markings for non-diving cylinders. You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) Filling [ edit ] See also: Diving cylinder § Filling Diving cylinders are filled by attaching a high-pressure gas supply to the cylinder valve, opening the valve and allowing gas to flow into the cylinder until the desired pressure is reached, then closing the valves, venting the connection and disconnecting it. This process involves a risk of the cylinder or the filling equipment failing under pressure, both of which are hazardous to the operator, so procedures to control these risks are generally followed. Rate of filling must be limited to avoid excessive heating, the temperature of cylinder and contents must remain below the maximum working temperature specified by the applicable standard.

[ 1 ] Filling by pressure [ edit ] For permanent gases, a cylinder can be filled to the charging pressure, or any lesser pressure that may be appropriate. This generally requires correction to account for temperature changes during filling, and variation from the reference temperature (usually 15 or 20°C).

[ 1 ] Charging pressure [ edit ] Charging pressure is the maximum gauge pressure allowed  during filling of a pressure vessel when corrected to the reference temperature. The charging pressure is permanently marked on the cylinder.

[ 1 ] Filling by mass [ edit ] See also: Filling carousel Filling by mass does not need correction or adjustment for temperature, and is the standard method for filling liquefied gases, as the pressure of a vapour over liquid is determined by the temperature, making it an unreliable indicator of the amount of liquefied gas in the cylinder. The process requires  the added mass to be measured accurately, and the scale to be zeroed according to the mass of the empty cylinder.

Pre-filling inspection of the cylinder [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: Filling methods, legal constraints. You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) Common sizes [ edit ] The below are example cylinder sizes and do not constitute an industry standard.

[ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ] Cyl.

size Diameter × height, including 5.5 inches for valve and cap (inches) Nominal tare weight, including 4.5 lb for valve and cap (lb) Water capacity (lb) Internal volume, 70 °F (21 °C), 1 atm U.S. DOT specs (liters) (cu.

ft) 2HP 9 by 51 inches (230 mm × 1,300 mm) 187 pounds (85 kg) 95.5 43.3 1.53 3AA3500 K 9.25 by 60 inches (235 mm × 1,524 mm) 135 pounds (61 kg) 110 49.9 1.76 3AA2400 A 9 by 51 inches (230 mm × 1,300 mm) 115 pounds (52 kg) 96 43.8 1.55 3AA2015 B 8.5 by 31 inches (220 mm × 790 mm) 60 pounds (27 kg) 37.9 17.2 0.61 3AA2015 C 6 by 24 inches (150 mm × 610 mm) 27 pounds (12 kg) 15.2 6.88 0.24 3AA2015 D 4 by 18 inches (100 mm × 460 mm) 12 pounds (5.4 kg) 4.9 2.24 0.08 3AA2015 AL 8 by 53 inches (200 mm × 1,350 mm) 52 pounds (24 kg) 64.8 29.5 1.04 3AL2015 BL 7.25 by 39 inches (184 mm × 991 mm) 33 pounds (15 kg) 34.6 15.7 0.55 3AL2216 CL 6.9 by 21 inches (180 mm × 530 mm) 19 pounds (8.6 kg) 13 5.9 0.21 3AL2216 XL 14.5 by 50 inches (370 mm × 1,270 mm) 75 pounds (34 kg) 238 108 3.83 4BA240 SSB 8 by 37 inches (200 mm × 940 mm) 95 pounds (43 kg) 41.6 18.9 0.67 3A1800 10S 4 by 31 inches (100 mm × 790 mm) 21 pounds (9.5 kg) 8.3 3.8 0.13 3A1800 LB 2 by 15 inches (51 mm × 381 mm) 4 pounds (1.8 kg) 1 0.44 0.016 3E1800 XF 12 by 46 inches (300 mm × 1,170 mm) 180 pounds (82 kg) 134.3 60.9 2.15 8AL XG 15 by 56 inches (380 mm × 1,420 mm) 149 pounds (68 kg) 278 126.3 4.46 4AA480 XM 10 by 49 inches (250 mm × 1,240 mm) 90 pounds (41 kg) 120 54.3 1.92 3A480 XP 10 by 55 inches (250 mm × 1,400 mm) 55 pounds (25 kg) 124 55.7 1.98 4BA300 QT 3 by 14 inches (76 mm × 356 mm) (includes 4.5 inches for valve) 2.5 pounds (1.1 kg) (includes 1.5 lb for valve) 2.0 0.900 0.0318 4B-240ET LP5 12.25 by 18.25 inches (311 mm × 464 mm) 18.5 pounds (8.4 kg) 47.7 21.68 0.76 4BW240 Medical E 4 by 26 inches (100 mm × 660 mm) (excludes valve and cap) 14 pounds (6.4 kg) (excludes valve and cap) 9.9 4.5 0.16 3AA2015 (US DOT specs define material, making, and maximum pressure in psi. They are comparable to Transport Canada specs, which shows pressure in bars . A 3E-1800 in DOT nomenclature would be a TC 3EM 124 in Canada.

[ 58 ] ) Gas storage tubes [ edit ] For larger volume, high pressure gas storage units, known as tubes , are available. They generally have a larger diameter and length than high pressure cylinders, and usually have a tapped neck at both ends. They may be mounted alone or in groups on trailers, permanent bases, or intermodal transport frames . Due to their length, they are mounted horizontally on mobile structures. In general usage they are often manifolded together and managed as a unit.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Gas storage banks [ edit ] Hydrogen storage cylinders in a cascade filling system Groups of similar size cylinders may be mounted together and connected to a common manifold system to provide larger storage capacity than a single standard cylinder. This is commonly called a cylinder bank or a gas storage bank. The manifold may be arranged to allow simultaneous flow from all the cylinders, or, for a cascade filling system , where gas is tapped off cylinders according to the lowest positive pressure difference between storage and destination cylinder, being a more efficient use of pressurised gas.

[ 61 ] Gas storage quads [ edit ] Helium quad for surface-supplied diving gas A gas cylinder quad, also known as a gas cylinder bundle, is a group of high pressure cylinders mounted on a transport and storage frame. There are commonly 16 cylinders, each of about 50 litres capacity mounted upright in four rows of four, on a square base with a square plan frame with lifting points on top and may have fork-lift slots in the base. The cylinders are usually interconnected by a manifold for use as a unit, but many variations in layout and structure are possible.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Bottled gas – Gas compressed and stored in cylinders Composite overwrapped pressure vessel – Pressure vessel with a non-structural liner wrapped with a structural fiber composite Diving cylinder – Container to supply high pressure gas for diving operations Filling carousel – Device for filling liquefied petroleum gas cylinders Kelly (gas storage) – Large volume high pressure gas storage tubes Lecture bottle – Small gas cylinder typically used for specialty gasses Powerlet – A small, inexpensive, disposable metal gas cylinder for providing pneumatic power Scuba set – Self-contained underwater breathing apparatus Storage tank – Container for liquids or compressed gas UN Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods – United Nations Model Regulations References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k South African National Standard SANS 10019:2008 Transportable containers for compressed, dissolved and liquefied gases – Basic design, manufacture, use and maintenance (6th ed.). Pretoria, South Africa: Standards South Africa. 2008.

ISBN 978-0-626-19228-0 .

^ a b "Gas cylinder" .

pwent.eu . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ South African National Standard SANS 10019:2023 Transportable containers for compressed, dissolved and liquefied gases – Basic design, manufacture, use and maintenance (9th ed.). Pretoria, South Africa: Standards South Africa. 2023.

ISBN 978-0-626-41897-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Position Paper PP- 03 - 2022: Use of tapered and parallel (straight) threads in aluminum alloy cylinders (PDF) (Report). Singapore: Asia Industrial Gases Association. 2022 . Retrieved 25 October 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Technology" .

faber-italy.com . Retrieved 24 October 2024 .

^ "ISO 13769:2018(en) Gas cylinders — Stamp marking" .

www.iso.org . Retrieved 26 October 2024 .

^ "ISO 13769:2018 Gas cylinders — Stamp marking Third edition" (PDF) .

cdn.standards.iteh.ai . 2018 . Retrieved 26 October 2024 .

^ "Type 4 CNG Cylinder" .

www.indorussenergy.com/ . Retrieved 23 October 2024 .

^ a b c d e "High Pressure Cylinder Technology" .

mjcengineering.com . 13 May 2022 . Retrieved 23 October 2024 .

^ a b "Cylinder Quads / Cascades / Pallets / Banks 16_cylinder_quad.jpg" .

www.saboointernational.com . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ "Gas cylinder bundle: 1. Definition of a gas cylinder bundle" .

pwent.eu/ . Retrieved 26 October 2024 .

^ "Gas cylinder bundle: 4. What is the size limit for a gas cylinder bundle?" .

pwent.eu . Retrieved 26 October 2024 .

^ a b c "Long Term Durability of Steel Gas Cylinders" (PDF) .

Position Paper PP- 05 - 2018, Adopted from EIGA TB 18/16 - 2016 . Singapore: Asia Industrial Gas Association . Retrieved 11 July 2025 .

^ Long Time Durability of Steel Gas Cylinders .

TB 18/23 (Report). Brussels, Belgium: European Industrial Gases Association. September 2023.

^ See Composite overwrapped pressure vessel for details ^ Stone, W.C. (1986). "Design of fully redundant autonomous life support systems".

In: Mitchell, CT (Eds.) Diving for Science 86. Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences Sixth Annual Scientific Diving Symposium . Dauphin Island, Alabama: American Academy of Underwater Sciences .

^ Staff.

"History of Stone Aerospace" . Austin, Texas: Stone Aerospace.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 13 November 2016 .

^ "CFR Title 49: Transportation" .

§173.301b Additional general requirements for shipment of UN pressure receptacles. (g) Composite cylinders in underwater use . Washington, DC: US Department of Transport.

Archived from the original on 20 December 2015 . Retrieved 21 January 2016 .

^ Golubovic-Bugarski, Valentina & Todic, Mladen & Petkovic, Snezana & Globocki Lakic, Gordana. (2021). The requirements for the design and construction of a gas cylinders aimed for transportation of a compressed and liquefied gases. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 1781. 012036. 10.1088/1742-6596/1781/1/012036.

^ NOAA Diving Manual 2001 , Section 5.7 Compressed gas cylinders.

^ Staff (2015).

"Manufacturing processes: All-aluminum cylinders" . Salford, UK: Luxfer Gas Cylinders, Luxfer Holdings PLC. Archived from the original on 25 December 2015 . Retrieved 25 December 2015 .

^ Staff.

"12L Concave Euro Cylinder with Left or Right Hand Valve" .

DirDirect Worldwide product catalog . Portland, UK: Underwater Explorers Ltd.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2016 . Retrieved 16 January 2016 .

^ Roberts, Fred M. (1963).

Basic Scuba: Self contained underwater breathing apparatus: Its operation, maintenance and use (2nd ed.). New York: Van Nostrand Reinholdt.

^ "49 CFR 178.37 - Specification 3AA and 3AAX seamless steel cylinders. (DOT 3AA)" . Washington, DC: US Department of Transport.

Archived from the original on 2 February 2016 . Retrieved 7 December 2015 – via Legal Information Institute.

^ Worthington steel (3 November 2007).

"Making a Worthington X-Series Steel Scuba Cylinder" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 18 November 2021.

^ "Vítkovice Cylinders" .

www.vitkovice.az .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2021 . Retrieved 1 April 2021 .

^ a b c d "A detailed guide to lpg cylinder manufacturing process" .

www.msgascylinder.com . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ Henderson, N. C.; Berry, W. E.; Eiber, R. J.; Frink, D. W. (1970). Investigation of scuba cylinder corrosion, Phase 1.

National Underwater Accident Data Center Technical Report Number 1 (Report). University of Rhode Island.

^ a b BS 341-3:2002 . London, UK: British Standards Institution. 2002.

^ "Incident Insights – Trust But Verify" .

Divers Alert Network .

^ Walls, W.L. (November 1978).

"Just What Is a BLEVE?" .

Fire Journal .

National Fire Protection Association . pp.

46– 47.

ISSN 0015-2617 . Retrieved 9 February 2024 .

^ Srivastava, U. (September 2013).

"Anaesthesia gas supply: gas cylinders" .

Indian J Anaesth .

57 (5): 500– 6.

doi : 10.4103/0019-5049.120147 .

PMC 3821267 .

PMID 24249883 .

^ ISO 3807:2013(en) Gas cylinders — Acetylene cylinders — Basic requirements and type testing (Report). International Organization for Standardization. 2013.

^ "ISO 11439:2000 — Gas cylinders – High pressure cylinders for the on-board storage of natural gas as a fuel for automotive vehicles" .

^ "ISO 15500-5:2001 — Road vehicles – Compressed natural gas (CNG) fuel system components – Part 5: Manual cylinder valve" .

^ "CNG Cylinder Valve ISO 15500 -" .

^ US DOT e-CFR (Electronic Code of Federal Regulations) Title 49, part 178, Subpart C — Specification for Cylinders — eg DOT 3AL = seamless aluminum ^ Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 167 / Tuesday, August 29, 2006 / Rules and Regulations Title 49 CFR Parts 173 and 180 Visual Edddy ^ a b c d e f "Gas cylinder production standards" .

pwent.eu . Retrieved 26 October 2024 .

^ "Cylinders manufactured from aluminium alloys HE30/AA6082 and AA6351 and used primarily for gases for underwater breathing apparatus: Health and Safety Executive - Safety Alert" .

Health and Safety Executive . 8 March 2018 . Retrieved 16 January 2025 .

^ a b c DGM_Support (16 April 2014).

"How to select the correct Proper Shipping Name?" . Hoofddorp, The Netherlands: Dangerous Goods Management Group.

Archived from the original on 19 January 2016 . Retrieved 31 January 2016 .

^ "§ 172.101 Hazardous Materials Table".

49 CFR Ch. I Subpart B -Table of Hazardous Materials and Special Provisions (PDF) . Washington, DC: Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Admin. DOT. 8 January 2010. pp. 134, 207, 249.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 31 January 2016 .

^ a b c d e f Economic Commission for Europe Committee on Inland Transport (2014).

European Agreement Concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road (ADR) (PDF) . New York and Geneva: United Nations.

ISBN 978-92-1-056691-9 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 31 January 2016 .

^ "Packing Instruction 200, Table 1: Compressed gases".

Recommendations on the TRANSPORT OF DANGEROUS GOODS Model Regulations (PDF) . Vol. II (Nineteenth revised ed.). New York and Geneva: United Nations. 2015. p. 44.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ "Items that are allowed in baggage: Information for Passengers on Dangerous Goods" . London: Civil Aviation Authority.

Archived from the original on 3 February 2016 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s "Guidance note 27: Guidance for the carriage of gas cylinders on vehicles" .

Bcga Guidance Note (Revision 1 ed.). Derby, UK: British Compressed Gases Association. 2015.

ISSN 0260-4809 .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2016 . Retrieved 31 January 2016 .

^ "The carriage of small quantities of gas cylinders on vehicles" .

Leaflet 1: Revision 5 . Derby, UK: British Compressed Gases Association. 2015.

Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 31 January 2016 .

^ DOT (January 2016). "§171.1 Applicability of Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) to persons and functions.".

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49 - Transportation . Washington, DC: US Department of Transport.

Archived from the original on 20 December 2015 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ a b US Department of Transport (20 January 2016).

"Part 173—Shippers—General Requirements For Shipments and Packagings" .

Code of Federal Regulations Title 49 - Transportation . Washington, DC: US Government publishing office.

Archived from the original on 20 December 2015 . Retrieved 23 January 2016 .

^ US Department of Transport.

"Code of Federal Regulations 49 - Transportation" .

49 CFR 173.115 - Class 2, Divisions 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 . Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Law School Legal Information Institute.

Archived from the original on 27 January 2016 . Retrieved 21 January 2016 .

^ PHMSA.

"Special Permits list" . Washington, DC: Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. Archived from the original on 29 January 2016 . Retrieved 23 January 2016 .

^ "DOT-SP 14951 (TENTH REVISION)" . U.S. Department of Transportation Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. 8 May 2025.

Archived from the original on 29 March 2021 . Retrieved 15 July 2025 .

^ Monahan, Corey (1 July 2011).

"Cylinders are HAZMAT?" . Archived from the original on 27 January 2016 . Retrieved 21 January 2016 .

^ "Pack Safe: Scuba tanks, pressurized" . Washington, DC: Federal Aviation Administration. 19 March 2013. Archived from the original on 28 January 2016 . Retrieved 21 January 2016 .

^ "My TSA" .

Search results for Scuba cylinder . Transportation Security.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 January 2016 .

^ "Indian Standard for Gas Cylinder Colour Code" .

melezy.com . 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 6 June 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Technical Committee ISO/TC 58, Gas cylinders, Subcommittee SC 4 (1 July 2002).

"Gas cylinders — Stamp marking" .

ISO 13769 (first ed.). Geneva, Switzerland: International Standards Organisation.

Archived from the original on 9 November 2016 . Retrieved 8 November 2016 .

^ "Sample Cylinders SC and MC Series" (PDF) .

FITOK . Retrieved 1 February 2023 .

^ "UG: Gas Kelly Tubes & Banks" .

www.uniquegroup.com . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ "High Pressure Gas Storage Tube Trailers" .

www.easonindustrial.com . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ Harlow, V (2002).

Oxygen Hacker's Companion . Airspeed Press.

ISBN 0-9678873-2-1 .

Sources [ edit ] NOAA Diving Program (U.S.) (28 February 2001). Joiner, James T (ed.).

NOAA Diving Manual, Diving for Science and Technology (4th ed.). Silver Spring, Maryland: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, National Undersea Research Program.

ISBN 978-0-941332-70-5 .

CD-ROM prepared and distributed by the National Technical Information Service (NTIS)in partnership with NOAA and Best Publishing Company External links [ edit ] NASA — Safety Standards for Oxygen and Oxygen Handling Briefing Note: Cylinder valves on high pressure oxygen tanks Date: 6 January 2025 v t e Packaging General topics Active packaging Child-resistant packaging Contract packager Edible packaging Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging Overpackaging Package delivery Package pilferage Package testing Package theft Packaging engineering Resealable packaging Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Shelf life Shelf-ready packaging Shelf-stable Sustainable packaging Tamper-evident Tamper resistance Wrap rage Product packages Alternative wine closure Ammunition box Banana box Beer bottle Box wine Case-ready meat Coffee bag Cosmetic packaging Currency packaging Disposable food packaging Drink can Egg carton Evidence packaging Field ration Flour sack Foam food container Food packaging Fuel container Gas cylinder Glass milk bottle Growler Juicebox Low plastic water bottle Luxury packaging Milk bag Optical disc packaging Oyster pail Popcorn bag Pharmaceutical packaging Pizza box Plastic milk container Purdue Improved Crop Storage bags Sand bag Seasonal packaging Self-heating food packaging Screw cap (wine) Single-serve coffee container Spray paint Toothpaste pump dispenser Unit dose Water bottle Wine bottle Containers Aerosol spray dispenser Aluminium bottle Aluminum can Ampoule Antistatic bag Bag-in-box Bag Barrel Biodegradable bag Blister pack Boil-in-bag Bottle Box Bulk box Cage Case Carboy Carton Chub Clamshell Corrugated box design Crate Disposable cup Drum Endcap Envelope Euro container Flexible intermediate bulk container Flexible tank Folding carton Glass bottle Gunny sack Inhaler Insulated shipping container Intermediate bulk container Jar Jerrycan Jug Keg Mesh bag Multilayered packaging Multi-pack Packet (container) Padded envelope Pail Paper bag Paper sack Plastic bag Plastic bottle Retort pouch Salvage drum Sachet Water sachet Security bag Shipping container Shipping tube Skin pack Spray bottle Squround Stand-up pouch Steel and tin cans Tetra Brik Thermal bag Tub (container) Tube Unit load Vial Wooden box Materials and components Adhesive Aluminium foil Bail handle Bioplastic Biodegradable plastic BoPET Bubble wrap Bung Cellophane Closure Coated paper Coating Coextrusion Container glass Corrugated fiberboard Corrugated plastic Cushioning Desiccant Double seam Flip-top Foam peanut Gel pack Hot-melt adhesive Humidity indicator card Kraft paper Label Lid Linear low-density polyethylene Liquid packaging board Living hinge Low-density polyethylene Meat absorbent pad Metallised film Modified atmosphere Molded pulp Nonwoven fabric Overwrap Oxygen scavenger Package handle Packaging gas Pallet Paper Paper pallet Paperboard Plastic-coated paper Plastic film Plastic pallet Plastic wrap Polyester Polyethylene Polypropylene Pressure-sensitive tape Pump dispenser Screw cap Screw cap (wine) Security printing Security tape Shock detector Shock and vibration data logger Shrink wrap Slip sheet Staple (fastener) Strapping Stretch wrap Susceptor Tamper-evident band Tear tape Temperature data logger Time temperature indicator Tinplate Velostat Processes Aseptic processing Authentication Automatic identification and data capture Blow fill seal Blow molding Calendering Canning Coating Containerization Converting Corona treatment Curtain coating Die cutting Die forming (plastics) Electronic article surveillance Extrusion Extrusion coating Flame treatment Glass production Graphic design Hazard analysis and critical control points Hermetic seal Induction sealing Injection moulding Lamination Laser cutting Molding Package tracking Papermaking Plastic extrusion Plastic welding Printing Product development Production control Quality assurance Radio-frequency identification Roll slitting Shearing (manufacturing) Thermoforming Track and trace Ultrasonic welding Vacuum forming Vacuum packaging Verification and validation Machinery Barcode printer Barcode reader Bottling line Calender Can seamer Cap torque tester Cartoning machine Case sealer Check weigher Conveyor system Drum pump Extended core stretch wrapper Filler Heat gun Heat sealer Industrial robot Injection molding machine Label printer applicator Lineshaft roller conveyor Logistics automation Material-handling equipment Mechanical brake stretch wrapper Multihead weigher Orbital stretch wrapper Packaging machinery Pallet inverter Palletizer Rotary wheel blow molding systems Seed-counting machine Shrink tunnel Staple gun Tape dispenser Turntable stretch wrapper Vertical form fill sealing machine Environment, post-use Biodegradation Can collecting Closed-loop box reuse Environmental engineering Extended producer responsibility Glass recycling Industrial ecology Life-cycle assessment Litter Packaging waste Paper recycling PET bottle recycling Plastic recycling Recycling Reusable packaging Reverse logistics Source reduction Sustainable packaging Waste management Category: Packaging v t e Anesthesia and anesthesiology Types General Sedation Procedural sedation and analgesia Twilight anesthesia Local Continuous wound infiltration Topical Neuraxial blockade Combined spinal and epidural anaesthesia Epidural anesthesia Spinal anaesthesia Nerve block Brachial plexus block Fascia iliaca block Femoral nerve block Inferior alveolar nerve block Intercostal nerve block Interpleural block Intravenous regional anesthesia Occipital nerve block Paracervical block Pudendal nerve block Retrobulbar block Sciatic nerve block Transverse abdominis plane block Total intravenous anaesthesia Pharmacologic agents Anticholinergics Antiemetics Butyrophenones Benzodiazepines General anesthetics Inhalational anesthetics Local anesthetics Neuromuscular-blocking drugs Opioids Sedatives Techniques Airway management Anesthesia provision in the US Bronchoscopy Dogliotti's principle Intravenous therapy Laryngoscopy Tracheal intubation Rapid sequence induction Scientific principles Blood–gas partition coefficient Concentration effect Fink effect Minimum alveolar concentration Second gas effect Measurements ASA physical status classification system Baricity Bispectral index Body mass index Capnography Entropy monitoring Fick principle Goldman index Guedel's classification Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring Mallampati score Neuromuscular monitoring Pain scale Thyromental distance Instruments Anaesthetic machine Anesthetic vaporizer Arterial catheter Bronchial blocker Double-lumen endobronchial tube Gas cylinder Laryngeal mask airway Laryngeal tube Magill forceps Relative analgesia machine Tracheal tube Complications Allergic reactions Anesthesia awareness Drug-induced amnesia Effects of early-life exposures to anesthesia on the brain Emergence delirium Local anesthetic toxicity Malignant hyperthermia Perioperative mortality Postanesthetic shivering Postoperative nausea and vomiting Postoperative residual curarization Subspecialties Cardiothoracic Critical emergency medicine Geriatric Intensive care medicine Obstetric Oral sedation dentistry Pain medicine Professions Anesthesiologist Anesthesiologist assistant Nurse anesthetist Operating department practitioners Certified anesthesia technician Certified anesthesia technologist Anaesthetic technician Physicians' assistant (anaesthesia) History ACE mixture Helsinki Declaration for Patient Safety in Anaesthesiology History of general anesthesia History of neuraxial anesthesia History of tracheal intubation Organizations American Association of Nurse Anesthetists American Society of Anesthesia Technologists & Technicians American Society of Anesthesiologists Anaesthesia Trauma and Critical Care Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland Royal College of Anaesthetists Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists Australian Society of Anaesthetists International Anesthesia Research Society European Society of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Category Outline v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐rkprv
Cached time: 20250818090023
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.570 seconds
Real time usage: 1.934 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10038/1000000
Revision size: 83453/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 689438/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8459/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 274371/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.855/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25120542/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1360.899      1 -total
 31.57%  429.601      1 Template:Reflist
 15.64%  212.781     39 Template:Cite_web
 14.29%  194.502     10 Template:Annotated_link
 13.59%  184.965     37 Template:Navbox
  9.14%  124.354     10 Template:Cite_book
  8.25%  112.232      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  7.89%  107.338      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  6.28%   85.524      1 Template:Packaging
  5.54%   75.355      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1179236:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818090023 and revision id 1306050251. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gas_cylinder&oldid=1306050251#Gas_storage_banks " Categories : Pressure vessels Containers Gas technologies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2020 Use British English from October 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles to be expanded from July 2025 All articles to be expanded Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2023 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 16:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gas cylinder 23 languages Add topic

