Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In Marxist analysis Toggle In Marxist analysis subsection 1.1 Lenin 1.2 Cultural Revolution 2 Other uses 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Economism 23 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Magyar Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ideology; term in Marxist discourse Economism is a direct reduction of any political or cultural phenomena or activities to economics.

In particular, "economism" was a movement in early Russian Social Democratic Labour Party whose position was that the workers' struggle must be only economical and not political.

[ 1 ] Robert M. Young used the term as a synonym to Vulgar Marxism , which he defined as "the most orthodox [position in Marxism which] provides one-to-one correlations between the socio-economic base and the intellectual superstructure ".

[ 2 ] In Marxist analysis [ edit ] Lenin [ edit ] The term economism was used by Lenin in his critique of the trade union movement, in reference to how working class demands for a more global political project can become supplanted by purely economic demands.

[ 3 ] Economistic demands include higher wages, shorter working hours, secure employment, health care, and other benefits.

[ 3 ] In his criticism of economism, Lenin's view was that the political figure of the worker could not necessarily be inferred from the worker's social position.

[ 4 ] Under capitalism, the worker's labor power is commodified and sold in exchange for wages.

[ 4 ] While negotiating the sale of labor power is necessary for survival under capitalism, Lenin argued that participating in that negotiation did not guarantee a worker's political existence and in fact obscured the underlying political stakes.

[ 4 ] Lenin used the term in his attacks on a trend in the early Russian Social Democratic Labour Party around the newspaper Rabochaya Mysl .

[ 5 ] Among the representatives of Russian economicism were Nikolai Lochoff , Yekaterina Kuskova , Alexander Martynov , Sergei Prokopovich , Konstantin Takhtarev [ ru ] and others.

[ 6 ] Cultural Revolution [ edit ] The charge of economism is frequently brought against revisionists by anti-revisionists when economics, instead of politics, is placed in command of society; and when primacy of the development of the productive forces is held over concerns for the nature and relations surrounding those productive forces.

"Smashing Economism", 1967 Chinese Propaganda Poster.

Economism became a familiar term in Chinese political discourse only during the Cultural Revolution .

[ 3 ] Mao Zedong criticized the material incentives of economism, arguing that production must be led by revolutionary politics and to reward productivity with money promoted the wrong values and was inconsistent with making factories a bastion of proletarian politics.

[ 7 ] In particular, economism became the most important issue during the Shanghai People's commune .

[ 3 ] Although many historical narratives of the Cultural Revolution have described economism as an effort on the part of the Chinese Communist Party leadership to bribe workers into political passivity, more recent scholarship argues that those narratives are only "partially correct, at best." [ 8 ] Academic Yiching Wu argues, for example, that although local bureaucrats were in fact willing to make economistic concessions to workers, they had no control over the eruption of worker grievances and demands.

[ 8 ] Instead, economistic demands during this period were rooted in worker's actual conditions and driven by factors including the deterioration of work conditions during the state-driven economic accumulation of the late 1950s, the weakness of Chinese trade unions, and the collapse of the economy during the Great Leap Forward .

[ 9 ] Other uses [ edit ] The term is often used to criticize economics as an ideology in which supply and demand are the only important factors in decisions and outstrip or permit ignoring all other factors.

[ 10 ] It is believed to be a side effect of neoclassical economics and blind faith in an " invisible hand " or laissez-faire means of making decisions, extended far beyond controlled and regulated markets and used to make political and military decisions.

[ 10 ] Conventional ethics would play no role in decisions under pure economism, except insofar as supply would be withheld, demand curtailed, by moral choices of individuals.

[ 10 ] Thus, critics of economism insist on political and other cultural dimensions in society .

[ 10 ] Old Right social critic Albert Jay Nock used the term more broadly, denoting a moral and social philosophy "which interprets the whole sum of human life in terms of the production, acquisition, and distribution of wealth", adding: "I have sometimes thought that here may be the rock on which Western civilization will finally shatter itself.  Economism can build a society which is rich, prosperous, powerful, even one which has a reasonably wide diffusion of material well-being. It can not build one which is lovely, one which has savor and depth, and which exercises the irresistible power of attraction that loveliness wields. Perhaps by the time economism has run its course the society it has built may be tired of itself, bored of its own hideousness, and may  despairingly consent to annihilation, aware that it is too ugly to be let live any longer." [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Class reductionism Economic determinism Gross national happiness Vulgar Marxism – Label for a Marxist philosophy of history References [ edit ] ^ s:ru:МСЭ2/«Экономизм» ^ Policy Futures in Education, Volume 3, Number 1, 2005.

Transmodernism, Marxism and Social Change: some implications for teacher education Mike Cole, Bishop Grosseteste College , Lincoln, United Kingdom ^ a b c d Wu, Yiching (2014).

The cultural revolution at the margins : Chinese socialism in crisis . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press . p. 98.

ISBN 978-0-674-41985-8 .

OCLC 881183403 .

^ a b c Russo, Alessandro (2020).

Cultural Revolution and revolutionary culture . Durham: Duke University Press . p. 180.

ISBN 978-1-4780-1218-4 .

OCLC 1156439609 .

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1902).

"What Is To Be Done?" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 5 October 2023 .

^ "ЭКОНОМИСТЫ • Большая российская энциклопедия - электронная версия" .

bigenc.ru . Archived from the original on 8 May 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ Karl, Rebecca E. (2010).

Mao Zedong and China in the twentieth-century world : a concise history . Durham [NC]: Duke University Press . p. 137.

ISBN 978-0-8223-4780-4 .

OCLC 503828045 .

^ a b Wu, Yiching (2014).

The cultural revolution at the margins : Chinese socialism in crisis . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press . pp.

98– 99.

ISBN 978-0-674-41985-8 .

OCLC 881183403 .

^ Wu, Yiching (2014).

The cultural revolution at the margins : Chinese socialism in crisis . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press . pp.

99– 101.

ISBN 978-0-674-41985-8 .

OCLC 881183403 .

^ a b c d U.C. Mandal, Dictionary Of Public Administration (2007), p. 149, ISBN 9788176257848 , Sarup & Sons publishing ^ Nock, Albert Jay.

Memoirs Of A Superfluous Man . p. 147.

Bibliography [ edit ] John Ralston Saul (2005).

The Collapse of Globalism .

Richard Norgaard (2015). "The Church of Economism and Its Discontents". In Great Transition Initiative .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Economism .

May God Save Us From Economists at The New Republic v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economism&oldid=1301051818 " Categories : Economic ideologies Political pejoratives Political science terminology Political ideologies Soviet phraseology Political movements in the Russian Empire Marxist terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2023 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 20:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economism 23 languages Add topic

