Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Immigration history 2 Notable Coptic Australians 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Coptic Australians 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Coptic Australians Total population 24,693 (by ancestry, 2011), [ 1 ] or up to 70,000-100,000 (estimated) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Languages Australian English · Egyptian Arabic · Coptic (Liturgical) Religion Coptic Orthodoxy · Coptic Catholicism Related ethnic groups Egyptian Australians Coptic Australians ( Arabic : أستراليون أقباط ) are Australians of Coptic descent or persons of Coptic descent residing in Australia . According to the 2011 census, there were 24,693 Copts in Australia, mostly members of the Coptic Orthodox Church .

[ 1 ] The Coptic population within Australia is estimated to be between 70,000 and 100,000 people.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Immigration history [ edit ] Congregations of the Coptic Orthodox Church in Australia are served by two Coptic Orthodox Dioceses with over 50 parishes, two Monasteries, two theological Colleges and four schools. The Coptic Church is a member of National Council of Churches in Australia . According to the 2006 Census of Australia, there were a total of 19,928 followers of Coptic Orthodoxy nationally.

[ citation needed ] Currently, the Coptic Orthodox Church has as many 100,000 members in Australia (in Sydney alone it is estimated that there are 70,000 Copts , with numbers in Melbourne in the tens of thousands).

[ 2 ] The community is growing.

Around three quarters of Egyptian migrants arrived in Australia before 1976, though many arrived between 1986 and 1991. In the early years of migration to Australia, most Egyptian-born migrants were of Greek or Armenian (36 percent) as well as Italian or Maltese heritage (45 percent).

Egyptian Jews , Copts and Protestants each made up around 5 percent of arrivals. However, the number of Copts migrating to Australia increased during the 1960s. Many Christian Egyptians left Egypt in response to the pan-Arabist and Islamist policies of president Gamal Abdel Nasser's leadership. Nowadays, the majority of Egyptian Australians are Christians (84 percent), mostly Copts. On average, Egyptian Australians generally attain higher levels of education when compared to other Australians.

St Abanoub and The Holy Apostles Coptic Orthodox Church in Blacktown , Sydney The first Coptic families in Sydney met at the Church of England parish in Artarmon on Sydney's lower North Shore .

[ 4 ] These early migrants were dependant on other Orthodox churches in the area for the use of churches and halls for services, festivals and activities. In 1967, a letter was sent from Sydney's Coptic community to the Coptic Pope, Pope Kyrillos VI requesting that a church would be established and a priest would be sent to serve the community. On 10 March 1968, Deacon Edward was ordained in Alexandria and given the name Father Mina. He was sent to Sydney in 1969. He performed his first Coptic wedding on Australia Day in 1969 in a Salvation Army Hall in Redfern , in Sydney's inner south. He regularly travelled to Melbourne to conduct services, weddings and bible study for the local Coptic community. Soon, the funds were raised to establish a Coptic church - St Mary and St Mina's - which was formerly a Methodist church in Sydenham . This church was badly affected by aircraft noise and has since relocated to Bexley .

Melbourne's first Copts arrived in the late 1960s, and first consisted of around 40 families.

[ 5 ] The new community worshipped at the Church of All Nations in Carlton. Already established Copts would wait at Station Pier Wharf , greeting new arrivals from Egypt and supporting them through accommodation and employment.

[ 5 ] The growing congregation rented a hall attached to the Syrian Maronite Church in Victoria Parade, East Melbourne. The first Coptic church in Melbourne was established in Kensington , in the inner-west, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary in 1970. The church has since had a school attached. There is now a Coptic Village Hostel for the elderly in Hallam , in Melbourne's outer eastern suburbs - nearby the Coptic Orthodox Church of St Mina and St Marina .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Coptic community of Perth began in the 1980s with about 25 families. In 1990, Perth's Coptic community purchased its first church, St Mary and Archangel Michael Church in East Victoria Park .

Adelaide's Copts were served by visiting priests until the permanent establishment of St Mary and Anba Bishoy Church.

[ 8 ] St Mary and St Joseph Coptic Orthodox Church in Coopers Plains , Queensland In 1982, the first Coptic Orthodox theological college outside of Egypt was established in Sydney as the Pope Shenouda III College for Theological Studies. In 1999, Bishop Suriel moved the diocesan headquarters to Donvale, in Melbourne's northeast, where the complex boasts a library. hostel and sporting facilities.

[ 9 ] The nearby St Athanasius Coptic Orthodox Church was established in 2001 and renovated in 2007.

[ 10 ] There are now 16 Coptic churches in Victoria , one in the Australian Capital Territory , two in South Australia , two in Western Australia , two in Tasmania , 33 in New South Wales , 10 in Queensland and one in the Northern Territory . There are also three monasteries, two theological colleges and four schools. St Mary Coptic Orthodox College was opened in 1991 by Pope Shenouda III in Clifton Hill . In 1994, it relocated to its present site in Coolaroo - in Melbourne's north west.

St Mary and St Merkorious Coptic Orthodox Church in Rhodes , Sydney In New South Wales, around half of the Coptic Orthodox population was born in Australia, while 37 percent were born in Australia and almost 10 percent were born in Sudan.

[ 11 ] Also in New South Wales, the majority of Copts identify as having Egyptian heritage with minorities identifying as Australian, Sudanese or Lebanese.

[ 12 ] Three quarters of Copts in New South Wales speak Arabic at home while about 10 percent have a low proficiency in English.

[ 13 ] A higher proportion of New South Wales Coptic Orthodox population work white-collar jobs such as managers or professionals.

[ 14 ] Furthermore, Coptic Orthodox household sizes were significantly higher than other New South Wales residents.

[ 15 ] Copts in Sydney are concentrated in the city councils of Blacktown , Canterbury Bankstown , Liverpool , Bayside and Georges River [ 16 ] while Copts in Melbourne largely reside in the north western suburbs, particularly in the city councils of Hume and Whittlesea .

There is also a small and recent community of Coptic Catholics in Australia. In 2019, the Patriarch of the Coptic Catholic Church, Ibrahim Isaak Sidrak , travelled from Egypt to consecrate the newly built St Mark's Coptic Catholic Church in Prospect (in Sydney's outer west). Western Sydney's Coptic Catholic community consists of about 200 families.

[ 17 ] Notable Coptic Australians [ edit ] Nick Kaldas Sam Soliman Anba Suriel Joseph Tawadros Peter Khalil See also [ edit ] Coptic Orthodox Church in Australia List of Coptic Orthodox churches in Australia Copts Coptic diaspora Coptic Americans Coptic Canadians Copts in Egypt Copts in Sudan Copts in Libya References [ edit ] ^ a b "The People of Australia: Statistics from the 2011 Census" (PDF) . Australian Government. 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2014.

^ a b c "Coptic Orthodox Church (NSW) Property Trust Amendment Bill" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . Parliament of NSW – Legislative Council. 12 November 2003. p. 4772. Archived from the original on 6 March 2005.

[The Coptic community] is a growing community with some 70,000 members in New South Wales Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b "Diocese Bodies" . Coptic.org.au. 2003. Archived from the original on 16 December 2011 . Retrieved 18 November 2011 .

^ "Egyptians | The Dictionary of Sydney" .

dictionaryofsydney.org . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ a b "orthodoxaustralia" .

oakleighcopts.org . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "orthodoxaustralia" .

oakleighcopts.org . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Coptic Village Hostel – Coptic Village Hostel" . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Saint Mary & Anba Bishoy Coptic Orthodox Church - Adelaide, Australia > Home" .

www.sacopts.org.au . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ School of Historical Studies, Department of History.

"Egyptians - Entry - eMelbourne - The Encyclopedia of Melbourne Online" .

www.emelbourne.net.au . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Welcome" . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Birthplace | Religion of Coptic Orthodox | CRC NSW" .

multiculturalnsw.id.com.au . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Ancestry | Religion of Coptic Orthodox | CRC NSW" .

multiculturalnsw.id.com.au . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Language spoken | Religion of Coptic Orthodox | CRC NSW" .

multiculturalnsw.id.com.au . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Occupation | Religion of Coptic Orthodox | CRC NSW" .

multiculturalnsw.id.com.au . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Household size | Religion of Coptic Orthodox | CRC NSW" .

multiculturalnsw.id.com.au . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Introduction | Religion of Coptic Orthodox | CRC NSW" .

multiculturalnsw.id.com.au . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ Sheehan, Catherine (22 March 2019).

"Patriarch consecrates first Coptic Catholic church in Australia" .

The Catholic Weekly . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

v t e Copts Christian denominations Oriental Orthodox Coptic Orthodox Church Eastern Catholic Coptic Catholic Church Protestant Evangelical Church of Egypt Traditional areas Egypt Diaspora Australia Canada United States Africa Libya Sudan Asia Europe South America Culture Architecture Art Calendar Coptology Cross Encyclopedia Fasting History Identity Literature Music Monasticism Names Nationalism Persecution Philosophy Toponymy Language Egyptian language Coptic language Writing systems Hieroglyphs Hieratic Demotic Coptic v t e North African and Middle Eastern Australians Arab Algerian Egyptian Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Palestinian Saudi Arabian Syrian Emirati Jewish Israeli Peoples of the Sudan South Sudanese Sudanese Other Coptic Iranian Kurdish Turkish Assyrian Mandaean Topics Antisemitism Anti-Arabism Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment Islamophobia Organized crime North African diaspora West Asian diaspora v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coptic_Australians&oldid=1306084033 " Categories : Ethnic groups in Australia Australian people of Coptic descent Coptic diaspora by country Coptic diaspora in Australia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use Australian English from August 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from August 2017 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 21:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Coptic Australians 1 language Add topic

