Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Socrates 1.2 Modern politics 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Gadfly (philosophy and social science) 6 languages Español فارسی Galego پښتو Simple English Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person who interferes with the status quo of a society or community For other uses, see Gadfly (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Socrates " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Gadfly Trial of Socrates Eponymous concepts Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic irony Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic problem Socratic questioning Category v t e A gadfly is a person who interferes with the status quo of a society or community by posing novel, potentially upsetting questions, usually directed at authorities. The term has a modern use but it was originally associated with the ancient Greek philosopher Socrates , as portrayed in Plato 's Apology when Socrates was on trial for his life .

History [ edit ] Socrates [ edit ] The term "gadfly" ( Ancient Greek : μύωψ [ 1 ] , mýops [ 2 ] ) was used by Plato in the Apology [ 3 ] to describe Socrates ' acting as an uncomfortable goad to the Athenian political scene, like a spur or biting fly arousing a sluggish horse.

During his defense when on trial for his life, Socrates, according to Plato's account, pointed out that dissent , like the gadfly , was easy to swat, but the cost to society of silencing individuals who were irritating could be very high: "If you kill a man like me, you will injure yourselves more than you will injure me" because his role was comparable to that of a gadfly: "to sting people and whip them into a fury, all in the service of truth".

[ 4 ] Dominic Scott notes that in the Apology , the allusion speaks well of Socrates, whereas in the Meno , the image which compares Socrates to a stingray who "numbs" his interlocutors into silence and confusion has the opposite effect.

[ 5 ] Modern politics [ edit ] The image used by Socrates is applied in modern politics : [ 4 ] a gadfly is someone who persistently challenges people in positions of power , the status quo or a popular position.

[ 6 ] For example, Morris Kline wrote, "There is a function for the gadfly who poses questions that many specialists would like to overlook.

Polemics is healthy." [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Concern troll – a false flag pseudonym created by a user whose actual point of view is opposed to the one that the troll claims to hold Devil's advocate – taking a position one does not necessarily agree with Gadfly (mythology) The Gadfly – novel References [ edit ] ^ See Marshall, Laura A. (2017).

"Gadfly or Spur? The Meaning of ΜΎΩΨ in Plato's Apology of Socrates" .

The Journal of Hellenic Studies .

137 : 163– 174.

doi : 10.1017/S007542691700012X .

^ See "commentary for book 3, line 277, out of George W. Mooney's Commentary on Apollonius: Argonautica" .

^ "Apology 30e" .

^ a b "Ron Kaye: The incessant buzzing of the gadflies" .

Los Angeles Times . 11 June 2011 . Retrieved 6 January 2025 .

^ Scott, Dominic (2006), Plato's 'Meno' , p. 69, Cambridge University Press ISBN 0-521-64033-4 ^ Liberto, Jennifer (8 August 2007).

"Publix uses law to boot gadfly" .

St. Petersburg Times . Retrieved 22 June 2008 .

^ Why the Professor Can't Teach (1977), page 238 External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of gadfly at Wiktionary v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gadfly_(philosophy_and_social_science)&oldid=1293328262 " Categories : Change Cognitive inertia Concepts in ethics Group processes Metaphors referring to insects Socrates Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from May 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 03:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gadfly (philosophy and social science) 6 languages Add topic

