Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Focus on symmetric equilibria 3 Lack of robustness 4 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 4.1 Airfare game 4.2 Discussion 5 Notes 6 References 7 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Markov perfect equilibrium 2 languages Ελληνικά فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Markov perfect equilibrium Solution concept in game theory Relationship Subset of Subgame perfect equilibrium Significance Proposed by Eric Maskin , Jean Tirole Used for tacit collusion ; price wars ; oligopolistic competition A Markov perfect equilibrium is an equilibrium concept in game theory . It has been used in analyses of industrial organization , macroeconomics , and political economy . It is a refinement of the concept of subgame perfect equilibrium to extensive form games for which a pay-off relevant state space can be identified. The term appeared in publications starting about 1988 in the work of economists Jean Tirole and Eric Maskin .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Definition [ edit ] In extensive form games , and specifically in stochastic games , a Markov perfect equilibrium is a set of mixed strategies for each of the players which satisfy the following criteria: The strategies have the Markov property of memorylessness, meaning that each player's mixed strategy can be conditioned only on the state of the game. These strategies are called Markov reaction functions .

The state can only encode payoff-relevant information. This rules out strategies that depend on non-substantive moves by the opponent. It excludes strategies that depend on signals, negotiation, or cooperation between the players (e.g.

cheap talk or contracts ).

The strategies form a subgame perfect equilibrium of the game.

[ 5 ] Focus on symmetric equilibria [ edit ] In symmetric games, when the players have a strategy and action sets which are mirror images of one another, often the analysis focuses on symmetric equilibria , where all players play the same mixed strategy. As in the rest of game theory , this is done both because these are easier to find analytically and because they are perceived to be stronger focal points than asymmetric equilibria.

Lack of robustness [ edit ] Markov perfect equilibria are not stable with respect to small changes in the game itself. A small change in payoffs can cause a large change in the set of Markov perfect equilibria. This is because a state with a tiny effect on payoffs can be used to carry signals, but if its payoff difference from any other state drops to zero, it must be merged with it, eliminating the possibility of using it to carry signals.

[ citation needed ] Examples [ edit ] For examples of this equilibrium concept , consider the competition between firms which have invested heavily into fixed costs and are dominant producers in an industry, forming an oligopoly . The players are taken to be committed to levels of production capacity in the short run, and the strategies describe their decisions in setting prices. The firms' objectives are modelled as maximizing the present discounted value of profits.

[ 6 ] Airfare game [ edit ] Often an airplane ticket for a certain route has the same price on either airline A or airline B.  Presumably, the two airlines do not have exactly the same costs, nor do they face the same demand function given their varying frequent-flyer programs , the different connections their passengers will make, and so forth. Thus, a realistic general equilibrium model would be unlikely to result in nearly identical prices.

Both airlines have made sunk investments into the equipment, personnel, and legal framework, thus committing to offering service. They are engaged or trapped, in a strategic game with one another when setting prices.

Consider the following strategy of an airline for setting the ticket price for a certain route. At every price-setting opportunity: if the other airline is charging $300 or more, or is not selling tickets on that flight, charge $300 if the other airline is charging between $200 and $300, charge the same price if the other airline is charging $200 or less, choose randomly between the following three options with equal probability: matching that price, charging $300, or exiting the game by ceasing indefinitely to offer service on this route.

This is a Markov strategy because it does not depend on a history of past observations. It satisfies also the Markov reaction function definition because it does not depend on other information which is irrelevant to revenues and profits.

Assume now that both airlines follow this strategy exactly. Assume further that passengers always choose the cheapest flight and so if the airlines charge different prices, the one charging the higher price gets zero passengers. Then if each airline assumes that the other airline will follow this strategy, there is no higher-payoff alternative strategy for itself, i.e. it is playing a best response to the other airline strategy. If both airlines followed this strategy, it would form a Nash equilibrium in every proper subgame , thus a subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium .

[ note 1 ] A Markov-perfect equilibrium concept has also been used to model aircraft production, as different companies evaluate their future profits and how much they will learn from production experience in light of demand and what others firms might supply.

[ 7 ] Discussion [ edit ] Airlines do not literally or exactly follow these strategies, but the model helps explain the observation that airlines often charge exactly the same price, even though a general equilibrium model specifying non-perfect substitutability would generally not provide such a result. The Markov perfect equilibrium model helps shed light on tacit collusion in an oligopoly setting, and make predictions for cases not observed.

One strength of an explicit game-theoretical framework is that it allows us to make predictions about the behaviours of the airlines if and when the equal-price outcome breaks down, and interpret and examine these price wars in light of different equilibrium concepts.

[ 8 ] In contrast to another equilibrium concept, Maskin and Tirole identify an empirical attribute of such price wars: in a Markov strategy price war, "a firm cuts its price not to punish its competitor, [rather only to] regain market share" whereas in a general repeated game framework a price cut may be a punishment to the other player. The authors claim that the market share justification is closer to the empirical account than the punishment justification, and so the Markov perfect equilibrium concept proves more informative, in this case.

[ 9 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ This kind of extreme simplification is necessary to get through the example but could be relaxed in a more thorough study. A more complete specification of the game, including payoffs, would be necessary to show that these strategies can form a subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium . For illustration let us suppose however that the strategies do form such an equilibrium and therefore that they also constitute a Markov perfect equilibrium.

References [ edit ] ^ Maskin E, Tirole J. A Theory of Dynamic Oligopoly, I: Overview and Quantity Competition with Large Fixed Costs. Econometrica 1988;56:549.

^ Maskin and Maskin E, Tirole J. A Theory of Dynamic Oligopoly, II: Price Competition, Kinked Demand Curves, and Edgeworth Cycles. Econometrica 1988;56:571 ^ Maskin E, Tirole J. Markov Perfect Equilibrium. J Econ Theory 2001;100:191–219.

^ Fudenberg D, Tirole J. Game Theory. 1991:603.

^ We shall define a Markov Perfect Equilibrium (MPE) to be a subgame perfect equilibrium in which all players use Markov strategies.

Eric Maskin and Jean Tirole. 2001.

Markov Perfect Equilibrium Archived 2011-10-05 at the Wayback Machine .

Journal of Economic Theory 100, 191-219.

doi : 10.1006/jeth.2000.2785 ^ Tirole (1988), p. 254 ^ C. Lanier Benkard. 2000. Learning and forgetting: The dynamics of aircraft production.

American Economic Review 90:4, 1034–1054. ( jstor ) ^ See for example Maskin and Tirole, p.571 ^ Maskin and Tirole, 1988, p.592 Bibliography [ edit ] Fudenberg, Drew ; Tirole, Jean (1991).

Game Theory . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press . pp.

501– 502.

ISBN 9780262061414 .

Book preview.

Tirole, Jean. 1988.

The Theory of Industrial Organization . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press .

Maskin, Eric, and Jean Tirole. 1988. " A Theory of Dynamic Oligopoly: I & II " Econometrica 56:3, 549-600.

v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7b7cddf567‐hwnr7
Cached time: 20250812092244
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.265 seconds
Real time usage: 0.333 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 955/1000000
Revision size: 9004/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85341/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 972/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 20756/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.150/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4552392/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  249.404      1 -total
 38.06%   94.928      1 Template:Game_theory
 37.36%   93.179      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 25.45%   63.483      2 Template:Reflist
 17.41%   43.424      1 Template:Doi
 13.49%   33.655      1 Template:Citation_needed
 12.16%   30.337      1 Template:Infobox_equilibrium
 11.61%   28.951      1 Template:Fix
 11.19%   27.916      1 Template:Infobox
  9.04%   22.546      1 Template:Cite_Fudenberg_Tirole_1991 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31232369:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812092244 and revision id 1058247401. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Markov_perfect_equilibrium&oldid=1058247401 " Categories : Game theory equilibrium concepts Non-cooperative games Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 This page was last edited on 2 December 2021, at 10:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Markov perfect equilibrium 2 languages Add topic

