Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of cityscapes in art 2 Selected cityscape painters 3 Selected cityscape photographers 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Cityscape 14 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша مصرى Nederlands Português Русский Svenska ไทย Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artistic representation of the physical aspects of a city or urban area For other uses, see Cityscape (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cityscape" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Dam Square in Amsterdam, by Gerrit Adriaensz Berckheyde , c.

1660 Tampere , Finland in the 1890s Dresden , Germany in the 1890s Plaza de Mayo in Buenos Aires , Argentina (1910) Houses of Parliament, Sunset , 1902, by Claude Monet Cityscape of New York in the 1980s In the visual arts , a cityscape (urban landscape) is an artistic representation, such as a painting , drawing , print or photograph , of the physical aspects of a city or urban area . It is the urban equivalent of a landscape .

Townscape is roughly synonymous with cityscape, though it implies the same difference in urban size and density (and even modernity) implicit in the difference between the words city and town .  In urban design the terms refer to the configuration of built forms and interstitial space.

History of cityscapes in art [ edit ] From the first century A.D. dates a fresco at the Baths of Trajan in Rome depicting a bird's eye view of an ancient city.

[ 1 ] In the Middle Ages, cityscapes appeared as a background for portraits and biblical themes. From the 16th up to the 18th century numerous copperplate prints and etchings were made showing cities in bird's eye view . The function of these prints was to provide a map-like overview.

In Ancient China, scroll paintings such as Along the River During the Qingming Festival ( Qingming Shanghe Tu ) offer a panoramic view of the cities depicted.

Halfway through the 17th century the cityscape became an independent genre in the Netherlands . In his famous View of Delft in 1660–1661 Jan Vermeer painted a quite accurate portrait of the city Delft . Cities like Amsterdam , Haarlem and The Hague also became popular subjects for paintings. Painters from other European countries (i.e., Great Britain , France , Germany ) followed the Dutch example. The 18th century was a flourishing period for cityscape painting in Venice ( Canaletto , Guardi ).

At the end of the 19th century the impressionists focused on the atmosphere and dynamics of everyday life in the city. Suburban and industrial areas, building sites and railway yards also became subjects for cityscapes. During the 20th century attention became focused on abstract and conceptual art , and thus the production of cityscapes declined. American painter Edward Hopper , who stayed loyal to figurative painting, created intriguing images of the American scene. With a revival of figurative art at the end of the 20th century comes a revaluation of the cityscape. Well-known living cityscape painters are Rackstraw Downes , Antonio López García , and Richard Estes . American artist Yvonne Jacquette has made a specialty of aerial cityscapes.

Selected cityscape painters [ edit ] Alexander Beggrov Bernardo Bellotto Johann Berthelsen George Hendrik Breitner Gustave Caillebotte Canaletto Edouard Leon Cortés John Atkinson Grimshaw Francesco Guardi Childe Hassam Jan van der Heyden Edward Hopper Isaac Israëls Matthäus Merian Georgia O'Keeffe Camille Pissarro Jacob Lawrence Paul Signac Alfred Sisley Pyotr Vereshchagin Jan Vermeer Brian Whelan James McNeill Whistler Guy C. Wiggins Stephen Wiltshire Selected cityscape photographers [ edit ] Berenice Abbott Eugène Atget Richard Berenholtz Henri Cartier-Bresson André Kertész Andrew Prokos Edward Steichen See also [ edit ] Gordon Cullen Landscape painting List of cities with most skyscrapers Skyline Skyscraper Veduta References [ edit ] ^ Eugenio la Rocca: "The Newly Discovered City Fresco from Trajan's Baths, Rome." Imago Mundi Vol. 53 (2001), pp. 121–124.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cityscapes in art .

Cityscape – ArtHistory.net Authority control databases NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cityscape&oldid=1293277838 " Categories : Cityscapes Visual arts genres Cityscape art Landscape Architecture paintings Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2018 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 20:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cityscape 14 languages Add topic

