Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Expansion 1.1.1 Landsborough Station addition 1.1.2 Milford Sound tunnel proposal 1.2 Recent history 1.2.1 Mining proposal 2 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 2.1 Glaciers 3 Conservation and human interaction Toggle Conservation and human interaction subsection 3.1 Visitor centre 3.2 Activities 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mount Aspiring National Park 23 languages Aragonés Basa Bali Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 44°23′S 168°44′E ﻿ / ﻿ 44.383°S 168.733°E ﻿ / -44.383; 168.733 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National park in New Zealand Mount Aspiring National Park IUCN category II ( national park ) West Matukituki Valley and the Matukituki River seen from Cascade Saddle Interactive map of Mount Aspiring National Park Nearest city Wānaka Coordinates 44°23′S 168°44′E ﻿ / ﻿ 44.383°S 168.733°E ﻿ / -44.383; 168.733 Area 3,562 km 2 (1,375 sq mi) Established 1964 Governing body Department of Conservation UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name Te Wāhipounamu – South West New Zealand Type Natural Criteria vii, viii, ix, x Designated 1990  (14th session ) Reference no.

551 Region Oceania Mount Aspiring National Park is in the Southern Alps of the South Island of New Zealand, north of Fiordland National Park , situated in Otago and Westland regions. The park forms part of the Te Wahipounamu World Heritage Site .

History [ edit ] Mount Aspiring National Park was established in 1964 as New Zealand's tenth national park .

Expansion [ edit ] Landsborough Station addition [ edit ] In April 2005 the Nature Heritage Fund purchased private land in the Landsborough River valley as an addition to the park.

[ 1 ] Milford Sound tunnel proposal [ edit ] In 2006, the Milford Dart Company asked the Department of Conservation to amend the Mt Aspiring National Park Management Plan to allow an additional road within the park for a bus tunnel, the so-called Milford Tunnel, from the Routeburn Road to the Hollyford Valley to take tourists to Milford Sound .

[ 2 ] The tunnel would have established a connection via Glenorchy and would have significantly reduced the current return travel time from Queenstown to Milford Sound of 9 hours.

[ 3 ] In December 2007, the New Zealand Conservation Authority declined to adopt the amendment to the Management Plan. The Conservation Authority considered the proposed road would not add to the use and enjoyment of Mount Aspiring National Park and that the adverse effects of construction and use of the road in the National Park would outweigh any benefits.

[ 4 ] The proposal gained approval in principle by the Department of Conservation in 2011, but was rejected by the Minister of Conservation , Nick Smith , in July 2013.  Smith stated that "the proposal was beyond what was appropriate for a World Heritage Area ." The managing director of the company behind the proposal stated that he was "disappointed of course.

National trying to out-green the greens . Going skiing." [ 3 ] Recent history [ edit ] Mining proposal [ edit ] In 2009 the National -led government of New Zealand indicated that Mount Aspiring National Park may be opened up to mining. Around 20% of the total area of the park, mainly in the western portions around the Red Hill Range, and the north eastern parts, could be removed from the park and mined.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Prospectors here are particularly interested in carbonatite deposits including rare earth elements and tungsten . The Green Party warned that the park is one of New Zealand's main tourism drawcards, and that mining here could do significant damage to the country's image.

[ 7 ] Geography [ edit ] Mount Aspiring National Park covers 3,562 square kilometres (1,375 sq mi) at the southern end of the Southern Alps , directly to the west of Lake Wānaka , and is popular for tramping , walking and mountaineering .

Mount Aspiring / Tititea , elevation 3,033 metres (9,951 ft) above sea level, gives the park its name.

[ 8 ] Other prominent peaks within the park include Mount Pollux, elevation 2,542 metres (8,340 ft), and Mount Brewster , elevation 2,519 metres (8,264 ft).

The Haast Pass , one of the three principal road routes over the Southern Alps, crosses the north-eastern corner of the park.

Glaciers [ edit ] Mount Aspiring is still home to over 100 glaciers , that contributed to the formation of the valleys in the national park.

[ 9 ] U-shaped valleys with steep sides can be found throughout Mount Aspiring National Park, which was formed through glaciation in the region 16,000 –18,000 years ago during the Ōtira Ice Age .

Conservation and human interaction [ edit ] Visitor centre [ edit ] Mt Aspiring Visitor Centre (July 2021) The Mount Aspiring National Park visitor centre is located in Wānaka on the Corner of Ardmore St and Ballentyne Rd.

[ 10 ] Activities [ edit ] Popular tramping and hiking tracks in the park include: Cascade Saddle Track Gillespie Pass circuit Matukituki Valley Routeburn Track Rees and Dart Tracks See also [ edit ] National parks of New Zealand Forest parks of New Zealand Regional parks of New Zealand Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation in New Zealand Tramping in New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ Honourable Chris Carter, Landsborough Station purchased for national park Archived 27 November 2005 at the Wayback Machine , Media Release, New Zealand Government, 22 April 2005 ^ "Amendment to park plan proposed for Milford Dart" (Press release). New Zealand Conservation Authority. 8 March 2006 . Retrieved 4 March 2010 .

^ a b Fox, Michael (17 July 2013).

"Government rejects Milford Tunnel" .

The Press . Retrieved 17 July 2013 .

^ "Roading Amendment to National Park Management Plan is declined" (Press release). Kerry Marshall, Chair, NZ Conservation Authority. 13 December 2007 . Retrieved 23 March 2008 .

^ Green Party Archived 3 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine – documents released under the OIA.

^ "Leaked report recommends mining option for Mt Aspiring" .

The New Zealand Herald .

NZPA . 1 December 2009 . Retrieved 26 October 2011 .

^ Cumming, Geoff (6 March 2010).

"Miners press to enter the green zone" .

The New Zealand Herald . Retrieved 26 March 2010 .

^ "Data Table – Protected Areas – LINZ Data Service" .

Land Information New Zealand . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ PeakVisor.

"Mount Aspiring National Park" .

PeakVisor . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .

^ "DOC Tititea / Mt Aspiring National Park Visitor Centre | Visitor Information Centres in Wanaka, New Zealand" .

www.newzealand.com . Retrieved 24 July 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mount Aspiring National Park .

Mount Aspiring National Park at the Department of Conservation v t e Mount Aspiring National Park , New Zealand Mountains Mount Aspiring / Tititea Mount Avalanche Mount Brewster Mount Castor Mount Earnslaw Mount Edward Mount Franklin Mount Maori Mount Pollux Rob Roy Peak Mountain ranges Humboldt Mountains Glaciers Dart Glacier Olivine Ice Plateau Rob Roy Glacier Volta Glacier Gorges and mountain passes Gates of Haast Haast Pass Rivers Arawhata River Barrier River Bettne River Blue River Blue Duck River Bonar River Burke River Cascade River Dart River / Te Awa Whakatipu Donald River Drake River Fish River Forgotten River Haast River Joe River Kitchener River Makarora River Matukituki River Mueller River Ngatau River Okuru River Olivine River Pearson River Pyke River Red Pyke River Routeburn River Te Naihi River Turnbull River Waiatoto River Waipara River Whitbourn River Wilkin River Williamson River Wills River Young River Waterfalls Bridal Veil Falls Fantail Falls Roaring Billy Falls Thunder Creek Falls Walking tracks Cascade Saddle Track Rees and Dart Tracks Routeburn Track Routeburn Classic Other Haast-Hollyford road Lake Sylvan Pleasant Flat v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area v t e Tolkien tourism destinations Peter Jackson film locations (New Zealand) North Island Waikato Hobbiton Movie Set The Shire Mount Ngauruhoe Mount Doom Manawatū-Whanganui Mangawhero River Ithilien Mount Ruapehu Gates of Mordor Rangipo Desert Gates of Mordor Rangitīkei River River Anduin Tongariro National Park Emyn Muil Whakapapa skifield Mordor Wellington Kaitoke Regional Park Rivendell and the Fords of Isen Mount Victoria Escaping the Shire and Dunharrow Pūtangirua Pinnacles Dimholt Road Wētā Workshop South Island Nelson Mount Olympus, Kahurangi National Park Outcrop south of Rivendell Tākaka Hill Chetwood Tasman Mount Owen Dimrill Dale Canterbury Mount Sunday , Mount Potts station Edoras Twizel Pelennor Fields Otago Dart River / Te Awa Whakatipu Isengard , Lothlórien and Amon Hen Kawarau Gorge Suspension Bridge The Argonath Mount Aspiring National Park Isengard Skippers Canyon Ford of Bruinen The Remarkables Misty Mountains Twelve Mile Delta, Queenstown Ithilien camp Westland Mount Gunn, Franz Josef Glacier Ered Nimrais Southland Kepler Mire Dead Marshes Mavora Lakes Nen Hithoel , Fangorn , Silverlode River and River Anduin Snowdon Forest Fangorn Waiau River River Anduin : J. R. R. Tolkien locations (Europe) United Kingdom Oxford The Eagle and Child Exeter College Merton College Pembroke College Northmoor Road Wolvercote Cemetery Birmingham Birmingham Oratory Sarehole Mill Worcestershire Malvern Hills Switzerland Jenins Lauterbrunnen See also Tolkien Societies Tolkien fandom Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mount_Aspiring_National_Park&oldid=1289793267 " Categories : IUCN Category II Mount Aspiring National Park Protected areas of Otago Protected areas established in 1964 1964 establishments in New Zealand National parks of New Zealand Parks in Otago Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Use New Zealand English from January 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 22:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mount Aspiring National Park 23 languages Add topic

