Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Statesman 3 French School of Spirituality 4 Berullian Spiritual Theology of Priesthood 5 Philosophy and works 6 References Toggle the table of contents Pierre de Bérulle 12 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano Latina مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Catholic priest and cardinal His Eminence Pierre de Bérulle Cardinal-Priest of Santa Maria della Pace Church Catholic Church In office 1633–1639 Previous post(s) Cardinal-Priest of San Lorenzo in Panisperna (1627–33) Orders Ordination 5 June 1599 Created cardinal 30 August 1627 by Pope Urban VIII Rank Cardinal-Priest Personal details Born 4 February 1575 Cérilly , France Died 2 October 1629 (aged 54) Paris , France Buried Trinità dei Monti Alma mater University of Bologna Pierre de Bérulle ( French pronunciation: [pjɛʁ də beʁyl] ; 4 February 1575 – 2 October 1629) was a French Catholic priest, cardinal and statesman in 17th-century France. He was the founder of the French school of spirituality and counted among his disciples Vincent de Paul and Francis de Sales , although both developed significantly different spiritual theologies.

Life [ edit ] Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Bérulle was born in the Château of Cérilly , near Troyes in Champagne , into two families of distinguished magistrates on 4 February 1575.

[ 1 ] The château de Cérilly is situated in the modern department of Yonne , while the village adjacent to it, Bérulle , is in Aube . He was educated by the Jesuits at Clermont and at the Sorbonne in Paris. He published his first work, his Bref Discours de l'abnegation interieure , in 1597. Soon after his ordination as a priest in 1599, he assisted Cardinal Duperron in his public controversy with the Protestant Philippe de Mornay , and made numerous converts.

With the co-operation of his cousin, Madame Acarie ( Marie of the Incarnation ), in 1604 he introduced the Discalced Carmelite nuns of the reform of Teresa of Ávila into France.

[ 1 ] In 1608, Vincent de Paul moved to Paris, where he came under the influence of Abbé (later Cardinal) Pierre de Bérulle, whom he took as his spiritual director for a time. De Bérulle was responsible for De Paul taking up an appointment to the parish of Clichy.

[ 2 ] A mainstay of the Counter-Reformation in France, in 1611 Bérulle founded in Paris the Congregation of the French Oratory , on the model of the one founded in 1556 by Philip Neri at Rome. The French congregation, however, varied in important respects from the Italian Oratory.

[ 3 ] Statesman [ edit ] Bérulle was a chaplain to King Henry IV of France , and several times declined his offers to be made a bishop. He obtained the necessary dispensations from Rome for Henrietta Maria 's marriage to Charles I , and acted as her chaplain during the first year of her stay in England. In 1626, as French ambassador to Spain, he concluded the favourable Treaty of Monzón , to which his enemy Cardinal Richelieu found objections. After the reconciliation of King Louis XIII with his mother, Marie de Medici , through his agency, he was appointed a councillor of state, but had to resign this office, owing to his pro- Habsburg policy, which was opposed by Richelieu. For religious reasons, Cardinal Bérulle favored the allegiance of France with Austria and Spain, the other Catholic powers, while Cardinal Richelieu wanted to undermine their influence in Europe.

[ 4 ] He was made cardinal by Pope Urban VIII on 30 August 1627, but never received the red hat.

Bérulle died October 2, 1629, in Paris, while celebrating Mass, and was buried in the chapel of the Oratorian College of Juilly .

[ 4 ] French School of Spirituality [ edit ] In the early part of his career, Bérulle was confident of the ability of the individual to both remake society and reform the church. Relying on human reason and diligent effort, he worked to convert the Huguenots through theological treatises and conferences. When his efforts seemed to have little effect, he came to the realization that everything depended on God, and that one should attempt to live in accordance with the will of God without concern for success or failure.

[ 5 ] Bérulle is generally regarded as being an initiator of the French School of Spirituality, a powerful spiritual, missionary, and reform movement that animated the church in France in the early seventeenth century. The movement was characterized by a deep sense of God's grandeur and of the Church as the Body of Christ, a pessimistic Augustinian view of man that nonetheless stressed positive potential through God, and a strong apostolic and missionary commitment.

[ 2 ] Cornelius Jansen and Jean du Vergier de Hauranne (the Abbé (Abbot) of Saint-Cyran), key collaborators of Bérulle, worked together to promote an Augustinian penitential theology, hoping that Bérulle’s Oratory would be the means by which the theology would displace that of " laxist " Jesuits.

[ 6 ] Bérulle's depiction of the mystical journey through Mary to Christ, and through Christ to the Trinity is a hallmark of the French School of spirituality.

[ 7 ] It has been asserted that the term "school" is potentially problematic, though, because at least some other cited members of this "school," such as Jean Eudes , Jean-Jacques Olier , Louis-Marie Grignion de Montfort , and Jean-Baptiste de La Salle , do not simply develop the thought of Bérulle, but all have their own significant insights. It has, therefore, been asserted that the "school" does not have simply one founder. However, the many common elements (such as an emphasis on living in the Spirit of Jesus, particular forms of meditative prayer, and, in some measure, a spiritual theology of priesthood taught in seminaries influenced by French School since the 1600s), means that it can be considered as a distinct tradition of spirituality, more recently known as Berullism.

[ 8 ] Berullian Spiritual Theology of Priesthood [ edit ] Cardinal Pierre de Bérulle Substantial and polemicized Lutheran, Calvinist, and Counter-Reformation theological and philosophical notions have been noted in Berulle's spiritual theology of priesthood. This spiritual theology created a sea change in the Roman Catholic theology of the priesthood, principally through an over-identification with Christ, according to Clare McGrath-Merkle. Berullian clerical spirituality has been characterized by a negative spiritual anthropology of self-annihilationism and neantism in which the priest must lose his identity to make room for that of Christ.

[ 9 ] Philosophy and works [ edit ] Bérulle encouraged Descartes ' philosophical studies, and it was through him that the Samaritan Pentateuch , recently brought over from Constantinople , was inserted in Lejay's Bible Polyglotte (1628–45).

Bérulle has been claimed to be an opponent of the abstract school of mysticism that bypassed the humanity of Christ, although his own method of prayer included a focus on adoring the being of Christ himself, considered in the abstract; [ 10 ] Pope Urban VIII called him the "apostle of the incarnate Word".

The Carmelite nuns who were brought to France by Bérulle objected to his attempts to influence their spirituality. Nevertheless, Berullian influences did remain within the spirituality of female Carmelite monastic communities and perdured into the 20th century, until Blessed Marie-Eugene OCD visited the communities to provide standard Carmelite spiritual formation.

[ 11 ] In his Discours de l'état et des grandeurs de Jésus Bérulle emphasized Jesus as the Incarnate Word of God, and the abasement, self-surrender, servitude and humiliation— all Bérulle's words— of his Incarnation .  He even took the Incarnation as the defining characteristic of his spirituality and his Oratory, when he asked Christ "that, in this piety, devotion, and special servitude to the mystery of Your Incarnation and of Your humanized divinity and deified humanity, be our life and our state, our spirit and our particular difference." [ 12 ] The chief works of Cardinal de Bérulle are: Bref discours de l'abnégation intérieure ( Brief Discourse on Interior Abnegation ), (1597).

Traité des énergumènes ( Treatise on the Possessed ), (Troyes, 1599). (This addresses the nature of diabolical possession, a topic of much controversy at the time. Diabolical possession, Bérulle argued, consists "precisely in a right which the malign spirit has of residing in [the possessed person's] body and of altering it in some manner." [ 13 ] At its heart lay the profound diabolical hostility to the Incarnation, such that Satan, through possession, attempts to ape God, becoming "incarnate" himself.) Trois Discours de controverse ( Three Discourses of Controversy ), (Paris, 1609), on various subjects.

Discours de l'état et des grandeurs de Jésus ( Discourse on the State and Grandeurs of Jesus ), (Paris, 1623). This work was reprinted several times; the substance and often the actual expressions are to be found in the diffuse Méditations of Father Bourgoing and also in Bossuet's Elévations sur les mystères . The work was also popular among Jansenists . Translated as Discourses on the State and Grandeurs of Jesus: The Ineffable Union of the Deity with Humanity , trans. Lisa Richmond (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 2023).

Vie de Jésus ( Life of Jesus ), (Paris, 1629). This was a sequel to the preceding work, which the author left unfinished at the time of his death, having only had the time to consider the mystery of the Annunciation and partially (in a draft) the Visitation.

Elévation à Jésus-Christ sur Sainte Madeleine ( Elevation to Jesus Christ Regarding St. [Mary] Magdalene ), (Paris, 1627).

[ 2 ] In addition, Bérulle wrote a number of short devotional works ( Œuvres de pieté ) and documents for the guidance of the Oratory.

Bérulle's works, edited by P. Bourgoing (2 vols., 1644) were reprinted, by Migne in 1857.

A selected modern English translation is available as Bérulle and the French School: Selected Writings , trans. Lowell M Glendon, (New York: Paulist Press, 1989).

References [ edit ] ^ a b Ingold, Augustin. "Pierre de Bérulle." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 2. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 12 Jun. 2013 ^ a b c "Berulle, Pierre de", Vincentian Online Library .

^ http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/11274a.htm Ingold, Augustin.  "French Congregation of the Oratory." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 11. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. 12 Jun. 2013 ^ a b "Miranda, Salvatore. ""Pierre de Bérulle", Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church , Florida International University" . Archived from the original on 2015-04-30 . Retrieved 2013-06-12 .

^ Minton, Anne M., "The Spirituality of Bérulle: A New Look", Order of Preachers - Central Province .

^ Sedgwick, Alexander, Jansenism in Seventeenth-Century France: Voices from the Wilderness, Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1977, 49.

^ An Anthology of Christian Mysticism Harvey D. Egan 1991, ISBN 0-8146-6012-6 , p. 481.

^ David D Thayer, 'The French School', in Peter Tyler, ed, The Bloomsbury Guide to Christian Spirituality , (2012), p. 181. See also Krumenacker, Yves, “Qu’est-ce qu’une école de spiritualité?,” in Port-Royal et l’école française de spiritualité: actes du colloque organisé par la société des amis de Port-Royal, Paris: Bibliothèque Mazarine, 2007, pp. 11–23.

^ McGrath-Merkle, Clare.

Berulle's Spiritual Theology of Priesthood, Munster: Aschendorff, 2018.

^ [Henri Bremond.

A Literary History of Religious Thought in France from the Wars of Religion Down to Our Own Times , vol. 3, The Triumph of Mysticism, trans. K. L. Montgomery (London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1928–36), 61.] ^ Selection, Autobiography of Blessed Anne of St. Bartholomew . Available at: https://carmelitequotes.blog/2019/09/20/quote-of-the-day-20-september/ .

^ Pierre de Bérulle, Discours de l'état et des grandeurs de Jésus VIII.13, in J.-P. Migne, ed., Œuvres Complétes de de Bérulle (Paris: J.-P. Migne, 1856), p. 314.

^ Pierre de Bérulle, Traité des énergumènes VI.1, in J.-P. Migne, ed., Œuvres Complétes de de Bérulle (Paris: J.-P. Migne, 1856), p. 860.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Bérulle, Pierre de ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

"Pierre de Bérulle" , Jean-Pierre Papon , Dictionnaire (in French) v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n9f4n
Cached time: 20250817045731
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.485 seconds
Real time usage: 0.613 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2383/1000000
Revision size: 14291/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 130284/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4231/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87543/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.310/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20032218/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  468.407      1 -total
 26.71%  125.103      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 19.64%   91.974      1 Template:IPA
 19.50%   91.358      1 Template:Christian_mysticism
 16.77%   78.539      1 Template:Reflist
 13.39%   62.710      1 Template:Cite_web
 11.34%   53.122      1 Template:Short_description
  9.98%   46.746      1 Template:History_of_Catholic_theology
  9.96%   46.674      1 Template:Infobox_Christian_leader
  9.71%   45.470      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:856227:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045731 and revision id 1301380271. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pierre_de_Bérulle&oldid=1301380271 " Categories : 1575 births 1629 deaths 17th-century French cardinals Cardinals created by Pope Urban VIII 17th-century Christian mystics 17th-century French Catholic theologians Founders of Catholic religious communities French Christian mystics 17th-century French nobility French Oratory mystics French school of spirituality Lycée Louis-le-Grand alumni People from Yonne Roman Catholic mystics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with French IPA Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 13:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pierre de Bérulle 12 languages Add topic

