Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory of infinitesimals 2 Writings 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul du Bois-Reymond 15 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Español Français Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician (1831–1889) Paul David Gustav du Bois-Reymond.

Paul David Gustav du Bois-Reymond.

Paul David Gustav du Bois-Reymond (2 December 1831 – 7 April 1889) was a German mathematician who was born in Berlin and died in Freiburg . He was the brother of Emil du Bois-Reymond .

His thesis was concerned with the mechanical equilibrium of fluids. He worked on the theory of functions and in mathematical physics . His interests included Sturm–Liouville theory , integral equations , variational calculus , and Fourier series . In this latter field, he was able in 1873 to construct a continuous function whose Fourier series is not convergent.

His lemma defines a sufficient condition to guarantee that a function vanishes almost everywhere .

In a paper of 1875, du Bois-Reymond employed for the first time the method of diagonalization, later associated with the name of Cantor .

[ 1 ] Du Bois-Reymond also established that a trigonometric series that converges to a continuous function at every point is the Fourier series of this function.  He is also associated with the fundamental lemma of calculus of variations of which he proved a refined version based on that of Lagrange .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Theory of infinitesimals [ edit ] Paul du Bois-Reymond developed a theory of infinitesimals : The infinitely small is a mathematical quantity and has all its properties in common with the finite […] A belief in the infinitely small does not triumph easily. Yet when one thinks boldly and freely, the initial distrust will soon mellow into a pleasant certainty ... A majority of educated people will admit an infinite in space and time, and not just an "unboundedly large". But they will only with difficulty believe in the infinitely small, despite the fact that the infinitely small has the same right to existence as the infinitely large. […] — Paul du Bois-Reymond, Über die Paradoxen des Infinitär-Calcüls (On the paradoxes of the infinitary calculus), 1877 Writings [ edit ] Théorie générale des fonctions (Nice : Impr. niçoise, 1887) (translated in French from the original German by G. Millaud and A. Girot) De Aequilibrio Fluidorum (PhD Thesis, 1859) References [ edit ] ^ Du Bois-Reymond, Paul (September 1875).

"Ueber asymptotische Werthe, infinitäre Approximationen und infinitäre Auflösung von Gleichungen" .

Mathematische Annalen (in German).

8 (3): 363– 414.

doi : 10.1007/BF01443187 .

ISSN 0025-5831 .

^ Dubois-Reymond: Erläuterungen zu den Anfangsgründen der Variationsrechnung.

Mathematische Annalen, Band 15, 1879, S. 283–314, hier S. 297, 300.

^ Oskar Bolza: Vorlesungen über Variationsrechnung.

Teubner 1909, S. 26. Nach Bolza stammt der älteste Beweis von Friedrich Stegmann , Lehrbuch der Variationsrechnung, Kassel 1854, dort werden aber einschränkendere Annahmen gemacht.

External links [ edit ] Works by or about Paul du Bois-Reymond at the Internet Archive O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Paul du Bois-Reymond" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Paul du Bois-Reymond at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Hardy, G. H. (Godfrey Harold) (1910).

Orders of Infinity: The 'Infinitärcalcül' of Paul Du Bois-Reymond .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet Leopoldina People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX This article about a German mathematician is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_du_Bois-Reymond&oldid=1294172461 " Categories : 1831 births 1889 deaths 19th-century German mathematicians Mathematicians from Berlin People from the Province of Brandenburg Academic staff of the University of Freiburg Academic staff of the University of Tübingen Academic staff of Technische Universität Berlin German people of French descent Mathematicians from the Kingdom of Prussia Mathematicians from the German Empire German mathematician stubs Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links All stub articles This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 02:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul du Bois-Reymond 15 languages Add topic

