Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Productions Toggle Productions subsection 2.1 The Deadlys 2.2 Other productions 3 Gavin Jones 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Vibe Australia Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Defunct media agency serving Indigneous Australians Vibe Australia Company type Subsidiary Industry Media, communications and events management agency Founded 1993 Defunct 2014 Key people Gavin Jones Georgia Cordukes Products Radio , Television and Magazine Vibe Australia was an Aboriginal media, communications, and events management agency founded by Gavin Jones in 1993. Located in Darlinghurst , Sydney , New South Wales , they worked with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people throughout Australia. The organisation was known for hosting The Deadly Awards , as well as running the music and culture radio show Deadly Sounds . It also published the website and magazine Deadly Vibe , and hosted an annual national music and sporting event called The Vibe 3on3 for Indigenous Australians .

History [ edit ] Vibe Australia was founded in 1993 by Gavin Jones at the Boomalli Aboriginal Artists Cooperative .

[ 1 ] Rhoda Roberts was a producer at Vibe through its entire history.

[ 2 ] In June 2014, Vibe Australia funding was cut by the Abbott government under Coalition budget measures designed to reallocate funding to Indigenous education programs, despite a recent audit which had been wholly positive. This including cutting the Deadly Awards funding back to $1 million, with no funding provided for future years. On 12 July 2014, Jones died at age 47.

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] On 14 July 2014, Vibe Australia announced that all Vibe projects including the Deadly Awards concluded on 30 June 2014.

[ 4 ] After a story was run on Triple J 's Hack program on 15 July 2014, a groundswell of community support for saving the Deadly Awards began.

[ 5 ] A petition on Change.org attracted over 26,000 signatures [ 6 ] and a Kickstarter campaign reached A$6,699 .

[ 4 ] The website, Deadly Vibe, was updated with the news of the project's termination, but kept as an archive of its activities up to that point.

[ 7 ] Productions [ edit ] The Deadlys [ edit ] Main article: Deadly Awards Since 1995, the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Music, Sport, Entertainment and Community awards, known as the Deadly Awards or simply "The Deadlys", have been held at the Sydney Opera House and broadcast by SBS .

[ 8 ] Other productions [ edit ] Vibe Australia produced a number of other events and media broadcasts, including: [ 7 ] Deadly Sounds , a weekly radio program syndicated to over 250 Aboriginal community stations Deadly Vibe , a national magazine and website focusing on health, sport, music and lifestyle.

In Vibe , a magazine for Indigenous people in secure rehabilitation care and at risk, hosted by Rhoda Roberts .

Move It Mob Style , a children's television show focusing on health, dance, and lifestyle, broadcast by NITV The Vibe 3on3, a national music and sporting event to promote health, well-being, Aboriginal identity , and sportsmanship Gavin Jones [ edit ] Gavin Jones was born in 1966 [ 3 ] in Goulburn , New South Wales and grew up there. He started a cadetship at the Goulburn Post , and then studied communications at the University of Canberra , graduating in 1989. He worked in journalism across various government departments.

[ 1 ] In 2008, he launched Vibe TV, which produced the programs Living Strong and Move it Mob Style .

[ 1 ] He died on his farm at Goulburn on 12 July 2014, aged 47.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Feneley, Rick (14 July 2014).

"Deadly Awards founder Gavin Jones dies after funding cut" .

Sydney Morning Herald . SMH . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ Pendergast, Kirra (2 February 2016).

"People to know – Rhoda Roberts" .

Common Ground North Coast . Archived from the original on 11 July 2021.

^ a b King, Jennifer (15 July 2014).

"Gavin Jones obituary: Respected Indigenous identity and Deadly Awards founder dies aged 47" .

ABC News .

^ a b "Fund a new Deadly awards!" .

Vibe Australia . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ Tilley, Tom.

"ABC Triple J Hack program, Interview with Tom Tilley" .

Triple J (Interview) . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Reinstate the Deadly Awards in memory of Founder Gavin Jones." at Change.org ^ a b "Who We Are" .

Deadly Vibe . 10 July 2014 . Retrieved 5 August 2024 .

^ "The Deadlys" .

Deadly Vibe . 14 February 2014 . Retrieved 5 August 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Indigenous music of Australia Instruments Bullroarer Clapstick Didgeridoo Lagerphone Other Aboriginal rock Songline Wangga Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vibe_Australia&oldid=1304008525 " Categories : Indigenous Australian musical groups Indigenous Australian musicians Indigenous Australian mass media Defunct organisations serving Indigenous Australians 1993 establishments in Australia 2014 disestablishments in Australia Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2015 Use Australian English from June 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Official website not in Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 11:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vibe Australia Add languages Add topic

