Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 History 3 Criticism 4 Notes 5 See also 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Strong programme 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Español Français 한국어 Italiano Magyar Polski Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( July 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The strong programme or strong sociology is a variety of the sociology of scientific knowledge (SSK) particularly associated with David Bloor , [ 1 ] Barry Barnes , Harry Collins , Donald A. MacKenzie , [ 2 ] and John Henry. The strong programme's influence on science and technology studies is credited as being unparalleled ( Latour 1999). The largely Edinburgh -based school of thought aims to illustrate how the existence of a scientific community , bound together by allegiance to a shared paradigm , is a prerequisite for normal scientific activity.

The strong programme is a reaction against "weak" sociologies of science, which restricted the application of sociology to "failed" or "false" theories, such as phrenology . Failed theories would be explained by citing the researchers' biases , such as covert political or economic interests. Sociology would be only marginally relevant to successful theories, which succeeded because they had revealed a fact of nature. The strong programme proposed that both "true" and "false" scientific theories should be treated the same way. Both are caused by social factors or conditions, such as cultural context and self-interest . All human knowledge, as something that exists in the human cognition, must contain some social components in its formation process.

Characteristics [ edit ] As formulated by David Bloor, [ 3 ] the strong programme has four indispensable components: Causality :  it examines the conditions (psychological, social, and cultural) that bring about claims to a certain kind of knowledge.

Impartiality :  it examines successful as well as unsuccessful knowledge claims.

Symmetry : the same types of explanations are used for successful and unsuccessful knowledge claims alike.

Reflexivity : it must be applicable to sociology itself.

History [ edit ] Because the strong programme originated at the 'Science Studies Unit,' University of Edinburgh , it is sometimes termed the Edinburgh School . However, there is also a Bath School associated with Harry Collins that makes similar proposals. In contrast to the Edinburgh School, which emphasizes historical approaches, the Bath School emphasizes microsocial studies of laboratories and experiments.

[ 4 ] The Bath school, however, does depart from the strong programme on some fundamental issues. In the social construction of technology (SCOT) approach developed by Collins' student Trevor Pinch , as well as by the Dutch sociologist Wiebe Bijker , the strong programme was extended to technology. There are SSK-influenced scholars working in science and technology studies programs throughout the world.

[ 5 ] Criticism [ edit ] In order to study scientific knowledge from a sociological point of view, the strong programme has adhered to a form of radical relativism . In other words, it argues that – in the social study of institutionalised beliefs about " truth " – it would be unwise to use "truth" as an explanatory resource. To do so would (according to the relativist view)  include the answer as part of the question (Barnes 1992), and propound a " whiggish " approach towards the study of history – a narrative of human history as an inevitable march towards truth and enlightenment.

Physicists Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont wrote a scathing critique Fashionable Nonsense of the Strong Programme in 1997 and its reliance on social constructionism .

[ 6 ] In their view postmodernists on the far left attempted to recast scientific controversy as a political struggle between good (progressivism) and bad (conservatism), a form of Marxist class struggle, one that leads to a dead end that obscures, rather than enlightens.

[ 7 ] They assert that the main error of the "Strong Program" is to ignore that scientists primarily use nature and mathematicians logic, not social pressures, to validate their findings.

[ 7 ] : 85–87, 90 They demonstrated that academics  such as Feyerabend , Latour , Lacan , Irigaray , Kristeva (Ch3) and Deleuze regularly attempted to apply nonsensical metaphor from the physical sciences and mathematics to bolster their theories of how scientific agreements were achieved.

[ 7 ] : 78–85, 92–99, 27–37, 38-49 106-123, 154–168 Markus Seidel attacks the main arguments – underdetermination and norm-circularity – provided by Strong Programme proponents for their relativism.

[ 8 ] It has also been argued that the strong programme has incited climate denial .

[ 9 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ David Bloor,  "The strengths of the strong programme." Scientific rationality: The sociological turn (Springer Netherlands, 1984) pp. 75-94.

^ Donald MacKenzie, "Notes on the science and social relations debate." Capital & Class 5.2 (1981): 47-60.

^ David Bloor, Knowledge and Social Imagery (1976) ^ Harry M. Collins, "Introduction: Stages in the empirical programme of relativism." Social studies of science (1981): 3-10.

in JSTOR ^ Wiebe E. Bijker, et al.

The social construction of technological systems: New directions in the sociology and history of technology (MIT press, 2012) ^ Galaty, David (2022).

Modern European Intellectual History: Individuals, Groupings and Technological Change 1800-2000 . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 336.

ISBN 978-1-350-10539-3 .

^ a b c Bricmont, jean; Sokal, Alan (1998).

Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern Intellectuals Abuse of Science . New York, NY: Picador. pp.

107– 200, 206– 207.

ISBN 0-312-19545-1 .

^ Markus Seidel Epistemic Relativism. A Constructive Critique , 2014, Palgrave Macmillan ^ Hansson, Sven Ove (29 August 2020).

"Social constructionism and climate science denial" .

European Journal for Philosophy of Science .

10 (3): 37.

doi : 10.1007/s13194-020-00305-w .

ISSN 1879-4920 .

See also [ edit ] Sociology of Scientific Knowledge – Study of science as a social activity Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Philosophy of science – Branch of philosophy Science studies – Research area analyzing scientific expertise Social constructivism – Sociological theory of knowledge Sokal affair – 1996 scholarly publishing sting accepted by an academic journal Bibliography [ edit ] Barnes, B. (1977).

Interests and the Growth of Knowledge . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Barnes, B. (1982).

T. S. Kuhn and Social Science . London: Macmillan.

Barnes, B. (1985).

About Science . Oxford: Blackwell.

Barnes, B. (1987). 'Concept Application as Social Activity', Critica 19: 19–44.

Barnes, B. (1992). "Realism, relativism and finitism". Pp. 131–147 in Cognitive Relativism and Social Science , eds. D. Raven, L. van Vucht Tijssen, and J. de Wolf.

Barnes, B., D. Bloor, and J. Henry. (1996), Scientific Knowledge: A Sociological Analysis . University of Chicago Press. [An introduction and summary of strong sociology] Bijker, Wiebe E., et al.

The social construction of technological systems: New directions in the sociology and history of technology (MIT press, 2012) Bloor, D. (1991 [1976]), Knowledge and Social Imagery , 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. [outlines the strong programme] Bloor, D. (1997).

Wittgenstein, Rules and Institutions . London: Routledge.

Bloor, D. (1999). "Anti-Latour," Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science Part A 20#1 pp: 81–112.

Collins, Harry, and Trevor Pinch.

The Golem at large: What you should know about technology (Cambridge University Press, 2014) Latour, B. (1999). "For David Bloor and Beyond ... a reply to David Bloor's 'Anti-Latour'," Studies in History & Philosophy of Science Part A 30 (1): 113–129.

External links [ edit ] STS Wiki WTMC Wiki Historical sociologist Simon Schaffer is interviewed on SSK Historical sociologist Steven Shapin is interviewed on SSK Strong Programme in Sociology of Knowledge and Actor-Network Theory: The Debate within Science Studies (includes questions posed to David Bloor and Bruno Latour, in Appendix) v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Strong_programme&oldid=1291578828 " Categories : Science and technology studies Sociology of scientific knowledge Historiography of science Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles lacking reliable references from July 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 03:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Strong programme 12 languages Add topic

