Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Writers 2 Fans 3 Gender 4 Influence of political movements 5 Media adaptations 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Women in speculative fiction 4 languages Català Français Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Women in science fiction ) Part of a series on Women in society Society Women's history ( legal rights ) Woman Animal advocacy Business Female entrepreneurs Gender representation on corporate boards of directors Combat Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Economic development Explorers and travelers Education Feminism Womyn Government Conservatives in the US Heads of state or government Legislators Queen regnant List Health Journalism Law Law enforcement Military Mother Nobel Prize laureates Piracy Positions of power Reproductive rights Sex segregation Feminist In Islam Venture capital Violence and abuse Voting rights Workforce Exchange of women Science Technology Computing Engineering Geology Medicine dentistry in the United States Organizations Science Science, technology, engineering and mathematics Space Telegraphy Arts Humanities Architecture Arts Art history field Women's cinema Dance Film "Chick flicks" Fine arts Literature Science fiction Philosophy Feminist philosophy Photographers Music Jazz Punk rock In Shakespeare's works Religion Theological figures Baháʼí Faith Bible Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Opus Dei Hinduism Islam Imams Mahr Segregation Women's testimony Judaism Sikhism Taoism Zoroastrianism Popular culture Comics Portrayal in American comics Film industry Music Fictional pirates Speculative fiction Video games Gender representation in video games Women in the video game industry Sports Auto racing Baseball Basketball Boxing Cricket Curling Cycling Fastpitch softball Football / soccer Golf Gymnastics Ice hockey Lacrosse Mixed martial arts Netball Paralympic Games Rodeo Roller derby Rowing Surfing Swimming Tennis Track and field Volleyball Winter sports See also: List of sports By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Belgium Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Croatia Cuba Cyprus ( North ) Denmark DR Congo Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Ethiopia FS Micronesia Fiji Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Iceland Italy India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Ivory Coast Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Libya Madagascar Malaysia Maldives Mali Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal New Zealand Niger Nigeria North Korea Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Spain Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Sudan Suriname Sri Lanka Sweden Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Tonga Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Trinidad and Tobago Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen v t e Part of a series on Sex and sexuality in speculative fiction Main topics Sex and sexuality Gender Women Reproduction Genres Women in comics Feminist science fiction Slash fiction LGBTQ themes In comics ( characters ) In mythology In horror fiction Lesbian vampires Yaoi (Boys' love) Yuri Recurring elements Sex in space Male pregnancy Single-gender worlds Lesbian vampires Woman warriors Gynoids Awards and conventions Gaylactic Network Gaylaxicon Gaylactic Spectrum Awards Lambda Literary Awards Otherwise Award Wiscon Broad Universe Other topics Women in Refrigerators (website) Sexuality in Star Trek v t e The role of women in speculative fiction has changed a great deal since the early to mid-20th century. There are several aspects to women's roles, including their participation as authors of speculative fiction and their role in science fiction fandom. Regarding authorship, in 1948, 10–15% of science fiction writers were female. Women's role in speculative fiction (including science fiction ) has grown since then, and in 1999, women comprised 36% of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America 's professional members.

[ 1 ] Frankenstein (1818) by Mary Shelley has been called the first science fiction novel, [ 2 ] although women wrote utopian novels even before that, with Margaret Cavendish publishing the first ( The Blazing World ) in the seventeenth century.

[ 3 ] Early published fantasy was written by and for any gender. However, speculative fiction, with science fiction in particular, has traditionally been viewed as a male-oriented genre.

[ 4 ] Women have been active in science fiction fandom for a number of decades.

Writers [ edit ] Science fiction originally had a reputation of being created by men for other men, though the genre had women writers, such as Clare Winger Harris , Miriam Allen deFord , and Gertrude Barrows Bennett , from the beginning.

[ 5 ] Until the late 1960s, women did not win major [ 6 ] science fiction awards, such as the Hugos . The 1966 " Analog Science Fiction and Fact All-Time Poll" did not list any novels by women [ 7 ] and the 1973 "Locus All-Time Favorite Authors Poll" was over 90% male.

[ 8 ] One of the two women in Locus's poll, Andre Norton , had been "gender ambiguous" for many of her readers. Other female writers of the era, such as C. L. Moore and Leigh Brackett , also used ambiguous or male names. Women who wrote under their own names, such as Zenna Henderson , initially wrote more "domestic" material concerning teachers and mothers. A partial exception was Katherine MacLean , who wrote sociology- and psychology-oriented fiction and rarely used a male name.

[ 5 ] Eric Leif Davin argues in Partners in Wonder that science fiction's "male-oriented" reputation is unjustified and that it was a "safe haven" for outsiders, including women.

[ 9 ] Davin reports that only L. Taylor Hansen concealed her sex in early years, and that C. L. Moore wanted to hide her career as a science fiction author from her job.

Women writers were in a minority: during the '50s and '60s, almost 1,000 stories published in science fiction magazines by over 200 female-identified authors between 1926 and 1960 were documented, making women writers 10-15% of contributors. His is a minority view, "at odds with the common perception of science fiction".

[ 9 ] The advent of second wave feminism in the 1960s, combined with the growing view of science fiction as the literature of ideas, led to an influx of female science fiction writers, and some saw this influx as the first appearance of women into the genre. In the 1960s and 1970s, authors such as Ursula K. Le Guin (who debuted in 1963) and Joanna Russ (who debuted in the 1950s) began to consciously explore feminist themes in works such as The Left Hand of Darkness and The Female Man , creating a self-consciously feminist science fiction .

As of 2013, publisher statistics indicate that men still outnumber women about two to one among English-language speculative fiction writers aiming for professional publication, but that the percentages vary considerably by genre. The following numbers are based on the 503 submissions received by Tor Books , a major science fiction and fantasy publisher, between January and July 2013.

[ 10 ] Submissions by genre Women Men Historical , epic or high fantasy 33% 67% Urban fantasy or paranormal romance 57% 43% Horror 17% 83% Science fiction 22% 78% Young adult fiction 68% 32% Other or unclassifiable 27% 73% Overall 37% 63% Ten women have been named Grand Master of science fiction by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America : [ 11 ] Andre Norton (1984) Ursula K. Le Guin (2003) Anne McCaffrey (2005) Connie Willis (2012) C.J. Cherryh (2016) Jane Yolen (2017) Lois McMaster Bujold (2020) Nalo Hopkinson (2021) Mercedes Lackey (2022) Robin McKinley (2023) Doris Lessing , who wrote the five-novel science fiction series Canopus in Argos , received the 2007 Nobel Prize in Literature .

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction lists three notable women authors of military science fiction : Lois McMaster Bujold ; Elizabeth Moon (particularly her Familias Regnant stories such as Hunting Party (1993)), and Karen Traviss .

[ 12 ] This list has no precise inclusion criteria as described in the Manual of Style for standalone lists .

Please improve this article by adding inclusion criteria, or discuss this issue on the talk page .

( December 2023 ) Below is an evolving list of women authors in science fiction emphasizing diversity and innovation across various subgenres: Terry Ann Adams Linda Addison Charlie Jane Anders Ryka Aoki Catherine Asaro Pauline Ashwell Margaret Atwood Wilhelmina Baird Kage Baker Celeste Rita Baker Gwen Benaway Gertrude Barrows Bennet Marcia Joanne Bennett Lauren Beukes Imogen Binnie Jay D. Blakeney (real name Deborah Chester ) Maya Kathryn Bohnhoff Margaret Wander Bonnano Amanda Bouchet Leigh Brackett (successfully authored her own titles and ghost wrote for George Sanders) Mary E. Bradley Lane Marion Zimmer Bradley Jennifer Marie Brissett Rosel George Brown adrienne maree brown Dorothy Bryant Lois McMaster Bujold Emma Bull Otis Kidwell Burger Chesya Burke Octavia E. Butler Maria Campbell Margaret Cavendish Becky Chambers Suzy McKee Charnas Carolyn Janice Cherry (pen name C. J. Cherryh ) Deborah Chester (pen name Jay D. Blakeney) Jo Clayton Mildred Clingerman Suzanne Collins Storm Constantine Susan Coon Susan Cooper Ann C. Crispin Myrna Culbreath Julie E. Czerneda Miriam Allen DeFord Grace Dillon Cherie Dimaline Ariel Djanikian Paula E. Downing Aliette de Bodard Debra Doyle Diane Duane Tananarive Due Phyllis Eisenstein Suzette Haden Elgin Meg Elison Amal El-Mohtar Sylvia Engdahl Louise Erdrich Heid E. Erdrich Isabel Fall Jane S. Fancher Cynthia Felice Sheila Finch Magnus Flight (writing duo Christina Lynch and Meg Showery) Karen Joy Fowler Leslie Gadallah Alexis Gilliland Jaymee Goh Jewelle Gomez Phyllis Gotlieb Susan Grant Gayle Greeno Pauline Margaret Griffin (pen name P.M. Griffin ) Nicola Griffith Cherry Barbara Grimm (real name Cherry Wilder ) Andrea Hairston Barbara Hambley Virginia Hamilton Lucile Taylor Hanson (pen name L. Taylor Hanson) Thea Von Harbou Joy Harjo Tara Harper Clare Winger Harris Zenna Henderson Nathalie Henneberg (pen name N.C. Henneberg collaborating with husband Charlie Henneberg) Lynn Hightower Nalo Hopkinson Monica Hughes Kameron Hurley N.K. Jemisin Jane Jeppson (pen name J.O. Jeppson) Alaya Dawn Johnson Diane Wynn Jones Cyril Judd (pen name for writing collaboration between Judith Merril and Cyril M. Kornbluth ) Melanie Kent Les Killough Katherine Eliska Kimbriel Robin Wall Kimmerer Melanie Kent Aditi Khorana Mary Robinette Kowal Bibiana Krall Mercedes Lackey Larissa Lai Joy Leach Ann Leckie Tanith Lee Fonda Lee Ursula K. Le Guin Deborah Lessing Jacqueline Lichtenberg Malinda Lo Karen Lord Karin Lowachee Judith Merril (pen name Cyril Judd for writing collaboration with Cyril M. Kornbluth ) Christina Lynch (pen name Magnus Flight) Elizabeth A. Lynn C.C. MacApp (real name Carol MacApp) Katherine Maclean Susan Cooper Mandrake Sondra Marshak Adrienne Marten-Barnes Arkady Martine Ann Maxwell Janet McAdams Ann McCaffrey Ashley McConnell Vonda N. McIntyre Helen Merrick Judith Merril Melisa Michaels Elizabeth Moon Catherine Lucille Moore (pen name C.L. Moore ) Janet Morris Tamsyn Muir Pat Murphy Nichelle Nichols Jeanette Ng Alice Andre Norton (born Alice Mary Norton, pen names include Andre Norton , Andrew North, and Allen Weston) Nnedi Okorafor Malka Older Kathleen O’Malley Nene Ormes An Owomoyela Barbara Paul Marge Piercy Casey Plett Susan Power Roberta Rambelli (pen name Robert Rainbell) Marta Randall Kit Reed Jane Rice Rebecca Roanhorse Eden Robinson Eleanor Robinson Jeanne Robinson Kelly Robson Janet Rogers Mary Rosenblum Kristine Kathryn Rusch Joanna Russ Maria Russell Kiini Ibura Salaam Sophia Samatar Pamela Sargent Josephine Saxton Melissa Scott Idris Seabright (real name Margaret St. Clair ) Nisi Shawl Alice Sheldon (pen name James Tiptree Jr.

) Mary Shelly Meg Showery Susan Shwartz Leslie Marmon Silko Leanne Betasamosake Simpson Vandana Singh Kathleen Sky Melinda M. Snodgrass Evelyn Smith Mary Staton Margaret St. Clair (pen name Idris Seabright ) Marti Steussy Emily St. John Mandel Tricia Sullivan Sherry Tepper Kai Cheng Thom Sheree Renée Thomas Karin Tidbeck Lisa Tuttle Rena Vale Catherynne M. Valente Sydney Van Scyoc Mary Vigiliante Joan D. Vinge Thea Von Harbou Anne Walker Barbara Walton Sharon Webb Aliya Whiteley Cherry Wilder (real name Cherry Barbara Grimm) Kate Wilhelm Tess Williams Connie Willis G. Willow Wilson (Gwendolyn Willow Wilson) Pauline Winslow Patricia Wrightson Isabel Yap Jane Yolen Sarah Zettle Fans [ edit ] Women have been active in science fiction fandom for some time, and the Oxford Dictionary of Science Fiction dates the coinage "femfan" (sometimes: "femme fan") to as early as 1944.

[ 13 ] Leigh Brackett says of the history of women in SF "There always were a certain number of women fans and women readers." [ 14 ] Labalestier quotes the editor of Startling Stories , writing in 1953, as saying Ten years ago [ i.e.

, 1943] stf fans were practically all male, today with or without benefit of fan activities, a lot of girls and housewives and other members of the sex are quietly reading science fiction and beginning to add their voices to the bable... We honestly never expected such a surge of female women into science fiction [ 15 ] A 1958 self-reported If survey found that 31% of respondents were women, which the editors said was "surprisingly high (at least to us)".

[ 16 ] Robert Silverberg said "probably the first appearance of the 'Women in Science Fiction' panel soon to become a fixture of these conventions" was at the 10th World Science Fiction Convention in 1953; [ 17 ] which was also the first World Science Fiction Convention chaired by a woman, author Julian May .

While science fiction fandom has been an organized phenomenon for decades—presaging the organized fandoms of other genres and media—the study of science fiction fandom within cultural studies and science fiction studies is relatively new. Consequently, assertions about the prevalence of women in fandom are largely anecdotal and personal, and sometimes contradictory. Most prominent among these assertions is the claim that it was the advent of the original Star Trek television series which brought large quantities of women into fandom. This claim is critically analyzed by Davin, who finds it poorly founded, and cites a long history of female involvement in fandom decades prior to Star Trek ; [ 18 ] Larbalestier also cites women active in science fiction fandom before the late 1960s and early 1970s.

[ 15 ] However, women became more visibly present in fandom, and more organized, in the 1970s. The slash movement among fans began, as far as anyone can tell, with Diane Marchant's publication of the first known Star Trek " Kirk/Spock " story in Grup #3 in 1974. 1974 also saw the creation of The Witch and the Chameleon , the first explicitly feminist fanzine .

[ 19 ] The fanzine Khatru published a "Women in Science Fiction" symposium in 1975 (one of the "males" who participated was James Tiptree, Jr.

). In 1976, Susan Wood set up a panel on "women and science fiction" at MidAmericon , the 1976 Worldcon; this ultimately led to the founding of A Women's APA , the first women's amateur press association . Also in 1976, WisCon , the world's leading—and for many years, only—feminist science fiction convention and conference was founded: an annual conference in Madison , Wisconsin . In turn, as a result of discussions at WisCon, institutions such as the Tiptree Awards and Broad Universe arose to address questions of gender in speculative fiction and issues peculiar to women writers of speculative fiction.

[ 20 ] Some of the same people involved in creating WisCon also founded the feminist fanzine Janus , which was thrice nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Fanzine (1978–1980).

[ 21 ] However, the perception of speculative fiction as mainly a men's genre continues to be widespread. As the inclusion of women within science fiction and fantasy more broadly has become obvious, the specificity of the perception has evolved. For instance, the still widely held view that "science fiction and fantasy are men's genres" has been refined by some to distinguish between science fiction as a genre mainly appealing to men, and fantasy, which is generally seen as being more accommodating to women [ 22 ] (some subgenres, particularly urban fantasy , with female protagonists, and paranormal romance are seen as being more popular with women than with men [ 23 ] ). Little formal study has supported any of these distinctions, whether based on readers, writers, or characters.

This perception has often been upheld and enforced by men, perhaps to protect themselves from what fandom researcher Henry Jenkins called the stereotype that "men are feminized and/or desexualized through their intimate engagement with mass culture".

[ 24 ] Women fans of speculative fiction are called pejorative terms like " fake geek girl "and  are chastised for their love of " Mary Sue " characters, while at the same time male characters with the same qualities are beloved, [ 25 ] and can even face harassment for their participation in fandom.

[ 26 ] However, Jenkins writes, speculative fiction is especially popular with women who identify with feminism because they reject the gender roles that are traditionally seen in other types of fiction.

Gender [ edit ] A 1911 illustration from Camille Flammarion 's La Fin du monde . It depicts a fictional future society in which all women are beautiful and have lovely voices.

[...] science fiction and fantasy pulp magazines were directed mainly at boys[...]. Female characters were only occasionally included in science fiction pulp stories; the male protagonists' lengthy explanations to the women with limited knowledge revealed the plots Garber, Eric and Paleo, Lyn "Preface" in Uranian worlds .

[ 27 ] Main article: Gender in speculative fiction The highlighting of gender in science fiction has varied widely throughout the genre's history. Some writers and artists have challenged their society's gender norms in producing their work; others have not. Speculative and science fiction fandoms have generally become less proportionately male over time.  In step with this, so have the casts of characters portrayed in fiction; similarly, considerations of gender in speculative and science fiction have increased in frequency and nuance over time.

[ 28 ] Influence of political movements [ edit ] The study of women within science fiction in the last decades of the twentieth century was driven in part by the feminist and gay liberation movements, and has included strands of the various related and spin-off movements, such as gender studies and queer theory .

In the 1970s, a number of events began to focus on women in fandom, professional science fiction, and as characters. In 1974, Pamela Sargent published an influential anthology, Women of Wonder: Science Fiction Stories by Women, About Women —the first of many anthologies to come that focused on women or gender rules. Additionally, movement among writers concerned with feminism and gender roles sprang up, leading to a genre of "feminist science fiction" including Joanna Russ ' 1975 The Female Man , Samuel R. Delany 's 1976 Trouble on Triton: An Ambiguous Heterotopia , and Marge Piercy 's 1976 Woman on the Edge of Time .

The 1970s also saw a vibrant gay liberation movement , which made its presence known in science fiction, [ 29 ] with gay/lesbian and gay/lesbian-friendly panels at conventions and articles in fanzines ; gay/lesbian content increasingly present in the fiction itself; the gay/lesbian bookstore "A Different Light", which took its name from Elizabeth A. Lynn 's novel of the same name; [ 30 ] [ 31 ] and a focus on LGBT issues in the pages of feminist publications.

More recently, the 2010s have sparked a rebirth for speculative fiction. This revival of the genre can be attributed to the political chaos that came with the 2016 election in which Donald J. Trump won the U.S. presidency. Margaret Atwood's speculative science fiction novel The Handmaid's Tale was adapted into a television series Hulu special and saw such success that it was renewed for a second season. Many critics made the connection between The Handmaid's Tale and President Trump's America in multiple reviews of the series. The fears that came with such a controversial election have given way to a revival of speculative fiction in the 2010s.

Media adaptations [ edit ] Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale was adapted into a film in 1990, directed by Volker Schlöndorff . The film received a 31% positive review on Rotten Tomatoes with an average rating of 4.8/10.

The Handmaid's Tale was also adapted into a ten-episode television series Hulu special released on April 26, 2017. The series saw such success that it was renewed for a second season set to release in April 2018.

Octavia Butler's speculative science/fantasy fiction novel Dawn , the first in her trilogy titled Lilith's Brood , is currently being adapted for television by producers Ava DuVernay and Charles D. King's Macro Ventures alongside writer Victoria Mahoney . There is no projected release date for the adaptation yet.

See also [ edit ] Feminist science fiction Janus (science fiction magazine) The Witch and the Chameleon Wiscon Notes [ edit ] ^ Davin, Eric Leif (2006).

Partners in Wonder: Women And the Birth of Science Fiction, 1926-1965 . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. pp.

69–70 .

ISBN 9780739112670 .

^ Aldiss, Brian W.

(1973).

Billion Year Spree: The True History of Science Fiction (1st ed.). Garden city: N.Y.

ISBN 978-0385088879 .

[ page needed ] ^ Davin, Eric Leif (2006).

Partners in Wonder . Lexington Books. pp.

54–55 .

ISBN 9780575123625 .

^ Clute, John ; Nicholls, Peter (1999). "Sex".

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (2nd ed.). Great Britain: Orbit. p. 1088.

ISBN 1-85723-897-4 .

^ a b Tuttle, Lisa . "Women as portrayed in Science Fiction".

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction . p. 1343.

^ See the bio of Clare Winger Harris for a case of a lesser one.

^ Kelly, Mark R.

"1966 Astounding/Analog All-Time Poll" .

The LOCUS Index to SF Awards . Locus Publications. Archived from the original on 14 January 2010.

^ "1973 All-Time Favorite Author (Locus Poll Award)" .

The Internet Speculative Fiction Database . Retrieved 16 May 2022 .

^ a b Davin, pp. 3-5 ^ Crisp, Julie (10 July 2013).

"SEXISM IN GENRE PUBLISHING: A PUBLISHER'S PERSPECTIVE" .

Tor Books . Retrieved 29 April 2015 .

^ "SFWA Grand Master page" .

sfwa.org . Retrieved 4 April 2018 .

^ "Military SF" .

sf-encyclopedia.com . Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. 20 June 2022 . Retrieved 18 February 2023 .

^ Jeff Prucher, Brave New Words: The Oxford Dictionary of Science Fiction , "Femfan," page 62. Oxford University Press, 2007; ISBN 978-0-19-530567-8 ^ Davin 2006, page 82 ^ a b Justine Larbalestier, "The Women Men Don't See," in The Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction, p. 159, Wesleyan University Press, 2002.

ISBN 978-0-8195-6527-3 ^ "Editor's Report" .

If (editorial). June 1958. pp.

3– 5.

^ Robert Silverberg, "Reflections: Problems of Time Travel," Asimov's Science Fiction, issue 0206 (2002)) ^ Davin 2006, Chapter 4 ^ Phillips, Julie.

James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double Life of Alice B. Sheldon ; New York: Macmillan, 2007; p. 402 ^ See generally Merrick, Helen. "From Female Man to Feminist Fan: Uncovering 'Herstory' in the Annals of SF Fandom," in Women of Other Worlds: Excursions through Science Fiction and Feminism , ed. by Helen Merrick and Tess Williams, University of Western Australia Press: Nedlands, 1999: pp. 115–139.

^ "Hugo Nominee List" .

locusmag.com . Retrieved 4 April 2018 .

^ Tuttle, Lisa.

"Gender"; Clute, John and Grant, John The Encyclopedia of Fantasy ; United Kingdom; Orbit Books, 1997; p. 393 ^ Arthur, Keri (2007).

"Paranormal Romance and Urban Fantasy--defining two popular subgenres" . The Romance Writers of Australia . Retrieved 2007-04-30 .

^ Jenkins, Henry (1992). Textual Poachers: Television Fans & Participatory Culture. Studies in culture and communication. New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-90571-0 .

^ "It's-A Me, Mary Sue: Why She's An Important Figure For Fanfic And Fangirls" .

www.themarysue.com . 12 May 2015 . Retrieved 4 April 2018 .

^ Faircloth, Kelly.

"San Diego Comic Con Attendees Fight Back Against Sexual Harassment" .

jezebel.com . Retrieved 4 April 2018 .

^ Eric Garber , Lyn Paleo.

Uranian Worlds: A Guide to Alternative Sexuality in Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror , G K Hall: 1983.

ISBN 0-8161-8573-5 ; p. viii ^ Bainbridge, William. "Women in Science Fiction." Sex Roles, vol. 8, no. 10, 1982, pp. 1081–1093.

^ Eric Garber, Lyn Paleo Uranian Worlds: A Guide to Alternative Sexuality in Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror , "Preface" p. x G K Hall: 1983 ISBN 0-8161-8573-5 . "The prevalence of homosexual imagery in contemporary science fiction and fantasy can be directly attributed to the influence of the lesbian-feminist and gay liberation movements." ^ "Elizabeth A Lynn" . Fantasticfiction.co.uk . Retrieved 2009-02-28 .

^ "Locus: Elizabeth A. Lynn interview" . Locusmag.com . Retrieved 2009-02-28 .

References [ edit ] (Archive.org) Index to Female Writers In Science Fiction, Fantasy & Utopia: 18th Century to the Present Badami, Mary Kenny . "A Feminist Critique of Science Fiction," Extrapolation 18 (Dec. 1978), pp. 6–19.

Davin, Eric Leif (2005).

Partners in Wonder: Women and the Birth of Science Fiction, 1926-1965 . Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-0-7391-1267-0 .

Larbalestier, Justine.

The Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction.

Wesleyan University Press, Middleton, Connecticut, 2002.

Merrick, Helen. "From Female Man to Feminist fan: Uncovering 'Herstory' in the Annals of SF Fandom." in Women of Other Worlds: Excursions through Science Fiction and Feminism , edited by Helen Merrick and Tess Williams, University of Western Australia Press: Nedlands, 1999: pp. 115–139.

-- The Secret Feminist Cabal: A Cultural History of Science Fiction Feminisms . Seattle: Aqueduct Press, 2009.

ISBN 978-1-933500-33-1 v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Women_in_speculative_fiction&oldid=1298495851 " Categories : Women science fiction and fantasy writers Science fiction culture Gender in speculative fiction Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2012 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Lists having no precise inclusion criteria from December 2023 All lists having no precise inclusion criteria This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 21:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Women in speculative fiction 4 languages Add topic

