Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Characteristics and role Toggle Characteristics and role subsection 3.1 Powers of the monarch 3.2 Person of monarch 3.3 Role of monarch 3.4 Titles of monarchs 3.5 Non-sovereign monarchies 3.6 Statehood 4 Succession Toggle Succession subsection 4.1 Hereditary monarchies 4.2 Elective monarchies 4.3 Other ways of succession 4.3.1 By accession 4.3.2 Dynasties 4.3.3 Succession crisis 5 Current monarchies Toggle Current monarchies subsection 5.1 Commonwealth realms 5.2 Other European constitutional monarchies 5.3 European semi-constitutional monarchies 5.4 Monarchies in the Muslim world 5.5 East and Southeast Asian constitutional monarchies 5.6 Other monarchies 5.7 Long form titles for the country 6 See also 7 Notes and references Toggle Notes and references subsection 7.1 Notes 7.2 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Monarchy 170 languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Коми Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of government ruled by a monarch, or a polity with this form of government For other uses, see Monarchy (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Monarchy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of the Politics series Monarchy Central concepts Monarch Monarchism Divine right of kings Mandate of Heaven Royal prerogative Types Abdication system Absolute Chinese Legalist Composite Constitutional Crowned republic Diarchy Dual Duchy Grand Dynastic union Elective Emirate Ethnarch Federal Hereditary Khanate Lordship Non-sovereign Pentarchy Personal union Popular Principality Real union Regency Coregency Self-proclaimed Signoria Tetrarch Triarchy Universal Philosophy Philosophers Aquinas Dante Bodin Bellarmine Filmer Hobbes Bossuet Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Novalis Balzac Crétineau-Joly Gogol Cortés Balmes Kierkegaard Dostoevsky Youwei Maurras Bainville Seca Evola Kuehnelt-Leddihn Bogdanor Scruton Hoppe Yarvin Works De Regno (1265-1266) Monarchia (1313) Les Six livres de la République (1576) Leviathan (1651) Patriarcha (1680) Considerations on France (1796) Democracy: The God That Failed (2001) Politicians Mazarin Pius VI Ruffo Consalvi Plessis Metternich Villèle Polignac Decazes Disraeli Cortés Castillo Bismarck Mella Maurras Metaxas Churchill Renouvin Zhirinovsky Popescu-Tăriceanu Zourabichvili History Birth of the Roman Empire Magna Carta Foundation of the Ottoman Empire Tsarist autocracy Birth of the Dutch Republic Glorious Revolution French Revolution Establishment of the Dutch monarchy Trienio Liberal First French Empire Liberal Wars Second French Empire Unification of Italy Meiji Restoration Austro-Hungarian Compromise German unification 5 October 1910 Revolution Proclamation of the Republic in Brazil Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution Siamese revolution of 1932 Birth of the Italian Republic Spanish transition to democracy Iranian Revolution Modern Cambodia Nepalese Civil War Polity Aristocracy Autocracy Oligarchy Administration Court Appointment Great Officers Household Retinue Camarilla Courtier Favourite Royal guard Privy council Crown Council Makhzen Riksråd Royal assent Related ideologies Conservatism Authoritarian Traditionalist Despotism Enlightened absolutism Legal despotism Noblesse oblige Royalism National variants Brazil Canada France Bonapartism Legitimism Ultra-royalist Orléanism Georgia Germany Bavaria Iran Low Countries Belgium Dutch Republic Netherland Luxembourg Mexico Portugal Miguelism Romania Russia Serbia Spain Alfonsism Carlism United States United Kingdom Jacobitism Toryism High Uruguay Related topics Coronation Criticism Dynasty Lists Family Consort Descent Family trees Illegitimate Emperor system of Japan Figurehead Heir apparent presumptive Kingmaker List of monarchies Current Former Non-sovereign Nobility Peerage Realm Philosopher king Pretender List Rank Realm Empire Reich Regicide Regnal list Regnal number Sovereign Style Succession Anti-king Crisis Interregnum Rebellion War Usurper list Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e A monarchy is a form of government in which a person, the monarch , reigns as head of state for the rest of their life, or until abdication . The extent of the authority of the monarch may vary from restricted and largely symbolic ( constitutional monarchy ), to fully autocratic ( absolute monarchy ), and may have representational , executive , legislative , and judicial functions.

[ 1 ] The succession of monarchs has mostly been hereditary , often building dynasties ; however, monarchies can also be elective and self-proclaimed .

[ 2 ] Aristocrats , though not inherent to monarchies, often function as the pool of persons from which the monarch is chosen, and to fill the constituting institutions (e.g.

diet and court ), giving many monarchies oligarchic elements. The political legitimacy of the inherited, elected or proclaimed monarchy has most often been based on claims of representation of people and land through some form of relation (e.g.

kinship ) and divine right or other achieved status .

Monarchs can carry various titles such as emperor , empress , king , and queen . Monarchies can form federations , personal unions , and realms with vassals through personal association with the monarch, which is a common reason for monarchs carrying several titles. Some countries have preserved titles such as " kingdom " while dispensing with an official serving monarch (note the example of Francoist Spain from 1947 to 1975) or while relying on a long-term regency (as in the case of Hungary in the Horthy era from 1920 to 1944).

Monarchies were the most common form of government until the 20th century, when republics replaced many monarchies , notably at the end of World War I . As of 2024 [update] , forty-three sovereign nations in the world have a monarch, including fifteen Commonwealth realms that share King Charles III as their head of state. Other than that, there is a range of sub-national monarchical entities . Most of the modern monarchies are constitutional monarchies, retaining under a constitution unique legal and ceremonial roles for monarchs exercising limited or no political power, similar to heads of state in a parliamentary republic .

Etymology [ edit ] Further information: King (title) , Rex (title) , and Realm The word "monarch" (Late Latin: monarchia ) comes from the Ancient Greek word μονάρχης ( monárkhēs ), derived from μόνος ( mónos , "one, single") and ἄρχω ( árkhō , "to rule"): compare ἄρχων ( árkhōn , "ruler, chief"). It referred to a single, at least, nominally, absolute ruler. In current usage the word monarchy usually refers to a traditional system of hereditary rule, as elective monarchies are quite rare.

History [ edit ] The Weld-Blundell Prism , inscribed with the Sumerian King List The similar form of societal hierarchy known as chiefdom or tribal kingship is prehistoric. Chiefdoms provided the concept of state formation, which started with civilizations such as Mesopotamia , Ancient Egypt and the Indus Valley civilization .

[ 3 ] In some parts of the world, chiefdoms became monarchies.

[ 4 ] Some of the oldest recorded and evidenced monarchies were Narmer , Pharaoh of Ancient Egypt c.

3100 BCE , and Enmebaragesi , a Sumerian King of Kish c.

2600 BCE .

From earliest records, monarchs could be directly hereditary, while others were elected from among eligible members. With the Egyptian , Chinese , Indian , [ 5 ] Mesopotamian , Sudanic , [ 6 ] reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion , and others, the monarch held sacral functions directly connected to sacrifice and was sometimes identified with having divine ancestry , possibly establishing a notion of the divine right of kings .

Polybius identified monarchy as one of three "benign" basic forms of government (monarchy, aristocracy , and democracy ), opposed to the three "malignant" basic forms of government ( tyranny , oligarchy , and ochlocracy ). The monarch in classical antiquity is often identified as " king " or "ruler" (translating archon , basileus , rex , tyrannos , etc.) or as " queen " ( basilinna , basilissa , basileia or basilis ; [ 7 ] regina ). Polybius originally understood monarchy [ note 1 ] as a component of republics , but since antiquity monarchy has contrasted with forms of republic, where executive power is wielded by free citizens and their assemblies. The 4th-century BCE Hindu text Arthasastra laid out the ethics of monarchism.

[ 8 ] In antiquity, some monarchies were abolished in favour of such assemblies in Rome ( Roman Republic , 509 BCE), and Athens ( Athenian democracy , 500 BCE).

Map of monarchies and republics in Europe, 1648 By the 17th century, monarchy was challenged by evolving parliamentarism e.g. through regional assemblies (such as the Icelandic Commonwealth , the Swiss Landsgemeinde and later Tagsatzung , and the High Medieval communal movement linked to the rise of medieval town privileges ) and by modern anti-monarchism e.g. of the temporary overthrow of the English monarchy by the Parliament of England in 1649, the American Revolution of 1776 and the French Revolution of 1789. One of many opponents of that trend was Elizabeth Dawbarn , whose anonymous Dialogue between Clara Neville and Louisa Mills, on Loyalty (1794) features "silly Louisa, who admires liberty, Tom Paine and the US, [who is] lectured by Clara on God's approval of monarchy" and on the influence women can exert on men.

[ 9 ] Since then advocacy of the abolition of a monarchy or respectively of republics has been called republicanism , while the advocacy of monarchies is called monarchism . As such republics have become the opposing and alternative form of government to monarchy, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] despite some having seen infringements through lifelong or even hereditary heads of state, such as in North Korea .

[ 13 ] With the rise of republicanism, a diverse division between republicanism developed in the 19th-century politics (such as anti-monarchist radicalism ) and conservative or even reactionary monarchism . In the following 20th century many countries abolished the monarchy and became republics, especially in the wake of World War I and World War II .

Today forty-three sovereign nations in the world have a monarch , including fifteen Commonwealth realms that have Charles III as the head of state. Most modern monarchs are constitutional monarchs , who retain a unique legal and ceremonial role but exercise limited or no political power under a constitution. Many are so-called crowned republics , surviving particularly in small states.

[ 14 ] In some nations, however, such as Morocco , Qatar , Liechtenstein , and Thailand , the hereditary monarch has more political influence than any other single source of authority in the state, even if it is by a constitutional mandate.

According to a 2020 study, monarchy arose as a system of governance because of an efficiency in governing large populations and expansive territories during periods when coordinating such populations was difficult. The authors argue that monarchy declined as an efficient regime type with innovations in communications and transportation technology, as the efficiency of monarchy relative to other regime types declined.

[ 15 ] According to a 2023 study, monarchy has persisted as a regime type because it can accommodate demands for democratization better than other forms of autocratic rule: "Monarchies can democratize without destabilizing the leadership through transitioning to a democratic constitutional monarchy . The prospect of retaining the ruler appeals to opposition groups who value both democracy and stability, but it also has implications for their ability to organize and sustain mass protest." [ 16 ] Characteristics and role [ edit ] King George III of the United Kingdom , coronation portrait by Allan Ramsay , 1762 Monarchies are associated with hereditary reign , in which monarchs reign for life [ note 2 ] and the responsibilities and power of the position pass to their child or another member of their family when they die. Most monarchs, both historically and in the modern-day, have been born and brought up within a royal family , the centre of the royal household and court . Growing up in a royal family (called a dynasty when it continues for several generations ), future monarchs are often trained for their expected future responsibilities as monarch.

[ 17 ] Different systems of hereditary succession have been used, such as proximity of blood , primogeniture , and agnatic seniority ( Salic law ). While most monarchs in history have been male, many female monarchs also have reigned.

[ 18 ] The term " queen regnant " refers to a ruling monarch, while " queen consort " refers to the wife of a reigning king. Rule may be hereditary in practice without being considered a monarchy: there have been some family dictatorships [ note 3 ] (and also political families ) in many democracies .

[ note 4 ] The principal advantage of hereditary monarchy is the immediate continuity of leadership (as evidenced in the classic phrase " The King is dead. Long live the King!

").

Some monarchies are not hereditary. In an elective monarchy , monarchs are elected or appointed by some body (an electoral college ) for life or a defined period. Four elective monarchies exist today: Cambodia , Malaysia and the United Arab Emirates are 20th-century creations, while one (the papacy ) is ancient.

[ 19 ] A self-proclaimed monarchy is established when a person claims the monarchy without any historical ties to a previous dynasty. There are examples of republican leaders who have proclaimed themselves monarchs: Napoleon I of France declared himself Emperor of the French and ruled the First French Empire after having held the title of First Consul of the French Republic for five years from his seizing power in the coup of 18 Brumaire . President Jean-Bédel Bokassa of the Central African Republic declared himself Emperor of the Central African Empire in 1976.

[ 20 ] Yuan Shikai , the first formal President of the Republic of China , crowned himself Emperor of the short-lived " Empire of China " a few years after the Republic of China was founded.

[ 21 ] Powers of the monarch [ edit ] King Salman of Saudi Arabia is an absolute monarch.

In an absolute monarchy , the monarch rules as an autocrat , with absolute power over the state and government—for example, the right to rule by decree , promulgate laws , and impose punishments .

In a constitutional monarchy , the monarch's power is subject to a constitution . In most current constitutional monarchies, the monarch is mainly a ceremonial figurehead symbol of national unity and state continuity. Although nominally sovereign , the electorate (through the legislature ) exercises political sovereignty. Constitutional monarchs' political power is limited. Typical monarchical powers include granting pardons , granting honours , and reserve powers , e.g. to dismiss the prime minister , refuse to dissolve parliament, or veto legislation ("withhold Royal Assent "). They often also have privileges of inviolability and sovereign immunity . A monarch's powers and influence will depend on tradition, precedent, popular opinion, and law .

Semi-constitutional monarchies exhibit fewer parliamentary powers or simply monarchs with more authority.

[ 22 ] The term "parliamentary monarchy" may be used to differentiate from semi-constitutional monarchies.

Monarchical reign has often been linked with military authority . In the late Roman Empire , the Praetorian Guard several times deposed Roman emperors and installed new emperors. Similarly, in the Abbasid Caliphate , the Ghilmans (slave soldiers) deposed Caliphs once they became prominent, allowing new ones to come to power. The Hellenistic kings of Macedon and of Epirus were elected by the army, which was similar in composition to the ecclesia of democracies , the council of all free citizens; military service was often linked with citizenship among the male members of the royal house. The military has dominated the monarch in modern Thailand and in medieval Japan (where a hereditary military chief, the shōgun , was the de facto ruler, although the Japanese emperor nominally reigned). In Fascist Italy , the Savoy monarchy under King Victor Emmanuel III coexisted with the Fascist single-party rule of Benito Mussolini ; Romania under the Iron Guard and Greece during the first months of the Colonels' regime were similar.

Spain under Francisco Franco was officially a monarchy, although there was no monarch on the throne. Upon his death, Franco was succeeded as head of state by the Bourbon heir, Juan Carlos I , and Spain became a democracy with the king as a figurehead constitutional monarch.

Person of monarch [ edit ] Postcard of ruling monarchs, taken in 1908, between February (accession of King Manuel II of Portugal ) and November (death of the Guangxu Emperor ) Most monarchies only have a single person acting as monarch at any given time, although two monarchs have ruled simultaneously in some countries, a situation known as diarchy . Historically this was the case in the ancient Greek city-state of Sparta . There are examples of joint sovereignty of spouses, parent and child or other relatives (such as William III and Mary II in the kingdoms of England and Scotland , Tsars Peter I and Ivan V of Russia , and Charles I and Joanna of Castile ).

Andorra currently is the world's only constitutional diarchy, a co-principality. Located in the Pyrenees between Spain and France , it has two co-princes: the bishop of Urgell in Spain (a prince-bishop ) and the president of France (derived ex officio from the French kings, who themselves inherited the title from the counts of Foix). It is the only case in which an independent country's (co-)monarch is democratically elected by the citizens of another country.

In a personal union , separate independent states share the same person as monarch, but each realm retains separate laws and government. The fifteen separate Commonwealth realms are sometimes described as being in a personal union with King Charles III as monarch. However, they can also be described as being in a shared monarchy.

A regent may rule when the monarch is a minor , absent, or debilitated.

A pretender is a claimant to an abolished throne or a throne already occupied by somebody else.

Abdication is the act of formally giving up one's monarchical power and status.

Monarchs may mark the ceremonial beginning of their reigns with a coronation or enthronement .

Role of monarch [ edit ] Monarchy, especially absolute monarchy, is sometimes linked to religious aspects; many monarchs once claimed the right to rule by the will of a deity ( Divine Right of Kings , Mandate of Heaven ), or a special connection to a deity ( sacred king ), or even purported to be divine kings, or incarnations of deities themselves ( imperial cult ). Many European monarchs have been styled Fidei defensor (Defender of the Faith); some hold official positions relating to the state religion or established church.

In the Western political tradition, a morally based, balanced monarchy was stressed as the ideal form of government, and little attention was paid to modern-day ideals of egalitarian democracy: e.g.

Saint Thomas Aquinas unapologetically declared: "Tyranny is wont to occur not less but more frequently on the basis of polyarchy [rule by many, i.e. oligarchy or democracy] than on the basis of monarchy." ( On Kingship ). However, Thomas Aquinas also stated that the ideal monarchical system would also have at lower levels of government both an aristocracy and elements of democracy in order to create a balance of power. The monarch would also be subject to both natural and divine law, and to the Church in matters of religion.

In Dante Alighieri 's De Monarchia , a spiritualised, imperial Catholic monarchy is strongly promoted according to a Ghibelline world-view in which the "royal religion of Melchizedek " is emphasised against the priestly claims of the rival papal ideology.

In Saudi Arabia , the king is a head of state who is both the absolute monarch of the country and the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques of Islam (خادم الحرمين الشريفين).

The roles of monarchs can overlap with other monarchies through personal union or dynastic union , with maybe becoming institutional real union and possibly a larger federal , composite or unitary monarchy, realm and state.

Titles of monarchs [ edit ] See also: Composite monarchy Tewodros II , Emperor of Ethiopia Monarchs can have various titles . Common European titles of monarchs (in that hierarchical order of nobility) are emperor or empress (from Latin : imperator or imperatrix ), king or queen , grand duke or grand duchess, prince or princess , duke or duchess.

[ 23 ] Some early modern European titles (especially in German states) included elector (German: Kurfürst , Prince-Elector, literally "electing prince"), margrave (German: Markgraf , equivalent to the French title marquis , literally "count of the borderland"), and burgrave (German: Burggraf , literally "count of the castle"). Lesser titles include count and princely count . Slavic titles include knyaz and tsar (ц︢рь) or tsaritsa (царица), a word derived from the Roman imperial title Caesar .

In the Muslim world , titles of monarchs include caliph (successor to the Islamic prophet Muhammad and a leader of the entire Muslim community), padishah (emperor), sultan or sultana , shâhanshâh (emperor), shah , malik (king) or malikah (queen), emir (commander, prince) or emira (princess), sheikh or sheikha , imam (used in Oman ). East Asian titles of monarchs include huángdì (emperor) or nǚhuáng (empress regnant), tiānzǐ (son of heaven), tennō (emperor) or josei tennō (empress regnant), wang (king) or yeowang (queen regnant), hwangje (emperor) or yeoje (empress regnant). South Asian and South East Asian titles included mahārāja (high king) or maharani (high queen), raja (king) and rana (king) or rani (queen) and ratu (South East Asian queen). Historically, Mongolic and Turkic monarchs have used the title khan and khagan (emperor) or khatun and khanum ; Ancient Egyptian monarchs have used the title pharaoh for men and women. In Ethiopian Empire , monarchs used title nəgusä nägäst (king of kings) or nəgəstä nägäst (queen of kings).

Many monarchs are addressed with particular styles or manners of address, like " Majesty ", " Royal Highness ", " By the Grace of God ", Amīr al-Mu'minīn ("Leader of the Faithful"), Hünkar-i Khanedan-i Âl-i Osman , "Sovereign of the Sublime House of Osman"), Duli Yang Maha Mulia Seri Paduka Baginda ("Majesty"), Jeonha ("Majesty"), Tennō Heika (literally "His Majesty the heavenly sovereign"), Bìxià ("Bottom of the Steps").

Sometimes titles are used to express claims to territories that are not held in fact (for example, English claims to the French throne ), or titles not recognised ( antipopes ). Also, after a monarchy is deposed, often former monarchs and their descendants are given alternative titles (the King of Portugal was given the hereditary title Duke of Braganza ).

Non-sovereign monarchies [ edit ] Main article: Non-sovereign monarchy A non-sovereign monarchy is one where the monarch is subject to a temporal authority higher than their own. Some are dependent on other powers (see vassals , suzerainty , puppet state , hegemony ). In the British colonial era, indirect rule under a paramount power existed, such as the princely states under the British Raj .

In Botswana , South Africa , Ghana and Uganda , the ancient kingdoms and chiefdoms that were met by the colonialists when they first arrived on the continent are now constitutionally protected as regional or sectional entities.

Furthermore, in Nigeria , though the hundreds of sub-regional polities that exist there are not provided for in the current constitution, they are nevertheless legally recognised aspects of the structure of governance that operates in the nation. For example, the Yoruba city-state of Akure in south-western Nigeria is something of an elective monarchy: its reigning Oba Deji has to be chosen by an electoral college of nobles from amongst a finite collection of royal princes of the realm upon the death or removal of an incumbent.

In addition to these five countries, non-sovereign monarchies of varied sizes and complexities exist all over the rest of the continent of Africa .

Statehood [ edit ] Monarchies pre-date polities like nation states [ 24 ] and even territorial states . A nation or constitution is not necessary in a monarchy since a person, the monarch, binds the separate territories and political legitimacy (e.g. in personal union) together.

Monarchies, though, have applied state symbols like insignia or abstracts like the concept of the Crown to create a state identity, which is to be carried and occupied by the monarch, but represents the monarchy even in absence and succession of the monarch.

Nevertheless, monarchies can also be bound to territories (e.g., the King of Norway ) and peoples (e.g., the King of the Belgians ).

Succession [ edit ] Hereditary monarchies [ edit ] Current European monarchies by succession method: Absolute primogeniture Male-preference cognatic primogeniture , to be changed to absolute primogeniture Male-preference cognatic primogeniture Agnatic primogeniture Elective In a hereditary monarchy , the position of monarch is inherited according to a statutory or customary order of succession , usually within one royal family tracing its origin through a historical dynasty or bloodline. This usually means that the heir to the throne is known well in advance of becoming monarch to ensure a smooth succession.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Primogeniture , in which the eldest child of the monarch is first in line to become monarch, is the most common system in hereditary monarchy. The order of succession is usually affected by rules on gender. Historically "agnatic primogeniture" or "patrilineal primogeniture" was favoured, that is inheritance according to seniority of birth among the sons of a monarch or head of family , with sons and their male issue inheriting before brothers and their male issue, to the total exclusion of females and descendants through females from succession.

[ 27 ] This complete exclusion of females from dynastic succession is commonly referred to as application of the Salic law . Another variation on agnatic primogeniture was the so-called semi-Salic law, or "agnatic-cognatic primogeniture", which allowed women to succeed only at the extinction of all the male descendants in the male line of the particular legislator.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Before primogeniture was enshrined in European law and tradition, kings would often secure the succession by having their successor (usually their eldest son) crowned during their own lifetime, so for a time there would be two kings in coregency —a senior king and a junior king. Examples were Henry the Young King of England and the early Direct Capetians in France. Sometimes, however, primogeniture can operate through the female line.

King Leopold I , an elected founder of the hereditary monarchy of Belgium In 1980, Sweden became the first monarchy to declare equal (full cognatic) primogeniture, meaning that the eldest child of the monarch, whether female or male, ascends to the throne.

[ 29 ] Other kingdoms (such as the Netherlands in 1983, Norway in 1990, Belgium in 1991, Denmark in 2009, and Luxembourg [ 30 ] in 2011) have since followed suit. The United Kingdom adopted absolute (equal) primogeniture (subject to the claims of existing heirs) on April 25, 2013, following agreement by the prime ministers of the sixteen Commonwealth Realms at the 22nd Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.

[ 31 ] In the absence of children, the next most senior member of the collateral line (for example, a younger sibling of the previous monarch) becomes monarch. In complex cases, this can mean that there are closer blood relatives to the deceased monarch than the next in line according to primogeniture. This has often led, especially in Europe in the Middle Ages , to conflict between the principle of primogeniture and the principle of proximity of blood .

Other hereditary systems of succession included tanistry , which is semi-elective and gives weight to merit and Agnatic seniority . In some monarchies, such as Saudi Arabia , succession to the throne first passes to the monarch's next eldest brother, and only after that to the monarch's children (agnatic seniority).

On June 21, 2017, King Salman of Saudi Arabi revolted against this style of monarchy and elected his son to inherit the throne.

[ 32 ] Elective monarchies [ edit ] See also: Jure uxoris This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pope Francis , Sovereign of the Vatican City State from 2013 to 2025 In an elective monarchy , monarchs are elected or appointed by somebody (an electoral college ) for life or a defined period, but then reign like any other monarch. There is no popular vote involved in elective monarchies, as the elective body usually consists of a small number of eligible people. Historical examples of elective monarchy are the Holy Roman Emperors (chosen by prince-electors but often coming from the same dynasty) and the free election of kings of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth . For example, Pepin the Short (father of Charlemagne ) was elected King of the Franks by an assembly of Frankish leading men; [ 33 ] nobleman Stanisław August Poniatowski of Poland was an elected king, as was Frederick I of Denmark .

Gallic and Germanic peoples also had elective monarchies.

Six forms of elective monarchies exist today. The Pope of the Roman Catholic Church (who rules as Sovereign of the Vatican City State ) is elected for life by the College of Cardinals . In the Sovereign Military Order of Malta , the Prince and Grand Master is elected for life tenure by the Council Complete of State from within its members. In Malaysia , the federal king, called the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or Paramount Ruler, is elected for a five-year term from among and by the hereditary rulers (mostly sultans ) of nine of the federation's constitutive states , all on the Malay peninsula . The United Arab Emirates also chooses its federal leaders from among emirs of the federated states. Furthermore, Andorra has a unique constitutional arrangement as one of its heads of state is the President of the French Republic in the form of a Co-Prince . This is the only instance in the world where the monarch of a state is elected by the citizens of a different country. In New Zealand, the Maori King, head of the Kingitanga Movement, is elected by a council of Maori elders at the funeral of their predecessor, which is also where their coronation takes place. All of the Heads of the Maori King Movement have been descendants of the first Maori King, Potatau Te Wherowhero, who was elected and became King in June 1858. The current monarch is Queen Nga wai hono i te po , who was elected and became Queen on 5 September 2024 after the death of her father, King Tūheitia , on 30 August 2024. As well as being Queen and head of the Kingitanga Movement, Queen Nga wai hono i te po is also ex officio the Paramount Chief of the Waikato-Tainui tribe.

Appointment by the current monarch is another system, used in Jordan . It also was used in Imperial Russia ; however, it was soon changed to semi-Salic because the instability of the appointment system resulted in an age of palace revolutions . In this system, the monarch chooses the successor, who is always his relative.

Other ways of succession [ edit ] See also: Order of succession , Self-proclaimed monarchy , and Legitimacy (political) Other ways to succeed to a monarchy can be through claiming alternative votes (e.g. as in the case of the Western Schism ), claims of a mandate to rule (e.g. a popular or divine mandate ), military occupation , a coup d'état , a will of the previous monarch or treaties between factions inside and outside of a monarchy (e.g. as in the case of the War of the Spanish Succession ).

By accession [ edit ] See also: Enthronement The legitimacy and authorities of monarchs are often proclaimed and recognized through occupying and being invested with insignia , seats, deeds and titles , like in the course of coronations .

This is especially employed to legitimize and settle disputed successions, changes in ways of succession, status of a monarch (e.g. as in the case of the privilegium maius deed) or new monarchies altogether (e.g. as in the case of the coronation of Napoleon I ).

Dynasties [ edit ] Succession is often based on the expected continuation of a dynastic period or association in a dynastic union , which is sometimes challenged by diverging lineage and legitimism .

Succession crisis [ edit ] Further information: Succession crisis In cases of succession challenges, it can be instrumental for pretenders to secure or install legitimacy through the above, for example proof of accession like insignia, through treaties or a claim of a divine mandate to rule (e.g. by Hong Xiuquan and his Taiping Heavenly Kingdom ).

Current monarchies [ edit ] Main article: List of current monarchs of sovereign states This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Monarchy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Absolute monarchies Semi-constitutional monarchies Parliamentary monarchies Commonwealth realms (parliamentary monarchies in personal union ) Subnational monarchies Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e World's states coloured by systems of government : Parliamentary systems : Head of government is elected or nominated by and accountable to the legislature.

Constitutional monarchy with a ceremonial monarch Parliamentary republic with a ceremonial president Parliamentary republic with an executive president Presidential system : Head of government (president) is popularly elected and independent of the legislature.

Presidential republic Hybrid systems: Semi-presidential republic : Executive president is independent of the legislature; head of government is appointed by the president and is accountable to the legislature.

Assembly-independent republic : Head of government (president or directory) is elected by the legislature, but is not accountable to it.

Other systems: Theocratic republic: Supreme Leader is both head of state and church and holds significant executive and legislative power Semi-constitutional monarchy : Monarch holds significant executive or legislative power.

Absolute monarchy : Monarch has unlimited power.

One-party state : Power is constitutionally linked to a single political party.

Military junta : Committee of military leaders controls the government; constitutional provisions are suspended.

Governments with no constitutional basis : No constitutionally defined basis to current regime, i.e.

provisional governments or Islamic theocracies .

Dependent territories or places without governments Note: this chart represents the de jure systems of government, not the de facto degree of democracy.

v t e Currently, there are 43 nations and a population of roughly half a billion people in the world with a monarch as head of state. They fall roughly into the following categories: Commonwealth realms [ edit ] King Charles III is, separately, monarch of fifteen Commonwealth realms ( Antigua and Barbuda , the Commonwealth of Australia , the Commonwealth of the Bahamas , Belize , Canada , Grenada , Jamaica , New Zealand , the Independent State of Papua New Guinea , the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , the Solomon Islands , Tuvalu and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ). They evolved out of the British Empire into fully independent states within the Commonwealth of Nations that retain the King as head of state. All fifteen realms are constitutional monarchies and full democracies where the King has limited powers or a largely ceremonial role. The King is head of the Church of England (the established church of England), while the other 14 realms do not have a state religion .

Other European constitutional monarchies [ edit ] The Principality of Andorra , the Kingdom of Belgium , the Kingdom of Denmark , the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , the Kingdom of the Netherlands , the Kingdom of Norway , the Kingdom of Spain , and the Kingdom of Sweden are fully democratic states in which the monarch has a limited or largely ceremonial role. Some countries have established a Christian religion as the official church. This is the Lutheran form of Protestantism in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, while Andorra is a Roman Catholic country. Spain, Belgium, and the Netherlands have no official state religion. Luxembourg, which is predominantly Roman Catholic, has five so-called officially recognized cults of national importance (Roman Catholicism, Protestantism, Greek Orthodoxy, Judaism, and Islam), a status which gives those religions some privileges like the payment of a state salary to their priests.

Andorra is unique among all existing monarchies, as it is a diarchy , with the co-princes being shared by the president of France and the bishop of Urgell . This situation, based on historical precedence, has created a peculiar situation among monarchies, as: neither of the co-princes is of Andorran descent; one is elected by citizens of a foreign country (France), but not by Andorrans as they cannot vote in the French presidential elections; and the other, the bishop of Urgell, is appointed by a foreign head of state, the pope.

European semi-constitutional monarchies [ edit ] A semi-constitutional monarchy is a monarchy where the monarch rules according to a democratic constitution but still retains substantial powers. The Principality of Liechtenstein and the Principality of Monaco are European semi-constitutional monarchies. For example, the 2003 Constitution referendum gave the Prince of Liechtenstein the power to veto any law that the Landtag (parliament) proposes, while the Landtag can veto any law that the Prince tries to pass. The prince can appoint or dismiss any elective member or government employee. However, he is not an absolute monarch, as the people can call for a referendum to end the monarch's reign. When Hereditary Prince Alois threatened to veto a referendum to legalize abortion in 2011, it came as a surprise because the prince had not vetoed any law for over 30 years.

[ note 5 ] The prince of Monaco has simpler powers; he cannot appoint or dismiss any elective member or government employee to or from his or her post, but he can elect the minister of state , government council and judges. Both Albert II, Prince of Monaco , and Hans-Adam II, Prince of Liechtenstein , are theoretically very powerful within their small states, but they have very limited power compared to the Islamic monarchs (see below). They also own huge tracts of land and are shareholders in many companies.

Monarchies in the Muslim world [ edit ] The monarchies of the Kingdom of Bahrain , the Brunei Darussalam , the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , the State of Kuwait , Malaysia , the Kingdom of Morocco , the Sultanate of Oman , the State of Qatar , the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia , and the United Arab Emirates generally retain far more powers than their European or Commonwealth counterparts. Brunei Darussalam, Oman, and Saudi Arabia remain absolute monarchies; Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar and United Arab Emirates are classified as mixed, meaning there are representative bodies of some kind, but the monarch retains most of his powers. Jordan, Malaysia, and Morocco are constitutional monarchies, but their monarchs still retain more substantial powers than European equivalents.

East and Southeast Asian constitutional monarchies [ edit ] The Kingdom of Bhutan , the Kingdom of Cambodia , the Kingdom of Thailand , and Japan are constitutional monarchies where the monarch has a limited or merely ceremonial role. Bhutan made the change in 2008.

[ 34 ] Cambodia had its own monarchy after independence from the French colonial empire , but it was deposed after the Khmer Rouge came into power. The monarchy was subsequently restored in the peace agreement of 1993. Thailand transitioned into a constitutional monarchy over the course of the 20th century. Japan has had a monarchy, an emperor , according to legend, since Emperor Jimmu (reigned 660–585 BCE), making it the world's oldest existing monarchy.

[ 35 ] After their defeat in the Second World War , Japan was forced into limiting the power of the Emperor, giving almost all of it to the National Diet .

Other monarchies [ edit ] Four monarchies do not fit into any of the above groups by virtue of geography or class of monarchy: the Kingdom of Tonga in Polynesia ; the Kingdom of Eswatini and the Kingdom of Lesotho in Africa and the Vatican City State in Europe. Of these, Lesotho and Tonga are constitutional monarchies, while Eswatini and the Vatican City are absolute monarchies.

Eswatini is unique among these monarchies, often being considered a diarchy : the King, or Ngwenyama , rules alongside his mother, the Ndlovukati , as dual heads of state.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] This was originally intended to provide a check on political power. The Ngwenyama, however, is considered the administrative head of state, while the Ndlovukati is considered the spiritual and national head of state, a position which more or less has become symbolic in recent years.

[ 38 ] The Pope is the absolute monarch of the Vatican City State (a separate entity from the Holy See ) by virtue of his position as head of the Roman Catholic Church and Bishop of Rome; he is an elected rather than a hereditary ruler, and does not have to be a citizen of the territory prior to his election by the cardinals.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] The Order of Malta describes itself as a "sovereign subject" based on its unique history and unusual present circumstances, but its exact status in international law is a subject of debate.

In Samoa , the position of head of state is described in Part III of the 1960 Samoan constitution . At the time the constitution was adopted, it was anticipated that future heads of state would be chosen from among the four Tama a 'Aiga "royal" paramount chiefs. However, this is not required by the constitution, and, for this reason, Samoa can be considered a republic rather than a constitutional monarchy . However, each member of the Samoan parliament , except for the two seats reserved for non-Samoans, must be a matai , a member of the hereditary political system known as the Faʻamatai .

[ 41 ] The ruling Kim family in North Korea ( Kim Il Sung , Kim Jong Il and Kim Jong Un ) has been described as a de facto absolute monarchy [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] or a "hereditary dictatorship".

[ 45 ] In 2013, Clause 2 of Article 10 of the new edited Ten Fundamental Principles of the Korean Workers' Party states that the party and revolution must be carried "eternally" by the " Baekdu (Kim's) bloodline".

[ 46 ] This though does not mean it is a de jure absolute monarchy, as the country's official name is the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The al-Assad family , which ruled Syria from 1971 to 2024, was similarly categorised as such.

[ 45 ] Long form titles for the country [ edit ] Kingdom: Bahrain , Belgium , Bhutan , Cambodia , Kingdom of Denmark , Eswatini , Jordan , Lesotho , Morocco , Kingdom of the Netherlands , Norway , Saudi Arabia , Spain , Sweden , Thailand , Tonga , United Kingdom State: Kuwait , Qatar , Japan (de facto) , Vatican City Principality: Andorra , Liechtenstein , Monaco Federation: Saint Kitts and Nevis , Malaysia (de facto) Commonwealth: Australia , Bahamas Sultanate: Oman Nation: Brunei Darussalam Grand Duchy: Luxembourg Independent State: Papua New Guinea Emirate: United Arab Emirates , Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (de jure) None : Antigua and Barbuda , Belize , Canada , Grenada , Jamaica , Japan , Malaysia , New Zealand , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Solomon Islands , Tuvalu See also [ edit ] Monarchy portal Absolute monarchy Abolition of monarchy Autocracy Cloistered rule Criticism of monarchy Diarchy Empire Family as a model for the state Federal monarchy Hereditary monarchy List of current monarchies List of current monarchs of sovereign states List of current non-sovereign monarchs List of fictional monarchs List of monarchies List of monarchs by nickname List of royalty by net worth List of usurpers Monarchism Order of succession President for life Pretender Personal union Royal Family Royal and noble ranks Universal monarchy Notes and references [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Now substituted with the concept of autocracy .

^ Malaysia is a special case. Malaysia's head of state, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (often translated as "King"), is elected to serve a five-year term. However, he is elected from among the federation's subnational monarchies, each of whom inherit their position and rule for life.

^ Examples are Oliver Cromwell and Richard Cromwell in the Commonwealth of England , Kim il-Sung and Kim Jong Il in North Korea , the Somoza family in Nicaragua , François Duvalier and Jean-Claude Duvalier in Haiti , and Hafez al-Assad and Bashar al-Assad in Syria .

^ For example, the Kennedy family in the United States and the Nehru-Gandhi family in India . See list of political families .

^ In the end, this referendum failed to make it to a vote.

References [ edit ] ^ "Monarchy | Definition, Examples, & Facts | Britannica" .

Britannica.com . Retrieved February 28, 2023 .

^ "The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth" .

In Our Time . October 14, 2021.

BBC Radio 4 . Retrieved March 29, 2023 .

^ Conrad Phillip Kottak (1991).

Cultural Anthropology . McGraw-Hill. p. 124.

ISBN 978-0-07-035615-3 .

^ A. Adu Boahen; J. F. Ade Ajayi; Michael Tidy (1986).

Topics in West African History . Longman Group. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0-582-58504-1 .

^ Political Violence in Ancient India , p.23, "In later Vedic texts, the frequency of the word "dharma" decreased and its connotations shrank; it came to be especially connected with kingship and with the royal consecration ritual known as the rājasūya." ^ Traditions and encounters .

McGraw–Hill Education . p. 63.

By about 5000 b.c.e. many Sudanic peoples had formed small monarchies ruled by kings who were viewed as divine or semidivine beings.

^ Liddell & Scott ^ The Arthasastra: Selections from the Classic Indian Work on Statecraft . Hackett Publishing. September 15, 2012.

ISBN 9781603849029 .

^ The Feminist Companion to Literature in English , ed. Virginia Blain, Patricia Clements and Isobel Grundy, (London: Batsford, 1990), p. 272.

^ Bohn, H. G. (1849).

The Standard Library Cyclopedia of Political, Constitutional, Statistical and Forensic Knowledge . p. 640.

A republic , according to the modern usage of the word, signifies a political community which is not under monarchical government ... in which one person does not possess the entire sovereign power.

^ "Definition of Republic" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved February 18, 2017 .

a government having a chief of state who is not a monarch ... a government in which supreme power resides in a body of citizens entitled to vote and is exercised by elected officers and representatives responsible to them and governing according to law ^ "The definition of republic" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved February 18, 2017 .

a state in which the supreme power rests in the body of citizens entitled to vote and is exercised by representatives chosen directly or indirectly by them. ... a state in which the head of government is not a monarch or other hereditary head of state.

^ Mansourov, Alexandre.

"Korean Monarch Kim Jong Il: Technocrat Ruler of the Hermit Kingdom Facing the Challenge of Modernity" .

The Nautilus Institute .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2013 . Retrieved December 18, 2007 .

^ W. Veenendaal, "Monarchy and Democracy in Small States: An Ambiguous Symbiosis," in S. Wolf, ed., State Size Matters: Politik und Recht I'm Kontext von Kleinstaatlichkeit und Monarchie (Wiesbaden: Springer VS, 2016), pp. 183–198, doi : 10.1007/978-3-658-07725-9_9 , ISBN 978-3-658-07724-2 .

^ Gerring, John; Wig, Tore; Veenendaal, Wouter; Weitzel, Daniel; Teorell, Jan; Kikuta, Kyosuke (2020).

"Why Monarchy? The Rise and Demise of a Regime Type" .

Comparative Political Studies .

54 ( 3– 4): 585– 622.

doi : 10.1177/0010414020938090 .

hdl : 10852/84589 .

ISSN 0010-4140 .

S2CID 225612565 .

^ Lawrence, Adria (2023).

"Why Monarchies Still Reign" .

Journal of Democracy .

34 (2): 47– 61.

doi : 10.1353/jod.2023.0017 .

ISSN 1086-3214 .

S2CID 258184108 .

^ UCL (November 8, 2021).

"What is the role of the monarchy?" .

The Constitution Unit . Retrieved February 28, 2023 .

^ Beemer, Cristy (2011).

"The Female Monarchy: A Rhetorical Strategy of Early Modern Rule" .

Rhetoric Review .

30 (3): 258– 274.

doi : 10.1080/07350198.2011.581937 .

ISSN 0735-0198 .

JSTOR 23064026 .

S2CID 144455583 .

^ "The Definition of an Elective Monarchy" .

The Classroom | Empowering Students in Their College Journey . Retrieved August 30, 2021 .

^ Marlowe, Lara.

"The Central African Republic, where Emperor Bokassa ruled with violence and greed" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved February 5, 2019 .

^ Spence, Jonathan D.

(1999) The Search for Modern China , W.W. Norton and Company . p. 274.

ISBN 0-393-97351-4 .

^ Anckar, Carsten; Akademi, Åbo (2016).

"Semi presidential systems and semi constitutional monarchies: A historical assessment of executive power-sharing" . European Consortium for Political Research (ECPR) . Retrieved August 14, 2019 .

^ Meyers Taschenlexikon Geschichte 1982 vol.1 p21 ^ Wimmer, Andreas; Feinstein, Yuval (October 8, 2010). "The Rise of the Nation-State across the World, 1816 to 2001".

American Sociological Review .

75 (5): 764– 790.

doi : 10.1177/0003122410382639 .

S2CID 10075481 .

Sovereignty has a domestic and an external component. Domestically, a written constitution claims a nationally defined community of equal citizens as the political (and moral) foundation of the state and foresees some institutional representation of this community (not necessarily a freely elected parliament). Internal sovereignty thus stands in opposition to dynasticism, theocracy, feudal privilege, and mass slavery. [page 773] ^ Kurrild-Klitgaard, Peter (2000). "The constitutional economics of autocratic succession".

Public Choice .

103 (1/2): 63– 84.

doi : 10.1023/A:1005078532251 .

ISSN 0048-5829 .

S2CID 154097838 .

^ Kurrild-Klitgaard, Peter (2004). "Autocratic Succession".

The Encyclopedia of Public Choice . Vol. 103. pp.

358– 362.

doi : 10.1007/978-0-306-47828-4_39 .

ISBN 978-0-306-47828-4 .

^ a b Tronföljd , Nordisk familjebok , vol. 30 (1920) ^ SOU 1977:5 Kvinnlig tronföljd , p. 16.

^ SOU 1977:5 Kvinnlig tronföljd , p. 16.

^ "Overturning Centuries of Royal Rules" (2011-10-28).

BBC.com . Retrieved 2018-11-02.

^ "New rules on royal succession come into effect" .

BBC News . March 26, 2015 . Retrieved August 1, 2019 .

^ Chara, Jihan (October 1, 2018).

"Saudi Arabia: A prince's revolution" .

European View .

17 (2): 227– 234.

doi : 10.1177/1781685818803525 .

ISSN 1781-6858 .

^ Middleton, John (2015).

World monarchies and dynasties . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-7656-8050-1 .

OCLC 920786632 .

^ Xavier, Constantino (July 8, 2020).

"Bhutan's democratic transition and ties to India" .

Brookings . Retrieved April 16, 2022 .

^ "Emperor of Japan" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved April 16, 2022 .

^ Africa Research Bulletin: Political, Social and Cultural Series .

36 (1). February 22, 1999.

doi : 10.1111/arbp.1999.36.issue-1 .

ISSN 0001-9844 http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/arbp.1999.36.issue-1 .

{{ cite journal }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ "BTI 2022 Eswatini Country Report" .

BTI 2022 . Retrieved November 12, 2023 .

^ Thom, Liezl (April 28, 2021).

"Princess Sikhanyiso Dlamini of Eswatini is looking to the future while embracing her roots" .

ABC News . Retrieved August 8, 2021 .

^ Marans, Noam E. (April 9, 2015).

"The Pope Francis Effect and Catholic-Jewish Relations" .

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations .

10 (1).

doi : 10.6017/scjr.v10i1.8659 .

ISSN 1930-3777 .

^ "Holy See (Vatican City)" , The World Factbook , Central Intelligence Agency, November 1, 2023 , retrieved November 12, 2023 ^ Drage, Jean (1994).

New Politics in the South pacific . Institute of Pacific Studies, University of the South Pacific. p. 162.

ISBN 9789820201156 . Retrieved April 11, 2010 .

^ Young W. Kihl, Hong Nack Kim.

North Korea: The Politics of Regime Survival . Armonk, New York, USA: M. E. Sharpe, Inc., 2006. Pp 56.

^ Robert A. Scalapino, Chong-Sik Lee.

The Society . University of California Press, 1972. Pp. 689.

^ Bong Youn Choy. A history of the Korean reunification movement: its issues and prospects. Research Committee on Korean Reunification, Institute of International Studies, Bradley University, 1984. Pp. 117.

^ a b Sheridan, Michael (September 16, 2007).

"A tale of two dictatorships: The links between North Korea and Syria" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on February 19, 2008 . Retrieved April 9, 2010 .

^ The Twisted Logic of the N.Korean Regime , Chosun Ilbo, 2013-08-13, Accessed date: 2017-01-11 External links [ edit ] Look up monarchy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up royalty in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Monarchy .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Monarchy .

Wikivoyage has travel information for Monarchies .

The Constitutional Monarchy Association in the UK "Monarchy" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Kings and queens .

v t e Monarchies Monarch Imperial, royal and noble ranks List of current sovereign monarchs List of current non-sovereign monarchs List of monarchy referendums Type Absolute Constitutional Diarchy Elective Federal Hereditary Non-sovereign Personal union Regency Topics Abdication Abolition of monarchy Aristocracy Criticism of monarchy Decolonization Democratization Dynasty Government Head of state Legitimacy (political) Oligarchy Order of succession Republicanism Self-proclaimed monarchy Sovereignty Titles Chhatrapati Emperor Khan King Queen regnant Pharaoh Prince regnant Raja Shah Sultan Tsar Current Africa Eswatini Lesotho Morocco list Asia Bahrain Bhutan Brunei Cambodia Japan Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Thailand United Arab Emirates list Europe Andorra Belgium Denmark Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Norway Spain Sweden Vatican City (Holy See) Oceania Tonga Commonwealth realms Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Belize Canada Grenada Jamaica New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Papua New Guinea Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Solomon Islands Tuvalu United Kingdom Former Africa Adamawa Ankole Aussa Bagirmi Barotseland Bornu Burundi Central Africa Dahomey Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Gomma Gumma Islands of Refreshment Kaffa Kongo Libya Luba Madagascar Mali Maore Maravi Mwali Ndzuwani Ngazidja Rwanda Shilluk Tunisia Wituland Wassoulou Yeke Zanzibar Zimbabwe and other Americas Araucanía Aztec Brazil Haiti Inca Mexico Miskito Suriname Talamanca Trinidad Thirteen Colonies Asia Afghanistan Asir Bengal Bukhara Burma Cebu Chehab China Dapitan Hejaz Indonesia Iran ( Qajar ) Iraq Jabal Shammar Kathiri Khiva Korea Kumul Kurdistan Laos Maguindanao Mahra Maldives Manchukuo Mongolia Najran Nepal Qu'aiti Ryukyu Sarawak Shan Sikkim Sri Lanka Sip Song Chau Tai Sulu Syria Tibet Taiwan Upper Asir Upper Yafa Vietnam Yemen Emirates of South Arabia South Arabia Europe Albania Aragon Asturias Austria Austria-Hungary Bavaria Bosnia Brittany Bulgaria Catalonia Cilicia Corsica Crimea Cyprus Finland France Galicia Georgia Germany Granada Greece Hanover Hungary Iceland Imereti Ireland Italy Kartli-Kakheti Lithuania Majorca Man Moldavia Montenegro Navarre Neuchâtel Ottoman Empire Papal States Piedmont-Sardinia Poland–Lithuania Portugal Prussia Romania Russia Samos Savoy Saxony Scotland Serbia Tavolara Tuscany Two Sicilies United Baltic Duchy Valencia Württemberg Yugoslavia Oceania Abemama Bora Bora Easter Island Fiji Hawaii Huahine Mangareva Niuē-Fekai Nuku Hiva Raiatea Rapa Iti Rarotonga Rimatara Rurutu Tahiti Tahuata Commonwealth realms Barbados Ceylon (Sri Lanka) Fiji The Gambia Ghana Guyana India ( British Raj , princely states ) Irish Free State / Ireland Kenya Malawi Malta Mauritius Nigeria Pakistan Rhodesia Sierra Leone South Africa Tanganyika Trinidad and Tobago Uganda v t e Crowns Albania Helmet of Skanderbeg (Vienna) Austria Archducal hat of Austria (Klosterneuburg) Imperial Crown of Austria (Vienna) Brilliant Crown of Empress Elisabeth ( de ) (missing) Archducal hat of Tyrol (Mariastein) Ducal hat of Styria (Graz) Archducal hat of Joseph II (Vienna) Bohemia Crown of Saint Wenceslas (Prague) Crown of the Środa Treasure (Środa Śląska) Brazil Crown of Pedro I (Petrópolis) Imperial Crown of Brazil (Petrópolis) Coronet of the Imperial Prince of Brazil Coronet of Laurels of Princess Isabel British Isles Crown of Princess Blanche (Munich) Crown of Margaret of York (Aachen) Crown of Scotland (Edinburgh) St Edward's Crown (London) State Crown of Mary of Modena (London) Tudor Crown (destroyed) Crown of James I (destroyed) State Crown of Charles II (broken up) State Crown of George I (London) Coronet of Frederick, Prince of Wales (London) Coronation Crown of George IV (London) Diamond Diadem Crown of Queen Adelaide (London) Imperial State Crown (London) Small Diamond Crown of Queen Victoria (London) Crown of Queen Alexandra (London) Coronet of George, Prince of Wales (London) Crown of Queen Mary (London) Imperial Crown of India (London) Crown of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother (London) Coronet of Charles, Prince of Wales (London) Bulgaria Diamond Crown of Bulgaria (missing) China Futou Yishanguan Tongtianguan Mianguan Colombia Crown of the Andes (New York City) Crown of Simón Bolívar (Bogotá) Crown of José María Córdova (Rionegro) Croatia Crown of Zvonimir (missing) Denmark Crown of Christian IV (Copenhagen) Crown of Christian V (Copenhagen) Crown of the Queen (Copenhagen) France Crown of Charlemagne (destroyed) Crown of Saint Louis (destroyed) Crown of Henry IV (destroyed) Crown of Louis XV (Paris) Crown of Napoleon I (Paris) Crown of Napoleon III (destroyed) Crown of Empress Eugénie (Paris) Germany German State Crown (heraldic) Baden : Grand Ducal Crown of Baden (Karlsruhe) Bavaria : Royal Crown of Bavaria (Munich) Crown of the Queen of Bavaria ( de ) (Munich) Crown of Queen Therese of Bavaria (Munich) Brandenburg : Electoral Hat of Brandenburg (Berlin) Brunswick-Lüneburg : Ducal Crown of Brunswick-Lüneburg Hanover : Royal Crown of Hanover Mecklenburg : Wendish Crown (heraldic) Prussia : Crown of Frederick I (Berlin) Crown of Sophia Charlotte of Hanover (Berlin) Crown of Wilhelm I (missing) Crown of Queen Augusta (missing) Crown of Wilhelm II (Hohenzollern Castle) Saxony : Electoral Hat of Saxony (Dresden) Crown of Augustus II the Strong (Dresden) Funeral Crown of Augustus II the Strong (Dresden) Württemberg : Royal Crown of Württemberg (Stuttgart) Greece Crown of Greece (Athens) Haiti Crown of Faustin I Hawaii Crown of King Kalākaua (Honolulu) Crown of Queen Kapiʻolani (Honolulu) Holy Roman Empire Imperial Crown of the Holy Roman Empire (Vienna) Iron Crown (Monza) Crown of Rudolf II (Vienna) Imperial Crowns of Charles VII (Munich) Essen Crown (Essen) Reliquary Crown of John the Baptist (Aachen) Reliquary Crown of Charlemagne (Aachen) Crown of Empress Cunigunde ( de ) (Munich) Lily Crown of Empress Cunigunde (Munich) Reliquary Crown of Henry II (Munich) Salian Funeral Crowns of Spires (Speyer) Reliquary Crown of Otto II (Halle (Saale)) Holy See Papal tiaras Papier-mâché Tiara (Vatican City) Napoleon Tiara (Vatican City) Tiara of Pope Pius IX (1846) (Vatican City) Spanish Tiara (Vatican City) Tiara of Pope Pius IX (Notre Dame, Indiana) Palatine Tiara (Vatican City) Tiara of Pope John XXIII (Bergamo) Tiara of Pope Paul VI (Washington, D.C.) Hungary Holy Crown of Hungary (Budapest) Crown of Stephen Bocskai (Vienna) Iran Sasanian crowns Empress's Crown (Tehran) Kiani Crown (Tehran) Pahlavi Crown (Tehran) Italy Iron Crown (Monza) Royal Crown of Savoy ( it ) (Turin) Crown of Theodelinda ( it ) (Monza) Grand Ducal Crown of Tuscany (missing) Crown of Constance of Sicily (Palermo) Japan Imperial Crowns of Emperor Shōmu and Empress Kōmyō (Surviving Portions) Benkan Emperor Kōmei Variant Kanmuri Raikan Imperial Crown of Empress Go-Sakuramachi Korea Crown of Baekje (Gongju) Crown of Gaya (Yongin) Crowns of Silla Gold Crown of Geumgwanchong (Gyeongju) Gold Crown of Cheonmachong (Gyeongju) Gold Crown of Hwangnamdaechong (Seoul) Gold Crown of Geumnyeongchong Tumulus (Seoul) Gold Crown of Seobongchong Tumulus (Gyeongju) Silver Crown (Gyeongju) Liechtenstein Ducal hat of Liechtenstein (missing; replica: Vaduz) Lithuania Gediminas' Cap (missing) Madagascar Crown of Madagascar Crown of Ranavalona III Mexico Imperial Crown of Mexico (First Mexican Empire) Imperial Crown of Mexico (Second Mexican Empire) (destroyed) Funerary crown of Maximilian I (Vienna) Netherlands Crown of the Netherlands Norway Norwegian Crown Prince's Coronet (Trondheim) Crown of Norway (Trondheim) Crown of the Queen of Norway (Trondheim) Poland Crown of Bolesław I the Brave (destroyed; replica: Stará Ľubovňa) Swedish Crown (destroyed) Muscovy Crown (destroyed) Hungarian Crown (destroyed) Homagial Crown (destroyed) Funeral Crown (missing) Queen's Crown (destroyed) Crown of Augustus II (Dresden) Funeral Crown of Augustus II (Dresden) Crown of Augustus III (Warsaw) Crown of Maria Josepha (Warsaw) Płock Diadem (Płock) Portugal Crown of João VI (Lisbon) Diadem of the Stars (Lisbon) Romania Crown of Elisabeta (Bucharest) Crown of Maria (Bucharest) Steel Crown of Romania (Bucharest) Russia "Cap of Monomakh" Crown of Kazan Tzardom Crown of Tsar Michael Fyodorovich Cap of Monomakh of the second set Diamond Crown of Tsar Peter I Diamond Crown of Tsar Ivan V Altabas crown of the third set Crown of Empress Catherine I Crown of Empress Anna Ivanovna Great Imperial Crown Maltese Crown Small Imperial Crown Serbia Karađorđević Crown (Belgrade) Nemanjić Crowns Crown of Stefan Uroš III (Cetinje) Crown of Stephen Bocskai (Vienna) Spain Royal Crown of Spain (heraldic) Royal Crown of Spain (Tumular Crown) (Madrid) Crown of Sancho IV (Toledo) Crown of Isabella I of Castile (Granada) Crown of the Crowned Virgin of the Kings (Seville) Crown of the Virgin of the Tabernacle of Toledo (Toledo) Sweden Crown of Eric XIV (Stockholm) Crown of the Queen (Stockholm) Crown of Queen Christina (Stockholm) Crown of the Heir Apparent (Stockholm) Tahiti Crown of Tahiti (Punaauia) Tonga Crown of Tonga (Nukuʻalofa) Ukraine Crown of Rus (missing) Africa Crowns of Egypt Silver Crown of Emperor Tewodros (Ethiopia) Asia Raven Crown (Bhutan) Shripech (Nepal) Crown of Sri Vikrama Rajasinha (Sri Lanka) Great Crown of Victory (Thailand) See also Coronation Crown jewels Heir apparent Heir presumptive King Monarchy Queen Regalia Royal family Canadian Heraldic Crown v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases : National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monarchy&oldid=1303551487 " Categories : Monarchy Positions of authority Titles Constitutional state types Political systems Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2018 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles needing additional references from March 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from November 2018 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use mdy dates from January 2016 Use British English from August 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles needing additional references from November 2018 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 17:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monarchy 170 languages Add topic

