Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Shells Toggle Shells subsection 1.1 Examples 2 Etymology and usage 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Midden 24 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaelg 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Sakizaya Scots Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Old dump for domestic waste This article is about archaeological remains, known in Spanish as "conchales". For the municipality in São Paulo, Brazil, see Conchal . For other uses, see Midden (disambiguation) .

A closeup of a shell midden in Santa Cruz Province, Argentina A midden [ a ] is an old dump for domestic waste .

[ 1 ] It may consist of animal bones , human excrement , botanical material, mollusc shells , potsherds , lithics (especially debitage ), and other artifacts and ecofacts associated with past human occupation.

These features provide a useful resource for archaeologists who wish to study the diets and habits of past societies. Middens with damp, anaerobic conditions can even preserve organic remains in deposits as the debris of daily life are tossed on the pile. Each individual toss will contribute a different mix of materials depending upon the activity associated with that particular toss. During the course of deposition sedimentary material is deposited as well. Different mechanisms, from wind and water to animal digs, create a matrix which can also be analysed to provide seasonal and climatic information. In some middens individual dumps of material can be discerned and analysed.

[ 2 ] Shells [ edit ] The Whaleback Shell Midden in Maine resulted from oyster harvesting from 200 BCE to 1000 CE .

A shell midden or shell mound is an archaeological feature consisting mainly of mollusc shells. The Danish term køkkenmøddinger (plural) was first used by Japetus Steenstrup to describe shell heaps and continues to be used by some researchers. A midden, by definition, contains the debris of human activity, and should not be confused with wind- or tide-created beach mounds. Some shell middens are processing remains: areas where aquatic resources were processed directly after harvest and prior to use or storage in a distant location.

Certain shell middens are linked directly to villages, serving as designated dump sites. In other cases, the materials found in the middens are closely tied to individual houses within the village, where each household would dispose of its waste right outside their home. Regardless of their association, shell middens are highly intricate and challenging to excavate completely and accurately. The fact that they contain a detailed record of what food was eaten or processed and many fragments of stone tools and household goods makes them invaluable objects of archaeological study.

Shells have a high calcium carbonate content, which tends to make the middens alkaline . This slows the normal rate of decay caused by soil acidity, leaving a relatively high proportion of organic material (food remnants, organic tools, clothing, human remains) available for archaeologists to find.

[ 3 ] Edward Sylvester Morse conducted one of the first archaeological excavations of the Omori Shell Mounds in Tokyo, Japan in 1877, which led to the discovery of a style of pottery described as "cord-marked", translated as " Jōmon ", which came to be used to refer to the early period of Japanese history when this style of pottery was produced.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Shell middens were studied in Denmark in the latter half of the 19th century. The Danish word køkkenmødding (kitchen mound) is now used internationally. The English word "midden" (waste mound) derives from the same Old Norse word that produced the modern Danish one.

[ 6 ] Examples [ edit ] The Turtle Mound shell midden, in Florida , is the largest on the US East Coast.

Shell midden in Kasori Shell Mound , Chiba , Chiba Prefecture Japan Shell middens are found in coastal or lakeshore zones all over the world. Consisting mostly of mollusc shells, they are interpreted as being the waste products of meals eaten by nomadic groups or hunting parties. Some are small examples relating to meals had by a handful of individuals, others are many metres in length and width and represent centuries of shell deposition. In Brazil , they are known as sambaquis , having been created over a long period between the 6th millennium BCE and the beginning of European colonisation.

European shell middens are primarily found along the Atlantic seaboard and in Denmark and primarily date to the 5th millennium BCE ( Ertebølle and Early Funnel Beaker cultures), containing the remains of the earliest Neolithisation process (pottery, cereals and domestic animals). Younger shell middens are found in Latvia (associated with Comb Ware ceramics), Sweden (associated with Pitted Ware ceramics), the Netherlands (associated with Corded Ware ceramics) and Schleswig-Holstein ( Late Neolithic and Iron Age ). All these are examples where communities practised a mixed farming and hunting/gathering economy.

In 2025, IIT Gandhinagar researchers have uncovered shell midden sites in Kutch in India, revealing hunter-gatherer communities lived there at least 5,000 years before the Harappans . These sites, with discarded shells and stone tools, show early coastal communities adapted to mangrove environments and relied on marine resources. This discovery challenges the idea that Kutch's urbanism was solely externally influenced by Sindh , suggesting a gradual, locally rooted cultural evolution.

[ 7 ] On Canada 's west coast, there are shell middens that run for more than 1 kilometre (0.6 mi) along the coast and are several meters deep.

[ 8 ] The midden in Namu, British Columbia is over 9 metres (30 ft) deep and spans over 10,000 years of continuous occupation.

Shell middens created in coastal regions of Australia by Indigenous Australians exist in Australia today. Middens provide evidence of prior occupation and are generally protected from mining and other developments. One must exercise caution in deciding whether one is examining a midden or a beach mound. There are good examples on the Freycinet Peninsula in Tasmania where wave action currently is combining charcoal from forest fire debris with a mix of shells into masses that storms deposit above high-water mark. Shell mounds near Weipa in far north Queensland that are mostly less than 2 metres (6.6 ft) high (although ranging up to 10 metres (33 ft) high) and a few tens of metres long are claimed to be middens, [ 9 ] but are in fact shell cheniers (beach ridges) re-worked by nest mound-building birds.

[ 10 ] Some shell middens are regarded as sacred sites, linked to the Dreamtime , such as those of the Anbarra group of the Burarra people of Arnhem Land .

[ 11 ] The Ohlone and Coast Miwok peoples built over 425 shell mounds in the San Francisco Bay Area. These mounds were used as: Burial sites Ceremonial places Living cemeteries Places of prayer The mounds were constructed over thousands of years. They were often discovered by accident during construction, mining, or farming.

Some of the largest mounds in the Bay Area include: Emeryville Shellmound Located between Oakland and Berkeley, this mound was estimated to be 60 feet high and 350 feet in diameter. It was demolished in 1924.

Huichuin Located in Berkeley, this mound was 20 feet high and was the site of the first human settlement on the shores of San Francisco Bay.

West Berkeley and Ellis Landing These mounds measured almost 200 meters in diameter and rose 9 meters above the shoreline.

[ 12 ] Shell mounds are also credited with the creation of tropical hardwood hammocks , one example being the Otter Mound Preserve in Florida , where shell deposits from Calusa natives provided flood free high areas in otherwise large watered areas.

[ 13 ] There are instances in which shell middens may have doubled as areas of ceremonial construction or ritual significance. The Woodland period Crystal River site provides an example of this phenomenon.

[ 14 ] Some shell mounds, known as shell rings , are circular or open arcs with a clear central area. Many are known from Japan and the southeastern United States, and at least one from South America.

[ 15 ] Etymology and usage [ edit ] See also: Midden (disambiguation) The word is of Scandinavian via Middle English derivation (from early Scandinavian; Danish: mødding , Swedish regional: mödding ).

[ 16 ] The word "midden" is still in everyday use in Scotland and has come by extension to refer to anything that is a mess, a muddle, or chaos.

[ 17 ] The word is used by farmers in Britain to describe the place where farm yard manure from cows or other animals is collected. Grants are sometimes available to protect these from rain to avoid runoff and pollution .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Squirrel midden, Kenai National Wildlife Refuge , Alaska In the animal kingdom, some species establish ground burrows , also known as middens, that are used mostly for food storage. For example, the North American red squirrel ( Tamiasciurus hudsonicus ) usually has one large active midden in each territory with perhaps an inactive or auxiliary midden.

[ 20 ] A midden may be a regularly used animal toilet area or dunghill , created by many mammals, such as the hyrax , and also serving as a territorial marker.

[ 21 ] Octopus middens are piles of debris that the octopus piles up to conceal the entrance of its den. Octopus middens are commonly made of rocks, shells, and the bones of prey, although they may contain anything the octopus finds that it can move.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Asturian culture , characterized by shell-middens Crystal River Archaeological State Park Emeryville Shellmound Green Mound Landfill Mussel Point , a megamidden in the South African West Coast Packrat midden Privy midden Tell Tumulus Urban archaeology Waste management in Australia#Pre-European settlement West Berkeley Shellmound Whaleback Shell Midden Yachats, Oregon Notes [ edit ] ^ Also known as a kitchen midden or shell heap .

References [ edit ] ^ Brinton, DG (1866). "Artificial Shell-deposits of the United States".

Reports . Washington: Smithsonian Institution .

^ Stein, Julie (2000).

Exploring Coast Salish Prehistory: The Archaeology of San Juan Island .

^ "Whaleback Shell Midden" . Retrieved 11 May 2006 .

^ John Whitney Hall (1988).

The Cambridge History of Japan . Cambridge University Press. p. 59.

ISBN 978-0-521-22352-2 .

^ Keiji Imamura.

"Collections of Morse from The Shell Mounds of Omori" .

Digital Museum, University of Tokyo . Retrieved 4 September 2015 .

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

www.etymonline.com .

^ "Kutch housed hunter-gatherer communities 5,000 years before Harappans arrived: Study" .

The Indian Express . 5 June 2025 . Retrieved 10 June 2025 .

^ Stein, Julie (1992).

Deciphering a Shell Midden . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-664730-3 .

^ Bailey, Geoff; Chappell, John; Cribb, Roger (1994). "The Origin of 'Anadara' Shell Mounds at Weipa, North Queensland, Australia".

Archaeology in Oceania .

29 (2): 69– 80.

doi : 10.1002/arco.1994.29.2.69 .

JSTOR 40386985 .

^ Stone, Tim (31 December 1995). "Shell mound formation in coastal northern Australia".

Marine Geology .

129 ( 1– 2): 77– 100.

Bibcode : 1995MGeol.129...77S .

doi : 10.1016/0025-3227(95)00101-8 .

^ Griffiths, Billy (2018).

Deep Time Dreaming: Uncovering Ancient Australia . Black Inc. p. 164.

^ "There Were Once More Than 425 Shellmounds in the Bay Area. Where Did They Go?" . kqed.org. 24 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 November 2023 .

^ "Otter Mound Preserve" . Colliergov.net . Retrieved 24 February 2014 .

^ Pluckhahn, Thomas J.

; Thompson, Victor D.

; Cherkinsky, Alexander (2015). "The temporality of shell-bearing landscapes at Crystal River, Florida".

Journal of Anthropological Anthropology .

37 : 19– 36.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaa.2014.10.004 .

^ Lawrence, David R. and Hilda L. Wrightson.

"Late Archaic-Early Woodland Period Shell Rings of the Southeastern United States Coast: A Bibliographic Introduction" . University of South Carolina . Retrieved 10 December 2011 .

^ Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.), 2003 .

^ "Annaker's midden n. a mess, a shambles" .

Scots Language Centre . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ "Manure/Slurry Storage" . Scottish Government. Archived from the original on 24 January 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2011 .

Investment under this storage and handling Option may include: action to minimise the volume of clean water getting into manure or slurry stores, including the installation of covers for slurry storage facilities and middens {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Roofed Midden benefits Lake District Farm" .

Thanks to a grant from Farming Connect Cumbria the Booths were able to roof the slurry midden, probably trebling its capacity by excluding the rainwater, as well as making necessary repairs to the midden itself to prevent possible run-off to a nearby beck. The midden can now provide up to 10 weeks' storage for the slurry.

^ dfg.webmaster@alaska.gov.

"Alaska Department of Fish & Game: North American Red Squirrel" .

Alaska Department of Fish and Game . Retrieved 24 February 2014 .

^ Chase, B.M.; Meadows, M.E.; Scott, L.; Thomas, D.S.G.; Marais, E.; Sealy, J.; Reimer, P.J.

(2009). "A record of rapid Holocene climate change preserved in hyrax middens from southwestern Africa".

Geology .

37 (8): 703– 6.

Bibcode : 2009Geo....37..703C .

doi : 10.1130/G30053A.1 .

^ Ambrose, Richard F. (1983). "Midden formation by octopuses: The role of biotic and abiotic factors".

Marine Behaviour and Physiology .

10 (2): 137– 144.

doi : 10.1080/10236248309378613 .

Published online: 22 Jan 2009 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shell midden sites .

Look up midden or middens in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Hidefumi Ogawa (小川英文).

"The excavations of Lal-lo shell middens (in the Philippines)" .

Tokyo University of Foreign Studies . Retrieved 19 October 2008 .

Authority control databases : National Japan v t e Ancient seafaring Vessels Types Balangay Bangka Beden Coracle Dhow Dragon boat Dugout canoe Fire ship Galley Penteconter Kunlun ship Liburna Longship Multihull Navis lusoria Obelisk ship Outriggers Sakman Single-outrigger Catamaran Trimaran Polyremes Bireme Oared warships Trireme Quadrireme Quinquereme Hexareme Tessarakonteres Raft Reed boat Sailing ship Solar ship Tomol Tākitimu Uru by region Austronesia Egypt Persia Rome Propulsion Paddling Sailing Towing Poling Components Anchor Bow Cabin Deck Figurehead Hull Planking Keel Mast Oar Paddle Rope Rudder Steering oar Sail Sail components Stem Sternpost Strake Tiller Construction Boat building Careening Carvel built Clinker built Dugout Framing Frame-first Shell-first Joinery Lashed-lug Mortise and tenon Phoenician joint Scarf joint Sewn-plank Shipbuilding By region: Egypt Rigging Crab claw Fore-and-aft Lateen Settee Tanja Triangular sail Junk Mast-aft Spritsail Square Armaments Ballista Catapult Corvus Dolphin Fire ship Harpax Ram Sambuca Wrecks and relics Earliest Pesse canoe Dufuna canoe Abydos Moor Sand Dokos Khufu ship Ferriby Boats Dover Bronze Age Boat Uluburun Canaanite Cape Gelidonya Zambratija Rochelongue Austronesia Pontian boat Butuan boats Black Sea‎ Sinop D Greek Kyrenia Leontophoros Syracusia Ashkelon Antikythera Canaanite and Phoenician Bajo de la Campana Canaanite shipwreck Gozo Ma'agan Michael Mazarrón Punic Marsala Punic shipwreck Roman Alkedo Arles Rhône 3 Blackfriars I Caligula's Giant Ship De Meern ships Isis Madrague de Giens Nemi ships Marausa Yassi Ada Nordic Hjortspring boat Nydam boat Lists Oldest surviving Museum ships Surviving ancient ships Navigation, and ports and harbors Navigation Celestial Charts Coastal Lighthouses History Ocean swell Stick chart Periplus Piloting Pilot boat Maritime pilot By region: Inuit Micronesian Polynesia Ports and harbors Actium Aden Adulis Alexandria Apollonia Aradus Arikamedu Arsinoe Avalites Barbarikon Barygaza Basra Berenice Troglodytica Bosphorus Byblos Caesarea Maritima Canopus Carthage Centumcellae Charmutha Chittagong Delos Essina Giao Chỉ Godavaya Guangzhou Jambukola Jeddah Kaveri Poompattinam Kedah Korkai Leptis Magna Lothal Manthai Madurai Malao Mersa Gawasis Myos Hormos Martaban Mueang Phra Rot Muscat Muziris Narbonne Nesis Óc Eo ( Cattigara ) Opone Ostia Antica Palembang Piraeus Portus Augusti Portus Pisanus Prosphorion Ptolemais Theron Puteoli Qal'at al-Bahrain Qandala Quilon Rhacotis Sarapion Satingpra Sidon Socotra Sounagoura Thapsus Trincomalee Tulum Tyndis Tyre Wadi al-Jarf Zanzibar History Prehistory Timeline Britain Oceania Remote Near Ubaid period Indus Valley Civilizations Ancient Egypt Old Kingdom Austronesia Sa Huỳnh Lapita Micronesia Langkasuka Kedah Champa Kutai Tarumanagara Kalingga Srivijaya Sunda Polynesia Minoan Indus Valley Tamilakam Chola Chera Pandya Somalia Dilmun Maya Nuragic Mycenaean Phoenicia Olmecs Carthage Greece Archaic Classical Rome Achaemenid Nabatea Aksum Migration and exploration Peopling of Australia Peopling of Micronesia Austronesian Expansion Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul Ocean exploration Phoenician maritime expansion Sardinia Circumnavigation of Africa Pytheas' voyage to Britain Roman circumnavigation of Britain Timeline Mariners and explorers Henenu Euthymenes Hanno the Navigator Himilco Sataspes Androsthenes of Thasos Archias of Pella Alexander the Great Nearchus Pytheas Megasthenes Xu Fu Hippalus Julius Caesar Eudoxus of Cyzicus Maes Titianus Military Navies Egyptian Achaemenid Greek Roman Battles Mediterranean: Alashiya Nile Delta Salamis Artemisium Eurymedon Naupactus Olpae Syracuse Cynossema Arginusae Mytilene Hellespont Echinades Salamis II Mylae Cape Hermaeum Ecnomus Drepana Aegates Lake Trasimene Chios Myonessus Nile Naulochus Mycale Actium Tactics Boarding Grappling Incendiaries Oared vessels Sailing ships Greek navy Ramming By region China India Odisha Japan Rome South America Rafts Economy and trade Whaling Fishing Egypt Land of Punt Indo–Mesopotamia relations Meluhha Tin Spice trade Austronesian network Sa Huynh-Kalanay Incense trade Maritime Silk Road Periplus of the Erythraean Sea Maya Greece Greco–Indian shipping Rome Indo–Roman Piracy History Mediterranean piracy Ameinias the Phocian Cilician pirates Jewish pirates Kidnapping of Julius Caesar Pompey's campaign against the pirates Research and education Scholars Historians David Blackman Lionel Casson Fik Meijer John Sinclair Morrison William L. Rodgers Chester G. Starr Archaeologists George Bass Jean-Yves Empereur Boris Rankov J. Richard Steffy Peter Throckmorton Shelley Wachsmann Topics and theories Coastal defence and fortification Grave goods Lighthouses Alexandria Marine art Marine navigation Maritime archaeology Naval warfare Maritime temples Temple of Isthmia Temple of Poseidon, Sounion Samothrace temple complex Nusantao network Phoenician discovery of America Pre-Columbian theories Sea Peoples Shipbuilding Shell middens Ship burial Tacking Thalassocracy Underwater archaeology Underwater exploration Sites H3 Qal'at al-Bahrain Experimental archaeology Ship replica Heyerdahl expeditions Kon-Tiki Ra and Ra II Austronesian replicas Hōkūleʻa Sarimanok Te Au o Tonga Hawaiʻiloa canoe Samudra Raksa Alingano Maisu Saina Balangay Voyage Faʻafaite Gaualofa Marumaru Atua Mediterranean Olympias Regina Phoenician Ship Expedition Viking replicas Viking Others Vital Alsar Ivlia Abora Viracocha Tangaroa Oakleaf Morgawr Institutes and conferences Advisory Council on Underwater Archaeology Archaeological Institute of America European Association of Archaeologists Institute of Nautical Archaeology International Congress of Maritime Museums Nautical Archaeology Society RPM Nautical Foundation Sea Research Society Society for American Archaeology Museums and memorials Boat Museum, Kolkata Bodrum Museum of Underwater Archaeology Giza Solar boat museum Grand Egyptian Museum Ancient Shipwreck Museum at Kyrenia Castle Museum of Ancient Seafaring Museum of Ancient Ships, Pisa National Museum of Subaquatic Archaeology Viking ship museums: Oslo Roskilde Legend and literature Legend Ark of bulrushes Flood myths Genesis Gilgamesh Greek Literature Odyssey Histories (Herodotus) On the Ocean Argonautica Histories (Polybius) Metamorphoses Geography Aeneid NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lncwh
Cached time: 20250811235848
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.642 seconds
Real time usage: 0.818 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2575/1000000
Revision size: 17569/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 219736/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1629/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 95865/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.377/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8051349/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  636.365      1 -total
 37.39%  237.935      2 Template:Reflist
 14.57%   92.701      1 Template:Short_description
 12.66%   80.584      2 Template:Cite_news
 10.53%   67.013      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.43%   66.381      1 Template:Ancient_seafaring
 10.39%   66.108     11 Template:Cite_web
  9.95%   63.319      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.81%   49.712      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.76%   49.376      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:606465:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235848 and revision id 1301374450. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Midden&oldid=1301374450 " Categories : Shell middens Landfill Stone Age Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Use British English from December 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 12:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Midden 24 languages Add topic

