Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classical Greek concepts of pleonexia 2 Christian concepts of pleonexia 3 Notes and references 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Pleonexia 8 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek concept of greed Pleonexia , sometimes called pleonexy , originating from the Greek πλεονεξία , is a philosophical concept which roughly corresponds to greed , covetousness, or avarice, and is strictly defined as "the insatiable desire to have what rightfully belongs to others." Classical Greek concepts of pleonexia [ edit ] Classical Greek philosophers such as Plato related pleonexia to justice.

Thrasymachus , in Book I of The Republic , presents pleonexia as a natural state, upon which justice is an unnatural restraint.

[ 1 ] In discussing the philosophy of Aristotle , who insisted in his Nicomachean Ethics that all specifically unjust actions are motivated by pleonexia, Kraut [ 2 ] discusses pleonexia and equates it to epichairekakia, the Greek version of schadenfreude , stating that inherent in pleonexia is the appeal of acting unjustly at the expense of others.  Young, [ 3 ] however argues that the simple involvement of unfairness in the desire for gaining ever more is what defines pleonexia, rather than that the desire itself be for gaining ever more in a manner that is specifically unfair.

Thomas Hobbes includes it as a concept of natural law in Leviathan : If in this case, at the making of Peace, men require for themselves, that which they would not have to be granted to others, they do contrary to the precedent law, that commandeth the acknowledgement of naturall equalitie, and therefore also against the law of Nature. The observers of this law, are those we call Modest, and the breakers Arrogant Men. The Greeks call the violation of this law πλεονεξία ; that is, a desire of more than their share.

[ 4 ] Christian concepts of pleonexia [ edit ] Pleonexia, being mentioned in the New Testament in Colossians 3 verses 1–11 and Luke 12 verses 13–21, has been the subject of commentary by Christian theologians.

William Barclay [ 5 ] describes pleonexia as an "accursed love of having", which "will pursue its own interests with complete disregard for the rights of others, and even for the considerations of common humanity".  He labels it an aggressive vice that operates in three spheres of life. In the material sphere, it involves "grasping at money and goods, regardless of honour and honesty".  In the ethical sphere it is "the ambition which tramples on others to gain something which is not properly meant for it".  In the moral sphere, it is "the unbridled lust which takes its pleasure where it has no right to take".

Notes and references [ edit ] ^ "Important terms: pleonexia" .

SparkNotes: The Republic . Barnes & Noble.

^ Richard Kraut (2002).

Aristotle: Political Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. xiv, 520.

ISBN 0-19-878200-4 .

, cited by David Keyt (2003-02-07).

"Review" .

Bryn Mawr Classical Review .

^ Charles Young (1989). "Aristotle on Justice".

The Southern Journal of Philosophy . 27 (Supp.): 233– 249.

, also cited by Keyt ^ Hobbes, Thomas: Leviathan : Chapter XV. Of Other Lawes of Nature ^ William Barclay.

The Daily study Bible series, Rev. ed . Philadelphia: The Westminster Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Keimpe Algra (August 1996). "Observations on Plato's Thrasymachus: The Case for Pleonexia". In Keimpe A. Algra; Pieter W. van der Horst; David T. Runia (eds.).

Polyhistor: Studies in the History and Historiography of Ancient Philosophy, Presented to Jaap Mansfeld on his Sixtieth Birthday . Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers. pp.

41– 59.

ISBN 90-04-10417-8 .

David Keyt (1989). In Timothy D. Roche (ed.). "Injustice and Pleonexia in Aristotle: A Reply to Charles Young".

Aristotle's Ethics, Supplementary Volume of the Southern Journal of Philosophy : 251– 257.

Ryan Balot (2001). "Aristotle's critique of phaleas : Justice, equality, and pleonexia".

Hermes .

129 (1). Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag: 32– 44.

Ryan K. Balot (2001). "1: Introduction".

Greed and Injustice in Classical Athens . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-04855-X . Archived from the original on 2006-09-04 . Retrieved 2006-09-22 .

External links [ edit ] Strong's Greek Dictionary Answers.com (pleonexia ref.) Portals : Society Psychology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pleonexia&oldid=1256006664 " Categories : Concepts in ethics Concepts in political philosophy Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 November 2024, at 19:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pleonexia 8 languages Add topic

