Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Publications 3 Bibliography 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Christopher Chase-Dunn 6 languages Català Čeština Español Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 20th and 21st-century American scholar, sociologist, and educator This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Christopher Chase-Dunn" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.

It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page .

( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Christopher Chase-Dunn Christopher Chase-Dunn Born ( 1944-01-10 ) January 10, 1944 (age 81) Corvallis, Oregon , U.S.

Academic work School or tradition World-systems Main interests Systems theory, world-systems, sociology Notable works Global Formation: Structures of The World-Economy (1991) Christopher K. Chase-Dunn (born January 10, 1944, Corvallis, Oregon ) is an American sociologist best known for his contributions to world-systems theory .

[ 1 ] Education and career [ edit ] Chase-Dunn earned his PhD in 1975 at Stanford University [ 2 ] (studying under John W. Meyer ) and has taught at The Johns Hopkins University (1975–2000) and at the University of California, Riverside (2000–present). He is a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and served as President (2002–06) of Research Committee 02 (Economy and Society) of the International Sociological Association from 2002 to 2006. He was chair of the Section on International Political Economy of the International Studies Association from 1984 to 1986, and chair of the Section on the Political Economy of the World-System of the American Sociological Association in 1982. He founded the Institute for Research on World-Systems at the University of California, Riverside. He is founding editor of the Journal of World-Systems Research , which is the official journal of the Political Economy of the World-System section of the American Sociological Association.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Publications [ edit ] Chase-Dunn is the author, co-author, editor, or co-editor of over a dozen books, including most notably Global Formation: Structures of The World-Economy , a major theoretical synthesis and restatement of the world-systems approach to the study of social change.

[ 5 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Unity on the Global Left: Critical reflections on Samir Amin's call for a New International (ed.). London: Routledge, 2021.

Global Struggle and Social Change Movements: From Prehistory to World Revolution in the 21st Century (with Paul Almeida). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2020.

Social change: Globalization from the Stone Age to the present (with B. Lerro). London: Routledge, 2016.

Global Social Change. Historical and Comparative Perspectives (with S. B. Babones). Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006.

Global Formation: Structures of the World Economy . London, Oxford and New York: Basil Blackwell, 1999.

Rise and Demise. Comparing World Systems (with Th. D. Hall). Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, 1997.

Socialist States in the World System (ed.) Beverly Hills and London: Sage, 1982.

References [ edit ] ^ "Christopher Chase-Dunn" .

Paradigm Publishers . Retrieved December 13, 2010 .

^ "Christopher Chase-Dunn" .

University of California-Riverside . Archived from the original on July 17, 2010 . Retrieved December 13, 2010 .

^ Journal of World-Systems Research. (2017). Journal History. Retrieved from http://jwsr.pitt.edu/ojs/index.php/jwsr/about/history ^ American Sociological Association. (2017). Journals. Retrieved from http://www.asanet.org/research-and-publications/journals ^ Chase-Dunn, Christopher (1991).

Global Formation: Structures of the World-Economy . Blackwell Pub.

ISBN 1557862737 .

External links [ edit ] Ch. Chase-Dunn is a member of the editorial board of Social Evolution & History journal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Archaeology Data Service Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christopher_Chase-Dunn&oldid=1261089775 " Categories : Living people 1944 births World system scholars American sociologists Stanford University alumni Johns Hopkins University faculty University of California, Riverside faculty Writers from Corvallis, Oregon Writers about globalization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from October 2013 All BLP articles lacking sources Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from October 2013 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 4 December 2024, at 05:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christopher Chase-Dunn 6 languages Add topic

