Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Theory 3 Variants Toggle Variants subsection 3.1 Impossibilism 3.2 Leninism and Stalinism 3.3 Trotskyism 3.4 Anti-revisionism 3.5 Instrumental Marxism 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Orthodox Marxism 15 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Русский Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Orthodox Marxist ) Body of Marxist thought, prominent until World War I Not to be confused with Classical Marxism or Marxism–Leninism .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Orthodox Marxism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Orthodox Marxism is the body of Marxist thought which emerged after the deaths of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in the late 19th century, expressed in its primary form by Karl Kautsky .

[ 1 ] Kautsky's views of Marxism dominated the European Marxist movement for two decades, and orthodox Marxism was the official philosophy of the majority of the socialist movement as represented in the Second International until the First World War in 1914, whose outbreak caused Kautsky's influence to wane and brought to prominence the orthodoxy of Vladimir Lenin . Orthodox Marxism aimed to simplify, codify and systematize Marxist method and theory by clarifying perceived ambiguities and contradictions in classical Marxism .

Orthodox Marxism maintained that Marx's historical materialism was a science which revealed the laws of history and proved that the collapse of capitalism and its replacement by socialism were inevitable. The implications of this deterministic view were that history could not be "hurried" and that politically workers and workers' parties must wait for the material economic conditions to be met before the revolutionary transformation of society could take place.

[ 2 ] For example, this idea saw the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) adopt a gradualist approach, taking advantage of bourgeois parliamentary democracy to improve the lives of workers until capitalism was brought down by its objective internal contradictions.

The use of "orthodox" to refer to Kautsky's line is primarily to distinguish it from the reformism of Eduard Bernstein . Such " revisionists " were reviled by the orthodox Marxists for breaking with Marx's thought.

History [ edit ] The emergence of orthodox Marxism is associated with the latter works of Friedrich Engels , such as the Dialectics of Nature and Socialism: Utopian and Scientific , which were efforts to popularise the work of Karl Marx, render it systematic and apply it to the fundamental questions of philosophy.

[ 3 ] Daniel De Leon , an early American socialist leader, contributed much to the thought during the final years of the 19th century and the early 20th century. Orthodox Marxism was further developed during the Second International by thinkers such as Georgi Plekhanov and Karl Kautsky in Erfurt Program and The Class Struggle (Erfurt Program) .

Karl Kautsky is recognized as the most authoritative promulgator of orthodox Marxism following the death of Engels in 1895. As an advisor to August Bebel , leader of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) until Bebel's death in 1913 and as editor of Die Neue Zeit from 1883 till 1917, he was known as the "Pope of Marxism". He was removed as editor by the leadership of the SPD when the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) split away from the SPD.

Kautskyism , based on his interpretations of Marxism, became a significant ideological current within socialist thought.

[ 4 ] Kautsky was an outspoken critic of Bolshevism and Leninism, seeing the Bolsheviks (or Communists as they had renamed themselves after 1917) as an organization that had gained power by a coup and initiated revolutionary changes for which there was no economic rationale in Russia.

[ citation needed ] Kautsky was also opposed to Eduard Bernstein's reformist politics in the period 1896–1901.

[ citation needed ] Menshevism refers to the political positions taken by the Menshevik faction of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party prior to the October Revolution of 1917. The Mensheviks believed that socialism could not be realized in Russia due to its backwards economic conditions and that Russia would first have to experience a bourgeois revolution and go through a capitalist stage of development before socialism became technically possible and before the working class could develop the class consciousness for a socialist revolution .

[ 5 ] The Mensheviks were thus opposed to the Bolshevik idea of a vanguard party and their pursuit of socialist revolution in semi-feudal Russia.

Theory [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The characteristics of orthodox Marxism are: A strong version of the theory that the economic base (material conditions) determines the cultural and political superstructure of society. In its most extensive form, this view is called economic determinism , economism and vulgar materialism . A related variation is that of technological determinism .

The view that capitalism cannot be reformed through policy and that any attempt to do so would only exacerbate its contradictions or distort the efficiency of the market economy (in contrast to reformism ). Orthodox Marxism holds that the only viable and lasting solution to the contradictions of capitalism is for the establishment of a post-capitalist socialist economy .

The centrality of class as a process and the view that existing policymakers and government is largely and structurally beholden to the interests of the ruling class .

[ 6 ] This view is called instrumental Marxism .

[ citation needed ] The claim that Marxist methodology is a science (a concept captured by Marx and especially Engels' idea of scientific socialism ).

The attempt to make Marxism a total system, adapting it to changes within the realm of current events and knowledge. (This system would come to be known as historical materialism or dialectical materialism .) An understanding of ideology in terms of false consciousness .

That every open class struggle is a political struggle.

Orthodox Marxism is contrasted with revisionist Marxism .

[ 7 ] Some writers also contrast it with Marxism–Leninism as it developed in the Soviet Union, [ citation needed ] while others describe the latter as firmly within orthodoxy: Orthodox Marxism rested on and grew out of the European working class movement that emerged in the final quarter of the 19th century and continued in that form until the middle years of the twentieth century. Its two institutional expressions were the 2nd and 3rd Internationals , which despite the great schism in 1919, were marked by a shared conception of capital and labour .

Trotskyism and Left communism were equally orthodox in their thinking and approach, and must be considered left variants of this tradition.

[ 8 ] [ better source needed ] Two variants of orthodox Marxism are impossibilism and anti-revisionism . Impossibilism is a form of orthodox Marxism that both rejects the reformism of revisionist Marxism and opposes the Leninist theories of imperialism, vanguardism and democratic centralism (which argue that socialism can be constructed in underdeveloped, quasi-feudal countries through revolutionary action as opposed to being an emergent result of advances in material development). An extreme form of this position is held by the Socialist Party of Great Britain .

[ 9 ] In contrast, the anti-revisionist tradition criticised official Communist parties from the opposite perspective as having abandoned the orthodox Marxism of the founders.

Variants [ edit ] See also: Marxist schools of thought A number of theoretical perspectives and political movements emerged that were firmly rooted in orthodox Marxist analysis, as contrasted with later interpretations and alternative developments in Marxist theory and practice such as Marxism–Leninism , revisionism and reformism.

Impossibilism [ edit ] Main article: Impossibilism Impossibilism stresses the limited value of economic, social, cultural and political reforms under capitalism and posits that socialists and Marxists should solely focus on efforts to propagate and establish socialism, disregarding any other cause that has no connection to the goal of the realization of socialism.

[ 10 ] Impossibilism posits that reforms to capitalism are counterproductive because they strengthen support for capitalism by the working class by making its conditions more tolerable while creating further contradictions of their own, [ 11 ] [ 12 ] while removing the socialist character of the parties championing and implementing said reforms. Because reforms cannot solve the systemic contradictions of capitalism, impossibilism opposes reformism, revisionism and ethical socialism.

[ 13 ] [ 11 ] Impossibilism also opposes the idea of a vanguard-led revolution and the centralization of political power in any elite group of people as espoused by Leninism and Marxism–Leninism.

[ citation needed ] This perspective is maintained by the World Socialist Movement , De Leonism , and to some extent followers of Karl Kautsky and pre-reformist social democracy.

[ citation needed ] Leninism and Stalinism [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main articles: Leninism , Marxism-Leninism , and Stalinism Kautsky and to a lesser extent Plekhanov were in turn major influences on Vladimir Lenin , whose version of Marxism was known as Leninism by its contemporaries. Whereas the generation of orthodox Marxists before Marx, such as Plekhanov, believed that Imperial Russia was too backwards for the development of socialism and would first have to undergo a capitalist (bourgeois) phase of development even if a Marxist party would head its government, Lenin urged a socialist revolution in Russia to inspire a socialist revolution in Germany and in the majority of the developed countries. His and Bukharin's New Economic Policy was to develop capitalism in Russia initially.

[ 14 ] Stalin, proposing the possibility of socialism in a single country , went further, arguing that socialism could be rapidly built by the party state.

Stalin's body of thought is known as Stalinism . The official thought of the Third International was based in orthodox Marxism combined with Lenin's and Stalin's views on revolutionary organization initially.

[ citation needed ] The terms dialectical materialism and historical materialism are associated with this phase of orthodox Marxism.

Trotskyism [ edit ] Main article: Trotskyism This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The tradition founded by Leon Trotsky purports that the USSR was a " degenerated workers' state " on the basis that, although maintaining that it held onto some aspects of a revolutionary workers' state (such as state control of foreign trade or the expropriation of the bourgeoisie), it lacked key aspects it used to have, namely soviet democracy and freedom of organization for workers, which only benefitted a bureaucracy led by Joseph Stalin . In his book The Revolution Betrayed , Trotsky supports a multi-party democratic model of revolutionary organizations and proposes a solution for the USSR's bureaucratic caste, that of a political revolution that reinstates those aspects the bureaucrats erased. Trotskyists maintain that the countries of the Eastern bloc, China , North Korea , Vietnam , Cuba and others were " deformed workers' states " which needed political revolutions while critically defending these countries from imperialist aggressions.

Anti-revisionism [ edit ] Main article: Anti-Revisionism (Marxism-Leninism) Anti-revisionists (which includes radical Marxist–Leninist factions, Hoxhaists and Maoists ) criticize the rule of the communist states by claiming that they were state capitalist states ruled by revisionists .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Though the periods and countries defined as state capitalist or revisionist varies among different ideologies and parties, all of them accept that the Soviet Union was socialist during Stalin's time.

Maoists view the Soviet Union and most of its satellites as "state capitalist" as a result of de-Stalinization ; some of them also view modern China in this light, believing that the People's Republic of China became state capitalist after Mao's death. Hoxhaists believe that the People's Republic of China was always state capitalist and uphold Socialist Albania as the only socialist state after the Soviet Union under Stalin.

[ 17 ] Instrumental Marxism [ edit ] Main article: Instrumental Marxism Instrumental Marxism is a theory derived from classical Marxism which reasons that policy makers in government and positions of power tend to "share a common business or class background, and that their decisions will reflect their business or class interests".

[ 6 ] Criticism [ edit ] There have been a number of criticisms of orthodox Marxism from within the socialist movement. From the 1890s during the Second International, Eduard Bernstein and others developed a position known as revisionism , which sought to revise Marx's views based on the idea that the progressive development of capitalism and the extension of democracy meant that gradual, parliamentary reform could achieve socialism.

[ citation needed ] But Bernstein himself was a revolutionary and joined the Independent Social Democratic Party in Germany which advocated for a socialist republic in 1918. This view was contested by orthodox Marxists such as Kautsky as well as by the young György Lukács , who in 1919 clarified the definition of orthodox Marxism as thus: [O]rthodoxy refers exclusively to method. It is the scientific conviction that dialectical materialism is the road to truth and that its methods can be developed, expanded and deepened only along the lines laid down by its founders. It is the conviction, moreover, that all attempts to surpass or 'improve' it have led and must lead to over-simplification, triviality and eclecticism.

[ 18 ] Western Marxism , the intellectual Marxism which developed in Western Europe from the 1920s onwards, sought to make Marxism more "sophisticated", open and flexible by examining issues like culture that were outside the field of orthodox Marxism. Western Marxists, such as György Lukács , Karl Korsch , Antonio Gramsci and the Frankfurt School , have tended to be open to influences orthodox Marxists consider bourgeois , such as psychoanalysis and the sociology of Max Weber . Marco Torres illustrates the shift away from orthodox Marxism in the Frankfurt School: In the early 1920s, the original members of the Frankfurt Institute—half forgotten names such as Carl Grünberg , Henryk Grossman and Karl August Wittfogel , were social scientists of an orthodox Marxist conviction. They understood their task as an advancement of the sciences that would prove useful in solving the problems of a Europe-wide transition into socialism, which they saw, if not as inevitable, at least as highly likely. But as fascism reared its head in Germany and throughout Europe, the younger members of the Institute saw the necessity for a different kind of Marxist Scholarship. Beyond accumulating knowledge relevant to an orthodox Marxist line, they felt the need to take the more critical and negative approach that is required for the maintenance of an integral and penetrating understanding of society during a moment of reaction. This could be described as the politically necessary transition from Marxist positive science to Critical Theory .

[ 19 ] In parallel to this, Cedric Robinson has identified a Black Marxist tradition , including people like C.L.R. James , Walter Rodney and W. E. B. Du Bois , who have opened Marxism to the study of race, "stretching" it beyond orthodox Marxism.

[ 20 ] In the postwar period, the New Left and new social movements gave rise to intellectual and political currents which again challenged orthodox Marxism.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] These include Italian autonomism , [ 25 ] French Situationism , the Yugoslavian Praxis School , British cultural studies , [ 21 ] Marxist feminism , Marxist humanism , analytical Marxism and critical realism .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Left communism Materialist conception of history Marxian economics Marxist revisionism Real socialism Scientific socialism Technological determinism References [ edit ] ^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism: The Founders, the Golden age, the Breakdown . Translated by Falla, P. S. New York: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

OCLC 213085194 .

^ Rees, John (July 1998).

The Algebra of Revolution: The Dialectic and the Classical Marxist Tradition .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0415198776 .

^ Mendelson, Jack (1979). "On Engels' metaphysical dialectics: A foundation of orthodox "Marxism" ".

Dialectical Anthropology .

4 (1): 65– 73.

doi : 10.1007/BF00417685 .

S2CID 145499456 .

^ Kautsky, John Hans (1994).

Karl Kautsky: Marxism, Revolution, and Democracy .

Routledge . p. 164.

^ "Menshevik" .

Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved 9 October 2013 .

^ a b Goldstein, Joshua S.

(2004). Whitworth, Sandra (ed.).

International Relations (Canadian ed.). Toronto: Pearson Education . p. 147.

^ Wiener, Philip P.

(ed.).

Dictionary of the History of Ideas . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons .

, in Kindersley, R. K. (1973–74).

Marxist revisionism: From Bernstein to modern forms . Retrieved 28 April 2008 – via University of Virginia Library.

^ Rooke, Mike.

"Marxism is Dead! Long Live Marxism!" .

What Next Journal . Archived from the original on 5 May 2013.

^ Howard, M.C.; King, J. E.

"State Capitalism in the Soviet Union" (PDF) .

History of Economics Review . Thought Society of Australia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 February 2021.

The same point was made, in the United Kingdom, by the leadership of the remorselessly orthodox Socialist Party of Great Britain.

^ "Impossiblism" .

Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b Browne, Waldo R., ed. (1921). "Impossiblism, Impossibilist".

What's What in the Labor Movement: A Dictionary of Labor Affairs and Labor Terminology . New York: B. W. Huebsch . p. 215.

^ Marx, Karl ; Engels, Friedrich (March 1850).

"Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League" .

Marxists Internet Archive . London . Retrieved 5 January 2013 .

However, the democratic petty bourgeois want better wages and security for the workers, and hope to achieve this by an extension of state employment and by welfare measures; in short, they hope to bribe the workers with a more or less disguised form of alms and to break their revolutionary strength by temporarily rendering their situation tolerable.

^ Rosenstone, Robert (November 1978).

"Why is there no socialism in the United States?" .

Reviews in American History . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2024.

^ Steele, David Ramsay (September 1999).

From Marx to Mises: Post-Capitalist Society and the Challenge of Economic Calculation . Open Court. p. 67.

ISBN 978-0875484495 .

Lenin is urging a socialist revolution in Russia, against the traditional Marxists who argue that Russia is too backwards for anything but a bourgeois revolution.

^ "Restoration of Capitalism in the Soviet Union" .

Archived from the original on 13 January 2016 . Retrieved 15 April 2016 .

^ "A Critique of Soviet Economics" .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 April 2016 .

^ "Class Struggles in China by Bill Bland" .

Archived from the original on 6 June 2010 . Retrieved 18 September 2010 .

^ Lukács, Georg (1967) [1919].

"What is Orthodox Marxism?" .

History & Class Consciousness . Translated by Livingstone, Rodney.

Merlin Press – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Orthodox Marxism, therefore, does not imply the uncritical acceptance of the results of Marx's investigations. It is not the 'belief' in this or that thesis, nor the exegesis of a 'sacred' book. On the contrary, orthodoxy refers exclusively to method.

^ Torres, Marco (1 May 2008).

"The science that wasn't: The orthodox Marxism of the early Frankfurt School and the turn to Marxist Critical Theory" .

Platypus .

^ Alagraa, Bedour (2018).

"Cedric Robinson's Black Marxism: Thirty-Five Years Later" .

The CLR James Journal .

24 (1/2). Philosophy Documentation Center: 301– 312.

ISSN 2167-4256 .

JSTOR 26752191 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 .

we should read Robinson's intervention as an interruption of Western episteme as a general order of knowledge. Orthodox Marxism, according to Robinson, contributed to a conception of Man that placed other forms of difference, such as race, as epiphenomenal and thus, at the periphery...  What does it mean to offer Black radicalism as a logical outcome of a refusal of Western epistemic framings, including Marxism, when many of the thinkers he invokes never rejected Marxism, but rather, 'stretched' Marxism (to borrow from Fanon's declaration)... The Black radical tradition is therefore not an addendum to Marxist theory, it makes up part of a world that is manifested by its blind spots, and reveals to us, that we do not need to adhere to orthodox Marxism in order to think dialectically.

^ a b Davis, Madeleine (1 October 2006). "The Marxism of the British New Left".

Journal of Political Ideologies .

11 (3): 335– 358.

doi : 10.1080/13569310600923949 .

ISSN 1356-9317 .

^ Copello, David (27 May 2021). "The 'invention' of human rights as a revolutionary concept: Confronting orthodox Marxism and the New Left (Argentina, 1972)".

Journal of Human Rights .

20 (3): 304– 317.

doi : 10.1080/14754835.2020.1868295 .

ISSN 1475-4835 .

^ Efstathiou, Christos (2 October 2014).

"E. P. Thompson's Concept of Class Formation and its Political Implications: Echoes of Popular Front Radicalism in The Making of the English Working Class" .

Contemporary British History .

28 (4): 404– 421.

doi : 10.1080/13619462.2014.962907 .

ISSN 1361-9462 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 .

^ Klare, Karl E. (1971).

"THE CRITIQUE OF EVERYDAY LIFE, MARXISM, AND THE NEW LEFT" .

Berkeley Journal of Sociology .

16 . Regents of the University of California: 15– 45.

ISSN 0067-5830 .

JSTOR 40999912 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 .

^ Pitts, Frederick Harry (16 March 2024).

"From the age of immanence to the autonomy of the political: (Post)operaismo in theory and practice" .

Philosophy & Social Criticism .

doi : 10.1177/01914537241240430 .

hdl : 10871/135460 .

ISSN 0191-4537 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marxism .

Lukács What is Orthodox Marxism (1919) v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8klz6
Cached time: 20250812042638
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.758 seconds
Real time usage: 0.925 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4506/1000000
Revision size: 27541/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 186240/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7146/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 24/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 135395/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.465/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8783860/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  753.902      1 -total
 34.42%  259.464      1 Template:Reflist
 17.07%  128.698      9 Template:Cite_book
 16.75%  126.255      1 Template:Marxism
 16.22%  122.268      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.70%   65.609     10 Template:Fix
  8.23%   62.026      7 Template:Cn
  8.10%   61.048      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.06%   60.796      9 Template:Cite_journal
  7.94%   59.875      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43350024:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812042638 and revision id 1297106286. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Orthodox_Marxism&oldid=1297106286 " Categories : Economic ideologies Eponymous political ideologies Marxist schools of thought Orthodox Marxists Sociological theories Types of socialism Hidden categories: CS1: abbreviated year range Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2018 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles needing additional references from August 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from October 2017 Articles needing additional references from February 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 05:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Orthodox Marxism 15 languages Add topic

