Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 References Toggle References subsection 2.1 Notes 2.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Acron 8 languages العربية Català Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Italiano Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek physician This article is about the Greek physician. For other uses, see Acron (disambiguation) .

Acron Acron ( Ancient Greek : Ἄκρων ), son of Zeno of Elea , [ 1 ] was a Greek physician born at Agrigentum (Gk. Acragas) in Magna Graecia .

Life [ edit ] The exact dates of Acron is not known; but, as he is mentioned as being contemporary with Empedocles , who died about the beginning of the Peloponnesian War , he must have lived in the fifth century BC. From Sicily he went to Athens and there opened a philosophical school ( ἐσοφίστευεν ).

It is said that Acron was in that city during the great plague (430 BC) and that large fires  kindled in the streets at his direction for the purpose of purifying the air proved of great service to several of the sick.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] There is, however, no mention of this in Thucydides , [ 6 ] and if Empedocles or Simonides (d. 467 BC) in fact wrote the epitaph on Acron, he may not have been in Athens during the plague.

On Acron's return to his native country, the physician asked the senate for a spot of ground where he might build a family tomb. The request was refused at the suggestion of Empedocles, who conceived that such a grant for such a purpose would interfere with the principle of equality that he was anxious to establish at Agrigentum. Because the ironic epitaph on the "Acragantine Acron" is among the most replete jeux de mot on record, it so challenges translation that it will be given in Greek to preserve the paronomasia of the original: ἄκρον ἱητρὸν Ἄκρων' Ἀκραγαντῖνον πατρὸς ἄκρου κρύπτει κρημνὸς ἄκρος πατρίδος ἀκροτάτης The second line was sometimes read thus: ἀκροτάτης κορυφῆς τύμβος ἄκρος κατέχει More or less: "The lofty physician Loftyman of Loftyville, son of a lofty father, is hidden here under a lofty crag in the loftiest of fatherlands," or "is covered by the lofty tomb of a very lofty peak." Some attributed the whole epigram to Simonides .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Pliny considers Acron as the first of the Empirics .

[ 10 ] But this has been considered an error, for the sect alluded to did not arise until the third century BC, roughly 200 years after the time of Acron. Some scholars consider that the sect of the Empirici , in order to boast of a greater antiquity than the Dogmatics (founded about 400 BC by Thessalus the son and Polybus the son-in-law of Hippocrates ), merely claimed Acron as their founder.

[ 11 ] None of Acron's works are now extant, though he wrote several in the Doric dialect on medical and physical subjects, the titles of which are preserved by the Suda and Eudocia.

[ 12 ] References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ LinkedIn ^ Plutarch , De Iside et Osiride 80 ^ Oribasius , Synops.

6.24, p. 97 ^ Aëtius Amidenus , tetrab. 2, serm. 1.94, p. 223 ^ Paul Aegin. 2.35, p. 406 ^ Thucydides 2.49 &c.

^ Suda s.v.

Ἄκρων ^ Eudoc., Violar.

ap. Villoison, Anecd. Gr.

1.49 ^ Diogenes Laërtius 8.65 ^ Pliny the Elder , Naturalis historia 29.1 ^ Pseudo-Gal., Introd.

4, vol. xiv, p. 683 ^ Greenhill, William Alexander (1867), "Acron (2)" , in Smith, William (ed.), Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology , vol. 1, Boston, MA, pp.

14– 15 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Sources [ edit ] Rose, Hugh James (1857).

"Acron" .

A New General Biographical Dictionary . Vol. 1  AA–ANS. London: B. Fellowes et al. pp.

79– 80.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Acron (2)".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Vatican People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Acron&oldid=1290102340 " Categories : 5th-century BC Greek physicians Ancient Acragantines Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the New General Biography Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 20:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Acron 8 languages Add topic

