Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Scientific work 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Vladimir Fock 33 languages العربية Asturianu تۆرکجه Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian physicist (1898–1974) Vladimir Fock Born ( 1898-12-22 ) December 22, 1898 St. Petersburg , Russia Died December 27, 1974 (1974-12-27) (aged 76) St. Petersburg (Leningrad) , Russia Alma mater Petrograd University Known for Fock space Fock state Fock matrix Fock representation Fock–Lorentz symmetry Fock–Schwinger gauge Klein–Fock–Gordon equation Hartree–Fock method Mehler–Fock transform Adiabatic theorem Creeping wave Relativistic dynamics Scientific career Fields Physicist and mathematician Institutions Petrograd University State Institute of Optics Leningrad Institute of Physics and Technology Lebedev Physical Institute Notable students A. D. Aleksandrov F. I. Fedorov Yu. A. Yappa Vladimir Aleksandrovich Fock (or Fok ; Russian : Влади́мир Алекса́ндрович Фок ) (December 22, 1898 – December 27, 1974) was a Soviet physicist, who did foundational work on quantum mechanics and quantum electrodynamics .

Biography [ edit ] He was born in St. Petersburg, Russia . In 1922 he graduated from Petrograd University , then continued postgraduate studies there. He became a professor there in 1932. In 1919–1923 and 1928–1941 he collaborated with the Vavilov State Optical Institute , in 1924–1936 with the Leningrad Institute of Physics and Technology , in 1934–1941 and 1944–1953 with the Lebedev Physical Institute .

Scientific work [ edit ] His primary scientific contribution lies in the development of quantum physics and the theory of gravitation, although he also contributed significantly to the fields of mechanics, theoretical optics, and physics of continuous media. In 1926, he derived the Klein–Gordon equation . He gave his name to Fock space , the Fock representation and Fock state , and developed the Hartree–Fock method in 1930. He made many subsequent scientific contributions during the rest of his life. Fock developed the electromagnetic methods for geophysical exploration in a book The theory of the study of the rocks resistance by the carottage method (1933), methods called well logging in modern literature.

Fock made significant contributions to general relativity theory, specifically for the many-body problems. Fock criticised on scientific grounds both Einstein's general principle of relativity , as being devoid of physical substance, and the equivalence principle , as interpreted as the equivalence of gravitation and acceleration, as having only a local validity.

In Leningrad, Fock created a scientific school in theoretical physics and raised the physics education in the USSR through his books. He wrote the first textbook on quantum mechanics Fundamentals of Quantum Mechanics (1931, 1978) and a very influential monograph The Theory of Space, Time and Gravitation (1955).

Historians of science, such as Loren Graham , see Fock as a representative and proponent of Einstein's theory of relativity within the Soviet world. At a time when most Marxist philosophers objected to relativity theory, Fock emphasized a materialistic understanding of relativity that coincided philosophically with Marxism.

He was a full member ( academician ) of the USSR Academy of Sciences (1939) and a member of the International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science .

A memorial coin with Fock being second from the right See also [ edit ] List of things named after Vladimir Fock References [ edit ] Graham, L. (1982). "The reception of Einstein's ideas: Two examples from contrasting political cultures". In Holton, G. and Elkana, Y. (Eds.) Albert Einstein: Historical and cultural perspectives . Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP, pp. 107–136 Fock, V. A. (1964). "The Theory of Space, Time and Gravitation". Macmillan.

External links [ edit ] Oral history interview transcript with Vladimir Fok on 11 October 1967, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library & Archives Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vladimir_Fock&oldid=1301612669 " Categories : 1898 births 1974 deaths Saint Petersburg State University alumni Academic staff of Saint Petersburg State University Russian people of German descent Scientists from Saint Petersburg Full Members of the USSR Academy of Sciences Members of the International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science Soviet physicists Members of the German Academy of Sciences at Berlin Russian scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Russian-language text This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 19:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vladimir Fock 33 languages Add topic

