Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Some deterministic systems 2 Non-deterministic systems 3 Systems with controversial classification 4 The entire universe 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Deterministic system (philosophy) 1 language 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Causality and Determinisim This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Deterministic system" philosophy – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2025 ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A deterministic system [ 1 ] is a conceptual model of the philosophical doctrine of determinism applied to a system for understanding everything that has and will occur in the system, based on the physical outcomes of causality . In a deterministic system, every action, or cause, produces a reaction, or effect, and every reaction, in turn, becomes the cause of subsequent reactions. The totality of these cascading events can theoretically show exactly how the system will exist at any moment in time.

To understand this concept, start with a fairly small system.  Visualize a set of three dominoes lined up in a row with each domino less than a domino's length away from its neighbors. Once the first domino has toppled, the third domino will topple because the second will topple upon being contacted by the first domino.

Small deterministic systems are easy to visualize, but are necessarily linked to the rest of reality by an initial cause and/or final effect.  To go back to the dominoes, something outside the system has to cause the first domino to topple.  The last domino falling might cause something else outside the system to happen.  And the system itself must be considered in isolation: if external forces such as hurricanes, earthquakes, or the hands of nearby people were taken into consideration, the final domino toppling might not be a predetermined outcome.  Complete isolation of a system is unrealistic, but useful for understanding what would normally happen to a system when the possibility of external influences is negligible.  Complex physical systems are necessarily built using simpler ones, and using isolated systems as a starting model can help bridge the gap, and aid in understanding. The domino example is developed in the Petri net computational model.

This example assumes that dominoes toppling into each other behave deterministically.  Even the above-mentioned external forces which might interrupt the system are causes which the system did not consider, but which could be explained by cause and effect in a larger deterministic system.

Some deterministic systems [ edit ] Classical physics is the deterministic system assumed in the domino example which scientists can use to describe all events which take place on a scale larger than individual atoms.  Classical physics includes Newton's laws of motion , Classical electrodynamics , thermodynamics , the Special theory of relativity , the General theory of relativity , chaos theory and nonlinear dynamics .  Some of these systems are complex, and events may be difficult to predict in practice, but if the starting conditions were known in enough detail, the outcomes of events in such systems could be predicted.

Nearly all electronic computers in use today are based on theoretical von Neumann computers or Turing machines , i.e.: they are devices that perform one small, deterministic step at a time. If all inputs are specified, the computer will always produce a particular output which is calculated deterministically. Computer scientists also study other models of computation including parallel computers (more than one deterministic step at a time), and quantum computers (which are based on non-deterministic quantum mechanical models). Computer systems or programs are often described as non-deterministic if their behavior depends on factors that cannot be predicted or reliably reproduced, such as the time of day or the speed at which the user enters data at the keyboard. This, however, is a somewhat different usage of the term.

Behaviorism , an approach to psychology based on the proposition that behavior can be researched scientifically without recourse to inner mental states, is usually considered to be deterministic and opposed to free will.

Non-deterministic systems [ edit ] Events without natural causes cannot be part of a deterministic system. Whether such events actually occur is a matter of philosophical and scientific debate – however, possible uncaused events include: Random Quantum events Quantum physics holds that certain events such as radioactive decay and movement of particles are completely random when taken at the level of single atoms or smaller.

Schrödinger's cat is a famous thought experiment in which a cat's survival cannot be determined theoretically before the experiment is done.  For almost all everyday non-microscopic occurrences, however, the probability of such random events is extremely close to zero, and can be approximated to almost certainty with statistics using the correspondence principle .  The philosophical consequences of quantum physics were once considered by many (including Albert Einstein ) to be a major problem for the scientific method which traditionally used a strong version of scientific determinism (see Philosophy of science ).

Systems with controversial classification [ edit ] Some systems are particularly difficult to classify as deterministic or not, and have generated much philosophical debate.  The major example would be human minds, and possibly animal minds too.  Can people have free will if their minds are truly deterministic?  Conversely, when deterministic computers are said to exhibit artificial intelligence , how are their minds similar to ours?

The entire universe [ edit ] The larger the deterministic system, the longer the necessary chain of cause and effect.  The entire universe may be considered as such a system, which creates its own philosophical questions (see Determinism ).

See also [ edit ] Chaos theory Classical mechanics Classical physics Philosophy of science Quantum indeterminacy Quantum mechanics Quantum mind Scientific determinism Uncertainty principle Indeterminacy References [ edit ] ^ "Determinism" (PDF) .

philsci-archive.pitt.edu . Retrieved 15 January 2025 .

v t e Determinism Types Architectural Biological Cultural Economic Environmental Genetic Historical Linguistic Nominative Psychic Psychological Reciprocal Social Technological Theological Related topics Causality Proximate and ultimate causation Correlation does not imply causation Contingency (philosophy) Etiology Cause (medicine) Falliblism Illusionism Destiny Deterministic system Essentialism and non-essentialism Fatalism Free will Compatibilism Hard determinism Indeterminism Predeterminism Metaphysical necessity Necessitarianism Superdeterminism Uncertainty principle Libertarianism (metaphysics) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deterministic_system_(philosophy)&oldid=1269600547 " Categories : Determinism Systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2025 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2023 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 15 January 2025, at 13:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deterministic system (philosophy) 1 language Add topic

