Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Exploration 2 Climate 3 Fauna 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Antarctic Plateau 29 languages العربية Català Cebuano Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 77°00′S 150°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 77.000°S 150.000°E ﻿ / -77.000; 150.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of East Antarctica This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Antarctic Plateau" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The high, flat, and cold environment of the Antarctic Plateau at Dome C Surface of Antarctic Plateau, at 150E, 77S The Antarctic Plateau , Polar Plateau or King Haakon VII Plateau is a large area of East Antarctica that extends over a diameter of about 1,000 kilometres (620 mi), and includes the region of the geographic South Pole and the Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station . This huge continental plateau is at an average elevation of about 3,000 metres (9,800 ft).

[ citation needed ] Exploration [ edit ] This plateau was first sighted in 1903 during the Discovery Expedition to the Antarctic, which was led by Robert Falcon Scott .

Ernest Shackleton became the first to cross parts of this plateau in 1909 during his Nimrod Expedition , which turned back in bad weather when it had reached a point  97 nautical miles (180 km; 112 mi) from the South Pole . Shackleton named this plateau the King Edward VII Plateau in honour of the king of the United Kingdom . In December 1911, while returning from the first journey to the South Pole , the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen decided to name this plateau the King Haakon VII Plateau in honour of the newly elected king of Norway.

The Antarctic Plateau was first observed and photographed from the air in 1929 by a Ford Trimotor aeroplane carrying four men on the first flight to the South Pole and back to the seacoast. The chief pilot of this flight was Bernt Balchen , a native of Norway , and the navigator and chief organizer of this expedition was Richard E. Byrd of Virginia , an officer in the U.S. Navy . The other two members of its crew were the co-pilot and the photographer.

Climate [ edit ] The high elevations of the Antarctic Plateau, combined with its high latitudes and its extremely long, sunless winters, mean that the temperatures here are the lowest in the world in most years, falling as low as −92 °C (−134 °F).

[ 1 ] Fauna [ edit ] The nearly continuous frigid winds that blow across the Antarctic Plateau, especially in the austral winter, make the environment inhospitable to life.

Microbial abundance is low (<103 cells/ml of snowmelt ). The microbial community is mainly composed of members of the Alphaproteobacteria class (e.g.

Kiloniellaceae and Rhodobacteraceae ), which is one of the most well-represented bacterial groups in marine habitats; Bacteroidota (e.g.

Cryomorphaceae and Flavobacteriaceae ); and Cyanobacteria . According to research, polar microorganisms should be considered as not only deposited airborne particles, but also as active components of the snowpack ecology of the Antarctic Plateau.

[ 2 ] No penguins live on the Antarctic Plateau, and few birds routinely fly over it, except mostly Antarctic petrels , snow petrels and south polar skuas . There are very few land animals anywhere on the plateau, or the Antarctic in general; nematodes , springtails , mites , midges , humans and dogs.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station Dome A Dome C Concordia Station Dome F East Antarctic Ice Sheet Gamburtsev Mountain Range Plateau Station Pole of Inaccessibility (Antarctic research station) Ridge A Roald Amundsen Vostok Station References [ edit ] ^ "What is the hottest place on Earth?" .

NASA Science . 10 December 2013 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 .

^ Michaud L, Lo Giudice A, Mysara M, Monsieurs P, Raffa C, Leys N, et al. (2014) Snow Surface Microbiome on the high Antarctic Plateau (DOME C).

PLoS ONE 9(8): e104505.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0104505 77°00′S 150°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 77.000°S 150.000°E ﻿ / -77.000; 150.000 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antarctic_Plateau&oldid=1293086441 " Categories : Plateaus of Antarctica East Antarctica Landforms of Queen Maud Land Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2009 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 16:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antarctic Plateau 29 languages Add topic

