Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Strategies Toggle Strategies subsection 2.1 Integrated marketing campaigns 2.2 Individualism 2.3 Brand image 3 Three categories of postmodern marketing Toggle Three categories of postmodern marketing subsection 3.1 The idea of change, new and complex 3.2 Sub-discipline of consumer research 3.3 Marketing practices and research methodologies 4 Modern marketing approach vs. postmodern marketing approach 5 Myths 6 Conditions 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Postmodern marketing 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marketing Management Key concepts Account-based marketing · Activation · Annoyance factor · Attribution · Distribution · Brand licensing · Brand management · Cannibalization · Co-creation · Communications · Consumer behaviour · Consumer culture · Digital marketing · Dominance · Effectiveness · Ethics · Horizontal integration · Influencer marketing · Mix · Pricing · Product marketing · Promotion · Retail · Segmentation · Service · Social marketing · Strategy · Vertical integration Promotional content Advertising · Ambush marketing · Branding · Corporate anniversary · Direct marketing · Franchising · Gender in advertising · Label · Loyalty marketing · Mobile marketing · On-hold messaging · Personal selling · Premiums · Prizes · Product placement · Propaganda · Publicity · Sales promotion · Sex in advertising · Underwriting spot Promotional media Behavioral targeting · Brand ambassador · Counter display unit · Display advertising · Display stand · Drip marketing · Endcap · Gondola · In-game advertising · Mobile advertising · Native advertising · New media · Online advertising · Out-of-home advertising · Point of sale · Product demonstration · Promotional merchandise (merchandising) · Promotional representative · Visual merchandising · Web banner · Word-of-mouth Research Market research · Marketing research · Mystery shopping · Consumer research v t e Postmodern marketing is a term derived from postmodern philosophical movements where there are cultural tendencies of inherent suspicion towards a global cultural narrative or meta-narrative.  Postmodern marketing takes this same philosophical perspective and applies it to the way advertising initiatives are handled in the current post-World War II era.  Postmodern marketing is approaching or has passed through a new era in advertising , branding , and strategic brand thinking.

[ 1 ] Postmodern marketing is inherently focused on customized experiences where broad market generalizations are no-longer applied or implemented on behalf of branded communications.

[ 2 ] Instead, the technique requires marketers to remove "new aged adlandia" trends and developments to focus on how the consumer prefers to be messaged to.

As a result, the ad aged "art and science" debate around creative , media , marketing and branding are put to an end.  With a postmodern marketing approach a one-to-one communication is created between real humans, controlling real mouses, real computers, real keyboards and real mobile telephones .

Origins [ edit ] The development of postmodern marketing is built on the foundations of modern marketing (with analysis, planning, implementation and control deeply rooted in its process).

[ 2 ] Postmodern marketing however, acts more of a collection of approaches in the need to stay nimble, reactive and able to engage and shift with consumers from a non-definitive point of view.  Postmodern marketing saw great acceptance in the early 1990s with the emerging developments of the Splinternet and marketers realization that "traditional" strategic practices like Porters five forces, the Wheel of Retailing, and the Boston Matrix had become outdated and not able to keep up with or report on consumer media habits, creative tone, and umbrella branding techniques.

[ 2 ] As a result, postmodern marketing was born.

Strategies [ edit ] In the context of marketing strategy, postmodern marketing refers to the cultural, societal, and strategic evolution of marketing practices [ 3 ] The introduction of postmodern marketing strategies has major implications for traditional marketing techniques. Because postmodern marketing requires a deep understanding of a brand's target audience, the targeting strategy must change.

[ 4 ] Integrated marketing campaigns [ edit ] A cornerstone of postmodern marketing is the integrated marketing campaign. Integrated marketing campaigns combine multiple channels of marketing materials such as email, print displays, social media and sales promotions to maintain a consistent message across the entire campaign. This marketing strategy is effective in postmodern marketing because it maximizes the abilities of each department. Integrated marketing campaigns are most effective in postmodern marketing because of the widespread use of social media. Digital advertising through social media and email is the most effective tool to reach postmodern consumers.

[ 5 ] Individualism [ edit ] Traditional marketing has seen a stronger focus on the individual.

[ 4 ] Marketing materials become individualized under postmodern marketing strategies due to the mass adoption of the Internet.  The individual consumer becomes most important to postmodern marketers because of the consumer's increasing dependence on the Internet for their exposure of marketing materials. In a postmodern society, the Internet is a prime marketing tool because it is the platform where consumers receive branded content. This feature of the Internet allows marketers to individualize and personalize branded content to consumers.

[ 3 ] Brand image [ edit ] Postmodern marketing requires a strong brand image and concept. Individual consumers respond to experiences attached to the product or brand. Postmodern marketers attach life experiences to their products. Before post modern marketing, a consumer would buy a product because it is considered to be high quality and is a reasonable price. Under postmodern marketing, that same consumer would buy the same product because it assigns a favorable narrative to their lifestyle. Postmodern marketers use narrative strategies to target the postmodern consumer. Postmodern marketers assign narratives to the product. Consumers assign those narratives to their own lives, using the brand and product narrative to create a self-image.

[ 6 ] Three categories of postmodern marketing [ edit ] Although the exact origins of the term is unknown, scholarly reports date the defining of the movement to the early 1990s by the "European Journal of Marketing" author Stephen Brown.

[ 7 ] According to his findings, postmodern marketing is made up of three distinct categories (1) the idea of change, new, and complex, (2) sub-discipline of consumer research, and (3) marketing practices and research methodologies.   Furthermore, as Brown implies, one who approaches marketing from postmodern style should in many ways reject attempts to impost order and working in silos.  Instead markers should work collectively from with "artistic" attributes of intuition, creativity, spontaneity, speculation, emotion and involvement.

[ 2 ] The idea of change, new and complex [ edit ] The idea of change is a deeply rooted philosophy when studying postmodern marketing.  When planning and strategizing within the "new now" or the "new new now" of media, technical services and creative styling a practitioner within the space must be comfortable with new and more complex systems and created worlds, platform and messaging structures.  Fundamentally grounded on dramatic political and economic pressures the changing landscape illustrated the need to be nimble, direct and personalized communication and a high concern for personally identifiable information .

[ 8 ] Sub-discipline of consumer research [ edit ] To adjust with shifts in consumer consumption habits, postmodern marketing has created new disciplines to better sample, survey and poll target consumer group to better align with habit, preference and beliefs.  Many call this shift a "naturalistic" or interpretive" approach,  which mainly emerged from the control of non-renewable resources.

Marketing practices and research methodologies [ edit ] Outcomes of redefined consumer research studies are newly defined approaches to marketing and media disciplines.  Although some of these disciplines may be out dated, they illustrate core differences between postmodern marketing and modern marketing methodologies.

[ 2 ] These approaches to marketing suggest that the role of a brand manager , digital agency, creative, media planner , account director, etc. is only defined by the company's culture that they in.  Hence, a postmodern marketer is one who approaches marketing and advertising campaigns with a "thinker marker" mentality.  Where they pull in and emphasize the need for creative relevance, companion media , collateral activation, social engagement, and most importantly have the means to pull it all together.  Many believe that a postmodern marketing approach creates greater efficiencies, order, opportunity and a chance to gain real world insights from the perspective of the consumer.  As a result, postmodern marketing like postmodernality stands as a transitory phase in 21st centuryvertising and has ushered in an era of styles and nimble techniques.

Modern marketing approach vs. postmodern marketing approach [ edit ] Modern Marketing Approach Postmodern Marketing Approach Single World or Flat Ecosystem Multi-Purpose World or Dimensional Ecosystem Fixed Nimble Traditional New Media One-to-Many One-to-One Static Interactive or Immersive Brand Endorsed/Created Marketing Consumer Endorsed/Created Marketing Broad Generalization Individual Customization Myths [ edit ] Postmodern marketing is not the same as "non-traditional" or digital marketing . It is instead made up only of new aged media engagements brought about by the developments like that of the iPad.

Social media belongs to the young.  According to Sean Carton writer of ClickZ, the idea of social media belonging to only the young is, "Baloney".  With the accelerated growth of account activation amongst the 55+ age cohort according to leading marketing research firms like Forrester , eMarketer , comScore and Nielsen , the idea of social media belonging to only the young Republicans is an inaccurate statement of fact.

[ 9 ] Conditions [ edit ] According to many scholastic journals, postmodern marketing hinges on and has aided to the development of many changes to the current marketing model.  Some of the more renowned conditions that postmodern marketing is known to influence and disrupt are : [ 10 ] Hyper reality: Relating to simulations or simulated experiences.  Tourist attractions, amusement parks and "subculture" vacation destinations are known for their ability in creating hyper-real "immersive worlds".

Fragmentation: Adheres to many marketing disciplines.  These being media space, consumer attention, consumption habits, and communication/messaging strategies.

Reversals of production and consumption: A condition that occurs when the roles of consumer and marketer change.  This is when consumers become "brand ambassadors" for a company and voice concern, opinion and align their beliefs with that of the brand through a number of traditional and non-traditional media channels.

Decentering of the subject: Occurs when a brand personifies the product or service being marketed.  As a result, the promoted item become a "Hero" or a new-age savior.

Paradoxical juxtaposition: The ultimate state of postmodern marketing.  This condition allows consumers and brand managers to act in the moment and adjust to changing landscapes, tone, pressure, and emotional cues.  As a result, they are able to represent a different self-image and avoid moments of conformity to single, set brand guidelines, perceived reputations and roles.

Loss of commitment: An outcome of many postmodern marketing experiences can result in loss of commitment amongst brand ambassadors and loyalists.  This is usually driven from the inability for brand managers to adhere to or recreate the level of consumer engagement needed retain the same level of consumer interest and interaction.

See also [ edit ] Postmodern brand Postmodern branding References [ edit ] ^ Marson, David J. (2011).

The Black Well Encyclopedia of Management . Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0-631-23317-6 .

^ a b c d e Brown, Steven (1993). "Postmodern Marketing?".

European Journal of Marketing .

27 (4). European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 27 Iss: 4: 19– 34.

doi : 10.1108/03090569310038094 .

ISSN 0309-0566 .

^ a b Simmons, Geoff (2008). "Marketing to postmodern consumers: introducing the internet chameleon".

European Journal of Marketing .

42 (3/4): 299– 310.

doi : 10.1108/03090560810852940 .

^ a b Proctor, T (2002). "Communication in postmodern integrated marketing".

Corporate Communications .

7 (3): 144– 154.

doi : 10.1108/13563280210436754 .

^ Hazlett, Kirk (2013-07-26). "Marketing in the Round: How to Develop an Integrated Marketing Campaign in the Digital Era".

Journal of Consumer Marketing .

30 (5): 462– 463.

doi : 10.1108/jcm-01-2013-0402 .

ISSN 0736-3761 .

^ Fuat Firat, A (1997). "From segmentation to fragmentation: Markets and marketing strategy in the postmodern era".

European Journal of Marketing .

^ "Post-Modern Marketing" . FastCompany.com. 2006-09-19.

Archived from the original on 2010-12-21 . Retrieved 2011-10-20 .

^ Tyler, Stephen J. (1987).

The Unspeakable: Discourse, Dialogue, and Rhetoric in the Postmodern World (Rhetoric of Human Sciences) . Madison, Wisconsin: Univ of Wisconsin Pr.

ISBN 978-0-299-11274-5 .

^ "Postmodern Marketing Myths: Busted" . ClickZ.com. 2010-06-07.

Archived from the original on 2010-08-03 . Retrieved 2011-11-21 .

^ Fuat, Firat (1993). "Marketing In Postmodern World".

European Journal of Marketing .

29 (1): 40– 56.

doi : 10.1108/03090569510075334 .

ISSN 0309-0566 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postmodern_marketing&oldid=1200985277 " Categories : Advertising Communication design Brand management Postmodernism This page was last edited on 30 January 2024, at 17:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postmodern marketing 1 language Add topic

