Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 State atheism Toggle State atheism subsection 2.1 Soviet Union 2.2 Albania 2.3 Romania 2.4 Cambodia 3 Notable antireligious people Toggle Notable antireligious people subsection 3.1 Philosophers 3.2 Politicians 3.3 Others 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Antireligion 28 languages العربية Български Dansk Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Scots Shqip සිංහල کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Opposition to religion This article is about opposition to religion. For discrimination, see Religious discrimination .

"War on religion" redirects here. For religious conflict, see Religious war .

Not to be confused with Theophobia .

Part of a series on Irreligion Irreligion Antireligion Anti-clericalism Criticism of religion Freethought Organized secularism Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Separation of church and state Atheism History Demographics Discrimination/Persecution Criticism Lists of atheists Forms and variations Implicit and explicit Negative and positive New State Aspects Antitheism Relationship between atheism and religion Existence of God Agnosticism Strong Weak Agnostic atheism Apatheism List of agnostics People Atheists Agnostics Humanists Books The Age of Reason Breaking the Spell The Demon-Haunted World The End of Faith The God Delusion God Is Not Great Letter to a Christian Nation The System of Nature Why I Am Not a Christian Why I Am Not a Muslim Why I Am an Atheist List of irreligious organizations American Atheists American Humanist Association Atheist Alliance International Center for Inquiry Freedom From Religion Foundation Humanists International Humanists UK Rational Response Squad Recovering from Religion Brazilian Association of Atheists and Agnostics Related topics Countries by irreligion Disestablishmentarianism Secular ethics }} Irreligion by country v t e Antireligion is opposition to religion or traditional religious beliefs and practices.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] It involves opposition to organized religion , religious practices or religious institutions . The term antireligion has also been used to describe opposition to specific forms of supernatural worship or practice, whether organized or not .

Antireligion is distinct from deity-specific positions such as atheism (the lack of belief in deities) and antitheism (an opposition to belief in deities); although "antireligionists" may also be atheists or antitheists. Unlike antitheism, antireligion is also against those religions that do not have deities, such as some sects of Buddhism and Jainism .

History [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2020 ) Further information: Criticism of religion § History of criticism See also: Anti-clericalism and Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution Some Catholics have accused the Reformation of Martin Luther as having inspired anti religiosity.

[ 4 ] Early anti religious tendencies were expressed by skeptics such as Christopher Marlowe .

[ 5 ] Significant antireligion was advanced during the Age of Enlightenment , as early as the 17th century.

Baron d'Holbach 's book Christianity Unveiled , published in 1766, attacked not only Christianity but religion in general as an impediment to the moral advancement of humanity. According to historian Michael Burleigh , antireligion found its first mass expression of barbarity in revolutionary France as "organised ... irreligion...an 'anti-clerical' and self-styled 'non-religious' state" responded violently to religious influence over society.

[ 6 ] State atheism [ edit ] Further information: State atheism Soviet Union [ edit ] The Soviet Union adopted the political ideology of Marxism–Leninism and by extension the policy of state atheism , which opposed the growth of religions.

[ 7 ] It directed varying degrees of antireligious efforts at varying faiths, depending on what threat they posed to the Soviet state, and their willingness to subordinate themselves to political authority. In the 1930s, during the Stalinist period, the government destroyed church buildings or put them into secular use (as museums of religion and atheism, clubs or storage facilities), executed clergy, prohibited the publication of most religious material and persecuted some members of religious groups.

[ 8 ] Less violent attempts to reduce or eliminate the influence of religion in society were also carried out at other times in Soviet history. For instance, it was usually necessary to be an atheist in order to acquire any important political position or any prestigious scientific job; thus, many people became atheists in order to advance their careers. Some estimate that 12–15 million Christians were killed in the Soviet Union.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Up to 500,000 Russian Orthodox Christians were persecuted by the Soviet government, not including other religious groups.

[ 12 ] At least 106,300 Russian clergymen were executed between 1937 and 1941.

[ 13 ] The Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic targeted numerous clergy for arrest and interrogation as enemies of the state, [ 14 ] and many churches, mosques, and synagogues were converted to secular uses.

[ 15 ] Albania [ edit ] The People's Republic of Albania had an objective for the eventual elimination of all religion in Albania with the goal of creating an atheist nation, which it declared it had achieved in 1967.  In 1976, Albania implemented a constitutional ban on religious activity and actively promoted atheism.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The government nationalized most property of religious institutions and used it for non-religious purposes, such as cultural centers for young people. Religious literature was banned. Many clergy and theists were tried, tortured, and executed. All foreign Roman Catholic clergy were expelled in 1946, [ citation needed ] and Albania officially tried to eradicate religion.

[ 17 ] Romania [ edit ] Authorities in the People's Republic of Romania aimed to move towards an atheistic society, in which religion would be considered as the ideology of the bourgeoisie; the régime also set to propagate among the laboring masses in science, politics and culture to help them fight superstition and mysticism , and initiated an anti-religious campaign aimed at reducing the influence of religion in society.

[ 18 ] After the communist takeover in 1948, some church personnel were imprisoned for political crimes.

[ 19 ] Cambodia [ edit ] The Khmer Rouge attempted to eliminate Cambodia's cultural heritage, including its religions, particularly Theravada Buddhism .

[ 20 ] Over the four years of Khmer Rouge rule, at least 1.5 million Cambodians perished. Of the sixty thousand Buddhist monks that previously existed, only three thousand survived the Cambodian genocide .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Notable antireligious people [ edit ] This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( November 2014 ) Philosophers [ edit ] Al-Ma'arri (973–1057), Arab philosopher, poet and writer.

[ 23 ] Thomas Paine (1737–1809), British-American writer and deist who wrote a scathing critique on religion in The Age of Reason (1793–94): "All national institutions of churches, whether Jewish , Christian , or Turkish [i.e.

Muslim ], appear to me no other than human inventions set up to terrify and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and profit." [ citation needed ] Karl Marx (1818–1883), German philosopher, social scientist, socialist. He said "religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people . The abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people is the demand for their real happiness. To call on them to give up their illusions about their condition is to call on them to give up a condition that requires illusions. The criticism of religion is, therefore, in embryo, the criticism of that vale of tears of which religion is the halo. The abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people is the demand for their real happiness." [ 24 ] John Dewey (1859–1952), an American pragmatist philosopher, who believed neither religion nor metaphysics could provide legitimate moral or social values, though scientific empiricism could (see science of morality ).

[ 25 ] Bertrand Russell (1872–1970), English logician and philosopher who believed that authentic philosophy could only be pursued given an atheistic foundation of "unyielding despair". In 1948, he famously debated with the Jesuit priest and philosophical historian Father Frederick Copleston on the existence of God .

[ 26 ] Ayn Rand (1905–1982), Russian-American novelist and philosopher, founder of Objectivism .

[ 27 ] Rajneesh (born Chandra Mohan Jain; 11 December 1931 – 19 January 1990), also known as Acharya Rajneesh, Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, and later as Osho, was an Indian Godman, philosopher, mystic, and founder of the Rajneesh movement . He was viewed as a controversial new religious movement leader during his life. He rejected institutional religions, Rajneesh said that spiritual experience could not be organized into any one system of religious dogma.

Richard Dawkins (born 1941), English biologist, one of the "Four Horsemen" of New Atheism . He wrote The God Delusion , criticizing belief in the divine , in 2006.

[ 28 ] Christopher Hitchens (1949–2011), English-American author and journalist, one of the "Four Horsemen" of New Atheism . He wrote God Is Not Great : How Religion Poisons Everything in 2007.

[ 29 ] Lawrence M. Krauss (born 1954), a theoretical physicist, author of A Universe from Nothing .

[ citation needed ] Steven Pinker (born 1954), Canadian-American cognitive scientist who believes religion incites violence.

[ 30 ] Sam Harris (born 1967), author of The End of Faith . He said, "If I could wave a magic wand and get rid of either rape or religion, I would not hesitate to get rid of religion." [ 31 ] Politicians [ edit ] Vladimir Lenin (1870–1924), Soviet leader from 1917 until 1924, who believed all religions to be "the organs of bourgeois reaction, used for the protection of the exploitation and the stupefaction of the working class".

[ 32 ] Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964), first prime minister of India who said "The spectacle of what is called religion, or at any rate organised religion, in India and elsewhere, has filled me with horror and I have frequently condemned it ...." in his autobiography .

Nikita Khrushchev (1894–1971), Soviet leader in 1953–1964, who initiated, among other measures, [ 33 ] [ 34 ] the 1958–1964 Soviet anti-religious campaign .

Plutarco Elías Calles (1877–1945), president of Mexico between 1924 and 1928. During his government the Cristero War began.

[ 35 ] Joseph Stalin (18 December 1878 – 5 March 1953), while he was the leader of the USSR he worked on ending religion in the country.

[ 36 ] Enver Hoxha (1908–1985), leader of Albania who described himself as an "Arch atheist" and sought to eradicate religion in his country, going as far as to ban religiously based names.

Others [ edit ] Haruki Murakami , Japanese novelist who wrote: "God only exists in people's minds. Especially in Japan, God's always has been a kind of flexible concept. Look at what happened to the war.

Douglas MacArthur ordered the divine emperor to quit being a God, and he did, making a speech saying he was just an ordinary person." [ citation needed ] Ricky Gervais , British comedian and actor who has been critical of religion in sketches and other comedic performances.

[ citation needed ] H. P. Lovecraft , American horror writer and creator of the Cthulhu Mythos , who, according to S. T. Joshi , "considered religion not merely false but dangerous to social and political progress." [ 37 ] Bill Maher , American comedian, who wrote and starred in Religulous , a 2008 documentary criticizing and mocking religion.

[ citation needed ] Marcus Brigstocke , British comedian.

[ citation needed ] George Carlin , American comedian who frequently mocked religion throughout his career.

James Randi , former magician, professional "debunker" of psychics, outspoken atheist and founder of the James Randi Educational Foundation .

[ citation needed ] Philip Roth , a Jewish-American novelist who described himself as anti-religious.

[ 38 ] Matt Dillahunty , host of The Atheist Experience and former president of the Atheist Community of Austin, engages in debates with Apologists.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Buddhism Anti-Catholicism Anti-Christian sentiment Anti-clericalism in France Anti-Hinduism Anti-Islamism , as distinct from Criticism of Islam and Islamophobia Anti-Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Mormonism Anti-Protestantism Conflict thesis Criticism of religion Irreligion Nontheistic religion Faith and rationality Freethought Persecution of Christians Relationship between religion and science Religious intolerance Religious persecution Religious segregation References [ edit ] ^ "Anti-religion" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Merriam-Webster Online . Retrieved 26 September 2017 .

^ "Antireligion" .

Collins Dictionary . Collins Dictionary Online . Retrieved 26 September 2017 .

^ Bullivant, Stephen; Lee, Lois (2016).

A Dictionary of Atheism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780191816819 .

^ Cooney, J. (2000).

John Charles McQuaid: Ruler of Catholic Ireland . Irish Studies. Syracuse University Press. p. 44.

ISBN 978-0-8156-0642-0 . Retrieved 2023-06-24 .

^ Flynn, T.; Dawkins, R. (2007).

The New Encyclopedia of Unbelief . Prometheus. p. 272.

ISBN 978-1-61592-280-2 . Retrieved 2023-01-19 .

^ Michael Burleigh Earthly Powers p 96-97 ISBN 0-00-719572-9 ^ Kowalewski 1980 , p. 426, Protest for Religious Rights in the USSR: Characteristics and Consequences : "The Soviet policy of state atheism (gosateizm), albeit inconsistently applied, remains a major goal of official ideology. Massive state resources have been expended not only to prevent the implanting of religious belief in nonbelievers but also to eradicate "prerevolutionary remnants" already existing. The regime is not merely passively committed to a godless polity but takes an aggressive stance of official forced atheization. Thus a major task of the police apparatus is the persecution of forms of religious practice. Not surprisingly, the Committee for State Security (KGB) is reported to have a division dealing specifically with "churchmen and sectarians." ^ "Revelations from the Russian Archives: ANTI-RELIGIOUS CAMPAIGNS" .

Library of Congress . US Government . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

The Soviet Union was the first state to have as an ideological objective the elimination of religion. Toward that end, the Communist regime confiscated church property, ridiculed religion, harassed believers, and propagated atheism in the schools. Actions toward particular religions, however, were determined by State interests, and most organized religions were never outlawed.

^ World Christian trends, AD 30-AD 2200: interpreting the annual Christian megacensus . Pasadena, Calif: William Carey Library. 2001.

ISBN 9780878086085 .

Table 4-10 ^ Nelson, James M. (2009-02-27).

Psychology, Religion, and Spirituality . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-0-387-87572-9 .

^ Johnson, Todd; Zurlo, Gina (2018).

"Martyrdom (Country-by-country statistics)" .

World Christian Database .

Brill Academic Publishers .

^ "Сколько репрессированных в России пострадали за Христа?" .

www.pravmir.ru .

^ Yakovlev, Alexander N. (2002).

A Century of Violence in Soviet Russia . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-10322-9 .

^ (in Romanian) Martiri pentru Hristos, din România, în perioada regimului comunist, Editura Institutului Biblic și de Misiune al Bisericii Ortodoxe Române, București, 2007, pp.34–35 ^ Brezianu, Andrei (26 May 2010).

The A to Z of Moldova . Scarecrow Press. p. 98.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7211-0 .

Communist Atheism. Official doctrine of the Soviet regime, also called "scientific atheism." It was aggressively applied to Moldova, immediately after the 1940 annexation, when churches were profaned, clergy assaulted, and signs and public symbols of religion were prohibited, and it was applied again throughout the subsequent decades of the Soviet regime, after 1944. ... churches were either pulled down or turned into facilities designed to serve secular or even profane purposes ... the Transfiguration Cathedral (previously dedicated to St. Constantine and Helena) housed the city's planetarium.

^ "The Albanian Constitution of 1976" .

bjoerna.dk . Retrieved 2021-09-19 .

^ a b Temperman, Jeroen (2010).

State-Religion Relationships and Human Rights Law : Towards a Right to Religiously Neutral Governance . Brill Academic/Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 9789004181489 .

Before the end of the Cold War , many Communist States did not shy away from being openly hostile to religion. In most instances, communist ideology translated unperturbedly into state atheism, which, in turn, triggered measures aimed at the eradication of religion. As much was acknowledged by some Communist Constitutions. The 1976 Constitution of the People's Socialist Republic of Albania , for instance, was firmly based on a Marxist dismissal of religion as the opiate of the masses. It provided: "The state recognizes no religion of any kind and supports and develops the atheist view so as to ingrain in to the people the scientific and materialistic worldview.

^ Leustean, Lucian (2009).

Orthodoxy and the Cold War: Religion and Political Power in Romania, 1947-65 . la University of Michigan. pp.

92– 93.

ISBN 978-3447058742 .

One of the main aims of the regime was to transform Romania into a communist atheist society in which religion was considered the ideology of the bourgeoise. Thus in 1949, the Society for the Popularisation of Science and Culture was established. The main objective of this anti-religious society was 'to propagate among the labouring masses political and scientific knowledge to fight obscurantism, superstition, mysticism, and all other influences of bourgeois ideologies'. ...the regime's anti-religious campaign aimed to discredit the church and to reduce the influence of religion in society.

^ January 23, 1999, issue of the London Tablet by Jonathen Luxmoore,  Published by Chesterton Review Feb/May 1999 ^ Shenon, Philip (1992-01-02).

"Phnom Penh Journal; Lord Buddha Returns, With Artists His Soldiers" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2023-01-02 .

^ Khmer Rouge: Christian baptism after massacres Archived January 23, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ "CRIMES OF WAR" . Archived from the original on 2016-07-16 . Retrieved 2015-07-09 .

^ Tharoor, Kanishk; Maruf, Maryam (March 8, 2016).

"Museum of Lost Objects: The unacceptable poet" .

BBC News . Retrieved August 21, 2022 .

^ Marx, K. 1976.

Introduction to A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right .

Collected Works , v. 3. New York.

^ "Dewey felt that science alone contributed to 'human good,' which he defined exclusively in naturalistic terms. He rejected religion and metaphysics as valid supports for moral and social values, and felt that success of the scientific method presupposed the destruction of old knowledge before the new could be created. ... (Dewey, 1929, pp. 95, 145) "William Adrian, ^ "I think all the great religions of the world – Buddhism , Hinduism , Christianity , Islam and Communism – both untrue and harmful. It is evident as a matter of logic that, since they disagree, not more than one of them can be true. ... I am as firmly convinced that religions do harm as I am that they are untrue." Bertrand Russell in "My Religious Reminiscences" (1957), reprinted in The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell [1] Archived 2008-12-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Rand, Ayn (January 1999).

The Return of the Primitive: The Anti-Industrial Revolution .

ISBN 9781101137277 .

^ "Many of us saw religion as harmless nonsense. Beliefs might lack all supporting evidence but, we thought, if people needed a crutch for consolation, where's the harm? September 11th changed all that. Revealed faith is not harmless nonsense, it can be lethally dangerous nonsense. Dangerous because it gives people unshakeable confidence in their own righteousness. Dangerous because it gives them false courage to kill themselves, which automatically removes normal barriers to killing others. Dangerous because it teaches enmity to others labelled only by a difference of inherited tradition. And dangerous because we have all bought into a weird respect, which uniquely protects religion from normal criticism. Let's now stop being so damned respectful!" The Guardian, 2001-10-11 ^ Grimes, William (16 December 2011).

"Christopher Hitchens, Polemicist Who Slashed All, Freely, Dies at 62" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "[T]he Bible, contrary to what a majority of Americans apparently believe, is far from a source of higher moral values. Religions have given us stonings, witch-burnings, crusades, inquisitions, jihads, fatwas, suicide bombers, gay-bashers, abortion-clinic gunmen, and mothers who drown their sons so they can happily be united in heaven." The Evolutionary Psychology of Religion , presentation by Steven Pinker to the annual meeting of the Freedom from Religion Foundation , Madison, Wisconsin , October 29, 2004, on receipt of “The Emperor's New Clothes Award.” ^ "The Sun Magazine | The Temple Of Reason | Bethany Saltman | Issue 369" .

The Sun Magazine . Retrieved 2021-03-20 .

^ "Religion is the opium of the people : this saying of Marx is the cornerstone of the entire ideology of Marxism about the religion. All modern religions and churches, all and of every kind of religious organizations are always considered by Marxism as the organs of bourgeois reaction, used for the protection of the exploitation and the stupefaction of the working class." Lenin, V. I.

"About the attitude of the working party toward the religion" .

Collected works, v. 17, p.41 . Archived from the original on 2011-07-20 . Retrieved 2006-09-09 .

^ "Anti-Religious Campaigns" .

www.ibiblio.org .

^ Grossman, J. D. (1973). "Khrushchev's Anti-Religious Policy and the Campaign of 1954".

Soviet Studies .

24 (3): 374– 386.

doi : 10.1080/09668137308410870 .

JSTOR 150643 .

^ Haas, Ernst B.; Haas, Professor Ernst B. (1997).

Nationalism, Liberalism, and Progress: The dismal fate of new nations . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-3109-8 .

^ Dixon, Paul.

"Religion in the Soviet Union" .

In Defence of Marxism . Retrieved 2023-01-22 .

^ Forbis, Wil (2002-06-16).

"S.T. Joshi Interview" .

acidlogic.com . Archived from the original on 2019-06-19.

^ Krasnik, Martin (2005-12-14).

"Philip Roth: 'It no longer feels a great injustice that I have to die' " .

The Guardian .

I'm anti-religious ... It's all a big lie ... I have such a huge dislike [of] the miserable record of religion.

Sources [ edit ] Kowalewski, David (1980). "Protest for Religious Rights in the USSR: Characteristics and Consequences".

The Russian Review .

39 (4): 426– 441.

doi : 10.2307/128810 .

ISSN 0036-0341 .

JSTOR 128810 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Antireligion at Wikiquote v t e Irreligion Irreligion Antireligion Anti-clericalism Criticism of religion Freethought Organized secularism Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Separation of church and state Atheism Demographics Religion History State New Criticism Discrimination/Persecution Implicit and explicit Negative and positive Existence of God Antitheism Agnosticism Strong Weak Agnostic atheism Apatheism People Atheists Agnostics Humanists Books The Age of Reason Breaking the Spell The Demon-Haunted World The End of Faith The God Delusion God Is Not Great Letter to a Christian Nation The System of Nature Why I Am Not a Christian Why I Am Not a Muslim Why I Am an Atheist Organizations American Atheists American Humanist Association Atheist Alliance International Center for Inquiry Freedom From Religion Foundation Humanists International Humanists UK Rational Response Squad Recovering from Religion Brazilian Association of Atheists and Agnostics Related topics Countries by irreligion Disestablishmentarianism Secular ethics v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Portal : Religion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antireligion&oldid=1304721189 " Category : Antireligion Hidden categories: Articles with Romanian-language sources (ro) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles to be expanded from July 2020 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Incomplete lists from November 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 19:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antireligion 28 languages Add topic

