Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 India and Bangladesh 2 United Kingdom 3 United States Toggle United States subsection 3.1 Automobiles 4 Minimum advertised price Toggle Minimum advertised price subsection 4.1 United States 4.2 United Kingdom 4.3 Australia 5 Rack rate 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents List price 7 languages Deutsch فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Recommended retail price ) Price that the manufacturer recommends for a retailer to charge "MSRP" redirects here. For other uses, see MSRP (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "List price" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This 1916 advertisement distinguishes the list price and a lower our special price .

The list price , also known as the manufacturer's suggested retail price ( MSRP ), or the recommended retail price ( RRP ), or the suggested retail price ( SRP ) of a product is the price at which its manufacturer notionally recommends that a retailer sell the product.

[ citation needed ] Suggested pricing methods may conflict with competition theory , as they allow prices to be set higher than would be established by supply and demand .

Resale price maintenance —fixing prices—goes further than suggesting prices, and is illegal in many countries.

[ citation needed ] Retailers may charge less than the suggested retail price, depending upon the actual wholesale cost of each item, usually purchased in bulk from the manufacturer, or in smaller quantities through a distributor . The suggested price is sometimes unrealistically high, so the seller can appear to be offering a discount.

[ citation needed ] Some retailers apply discount stickers over top of original prices to indicate a discount to consumers.

List price often cannot be compared directly internationally as products may differ in detail, sometimes due to different regulations, and list prices may or may not include taxes.

[ citation needed ] India and Bangladesh [ edit ] India and Bangladesh do not use list prices but instead have a maximum retail price .

United Kingdom [ edit ] In the United Kingdom, the list price is referred to as a recommended retail price or RRP.

In 1998, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry prohibited the placing of RRP on electrical goods under the "Domestic Electrical Goods Order", but this ruling was lifted by the Competition Commission in February 2012.

[ 1 ] United States [ edit ] In the United States, the list price is referred to as the manufacturer's suggested retail price or MSRP.

Under earlier US state Fair Trade statutes , the manufacturer was able to impose a fixed price for items.

[ citation needed ] The fixed prices could offer some price protection to small merchants in competition against larger retail organizations. These were determined to be in restraint of trade . Many manufacturers have adopted MSRP, a price at which the manufacturer suggests the item be priced by a retailer. The term "suggested" can be misleading because in many cases, the MSRP is extremely high compared to the actual wholesale cost, opening the market to " deep discounters ", who are able to sell products substantially below the MSRP but still make a profit. The discount stores benefit from exorbitant MSRPs because the discount offered increases the perceived value to customers.

[ citation needed ] Automobiles [ edit ] Main article: Monroney sticker A common use for MSRP can be seen in automobile sales in the United States. Prior to the spread of manufacturer's suggested retail pricing, there were no defined prices on vehicles, and car dealers were able to impose arbitrary markups , often with prices adjusted to what the salesperson thought the prospective purchaser would be willing to pay for a particular vehicle.

Currently, the MSRP, or "sticker price", the price of a vehicle as labeled by the manufacturer, is clearly labeled on the windows of all new vehicles, on a Monroney sticker , commonly called the "window sticker". The sticker was added as part of the Automobile Information Disclosure Act of 1958.

[ 2 ] The MSRP is different from the actual price paid to the manufacturer by the dealer, which is known as the " invoice price ". There are now numerous sources, such as online appraisal tools, that can be used to find the MSRP and invoice price.

[ 3 ] Minimum advertised price [ edit ] Manufacturers sometimes restrict retailers from displaying prices below the Manufacturer’s Suggested Retail Price (MSRP). A Minimum Advertised Price (MAP) policy allows retailers to comply with these restrictions while still providing customers with competitive pricing. Since MAP requirements vary by manufacturer, retailers can configure their online stores to hide actual prices on certain pages where lower pricing cannot be publicly advertised.

[ 4 ] United States [ edit ] Fixed pricing established between a distributor and seller or between two or more sellers may violate antitrust laws in the United States .

In Leegin Creative Leather Prods., Inc. v. PSKS, Inc.

, 127 S. Ct. 2705 (2007), the Supreme Court considered whether federal antitrust law established a per se ban on minimum resale price agreements and, instead, allow resale price maintenance agreements to be judged by the rule of reason, the usual standard applied to determine if there is a violation of section 1 of the Sherman Act .  In holding that vertical price restraints should be judged by the rule of reason , the Court overruled Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co.

, 220 U.S. 373 (1911).

Because the rule of reason applies, minimum RPM agreements may still be unlawful. In fact, in Leegin , the Court identified at least two ways in which a purely vertical minimum RPM agreement might be illegal. First, "[a] dominant retailer ... might request resale price maintenance to forestall innovation in distribution that decreases costs. A manufacturer might consider it has little choice but to accommodate the retailer's demands for vertical price restraints if the manufacturer believes it needs access to the retailer's distribution network". Second, "[a] manufacturer with market power... might use resale price maintenance to give retailers an incentive not to sell the products of smaller rivals or new entrants." In both of these examples, an economically powerful firm uses the RPM agreement to exclude or raise entry barriers for its competition.

In addition, federal law is not the only source of antitrust claims as almost all of the states have their own antitrust laws.

United Kingdom [ edit ] In the UK, in September 2010, an investigation was launched by the Office of Fair Trading into breaches of competition law by online travel agents and the hotel industry in relation to the advertised pricing of hotel rooms. As of April 2011, this was an administrative priority of the OFT.

Australia [ edit ] In Australia, any sort of attempt at setting minimum advertised pricing or any retaliation against such a reseller is against the Competition and Consumer Act.

[ 5 ] It is also illegal for resellers to ask their suppliers to use recommended price lists to stop competitors from discounting. In most cases, a supplier may specify a maximum price for retail.

[ 5 ] There is an exception to this where the reseller is engaging in a loss-leading exercise.

[ 5 ] Rack rate [ edit ] 'Rack rate' is the travel industry term for the published full price of a hotel room, which the customer would pay by just walking into the hotel off the street and asking for a room. In some jurisdictions, a customer may be entitled to overstay a reservation by paying the rack rate.

[ citation needed ] While the rack rate can be lower than the maximum rate that the hotel may be allowed to charge under local laws, it is higher than the rate most travel agents can book for their customers. Sometimes the terms "run of the house" or "walk-up rate" (in Europe usually: "walk-in rate") are used to refer to the same highest rate.

[ citation needed ] The term "rack rate" is also used by travel-related service providers, such as car rental companies or travel mobile phone rental companies, to refer to the same highest rate that customers would be charged with no prebookings.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Maximum retail price Rate card Drop shipping References [ edit ] ^ Competition Commission, CC lifts Domestic Electrical Goods Order [ usurped ] , published 1 February 2012, archived 25 July 2013, accessed 3 June 2021 ^ "Manufacturer Suggested Retail Price: MSRP Meaning & Details Explained - DealDriver" .

www.dealdriver.ai . Retrieved 2023-07-02 .

^ "How much is my car worth? Free car value appraisal" .

Edmunds.com .

^ "Minimum advertised price | Adobe Commerce" .

experienceleague.adobe.com . Retrieved 2025-04-05 .

^ a b c "Relevant sections of the Competition and Consumer Act" .

Australian Competition & Consumer Commission . Retrieved 15 November 2021 .

External links [ edit ] FTC Illegal Business Practices Record Companies Settle FTC Charges of Restraining Competition in CD Music Market MSRP and a real value of a car NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐kr97g
Cached time: 20250812014134
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.300 seconds
Real time usage: 0.374 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2351/1000000
Revision size: 10211/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 38689/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6505/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 17750/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.189/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4800820/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  333.610      1 -total
 35.23%  117.547      1 Template:Reflist
 26.34%   87.874      4 Template:Cite_web
 21.75%   72.573     10 Template:Fix
 21.47%   71.624      9 Template:Cn
 17.12%   57.127      1 Template:Refimprove
 17.12%   57.112      1 Template:Short_description
 14.90%   49.709      1 Template:Ambox
 10.05%   33.528      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.89%   33.008     10 Template:Delink Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:320248:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014134 and revision id 1297528116. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_price&oldid=1297528116 " Categories : Anti-competitive practices Competition (economics) Retail pricing Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2012 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018 This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 19:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List price 7 languages Add topic

