Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory 2 Vagina envy 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Womb envy 7 languages العربية Български فارسی 한국어 Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Male envy of women's biological functions The feminist psychoanalyst Karen Horney (c. 1938).

Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e In psychology , womb envy denotes the envy that men may feel of the biological functions of women (pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding). The neo-Freudian psychiatrist Karen Horney (1885–1952) proposed this as a male psychological trait. These emotions could fuel the social subordination of women, and drive men to succeed in other areas of life, such as business, medicine, law, and politics.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Each term is analogous to the concept of female penis envy presented in Freudian psychology . In this they address the gender role social dynamics underlying the "envy and fascination with the female breasts and lactation, with pregnancy and childbearing, and vagina envy [that] are clues and signs of transsexualism and to a femininity complex of men, which is defended against by psychological and sociocultural means".

[ 4 ] Theory [ edit ] Womb envy denotes the envy men may feel towards a woman's role in nurturing and sustaining life. In coining the term, the Neo-Freudian psychiatrist Karen Horney (1885–1952) proposed that men experience womb envy more powerfully than women experience penis envy, because "men need to disparage women more than women need to disparage men".

[ 5 ] This feeling is stronger in men because they want to live up to the male stereotype of having the upper hand and dominance over everyone. Boehm (1930, p. 457) said that when others have something more that we do not have ourselves then this excites our envy.

[ 6 ] As a psychoanalyst , Horney considered womb envy a cultural, psychosocial tendency, like the concept of penis envy, rather than an innate male psychological trait.

[ 1 ] She believed that it arises when men think they are not in control and powerful in their lives like they thought they were.

[ 7 ] Although Karen Horney is generally credited with originating the idea of "womb envy," especially in her 1926 article "The Flight from Womanhood: The Masculinity-Complex in Women as Viewed by Men and by Women," [ 8 ] she herself never used the term. One early appearance of the phrase was in Margaret Mead 's 1949 book, Male and Female .

[ 9 ] Mead may have coined the term.

Brian Luke, in his book Brutal: Manhood and the Exploitation of Animals, [ 10 ] discusses three ways in which men who experience womb envy may respond: by compensating—constructing a realm of exclusively male activity, by revaluing—devaluing the functions specific to women and/or magnifying the functions specific to men, and by appropriation—taking control of female specific functions.

[ 10 ] Luke attributes the coining of this term not to Horney, but to Eva Kittay . In her 1984 article, Rereading Freud on 'Femininity' or Why Not Womb Envy?

, [ 11 ] Kittay had posed the question of why there is not a concept analogous to penis envy and offers the term womb envy.

[ 11 ] In Personality Theories, Barbara Engler discusses the often unconscious and indirect ways that womb envy manifests. "Womb envy, rather than being openly acknowledged by most males, has often taken subtle and indirect forms, such as rituals of taboo, isolation, and cleansing that have been frequently associated with menstruation and childbirth, the need to disparage women, accuse them of witchcraft, belittle their achievements and deny them equal rights." [ 12 ] Engler also refers to criticism of Horney's theory on the grounds that it equated womanhood with motherhood .

[ 12 ] Discussing the limitations of Horney's broader psychological viewpoint, Bernardo J. Carducci points out the comparative lack of empirical evidence saying, "In comparison to other theorists..., Horney's work has generated very little empirical research among personality psychologists. Although her theoretical ideas were presented in a relatively straightforward manner, they have not stimulated much interest in others to investigate their validity. This may be in part due to the rejection of her ideas by the more traditional and influential Freudian tradition operating at the time." [ 13 ] In Eve's Seed (2000), historian Robert S. McElvaine extended Horney's argument that womb envy is a powerful, elementary factor in the psychological insecurity suffered by many men. He coined the term non-menstrual syndrome (NMS), denoting a man's possible insecurity before the biologic and reproductive traits of woman; thus, womb envy may impel men to define their identities in opposition to women. Hence, men who are envious of women's reproductive traits insist that a "real man" must be "not-a-woman", thus they may seek to socially dominate women—what they may or may not do in life—as psychological compensation for what men cannot do biologically.

[ 14 ] Along with womb envy there are other mentions that also discussed on topic of womb envy though not the exact name. Michael Joseph Eisler (1921) wrote it by looking at male pregnancy fantasies, not the direct term of womb envy is mentioned but contributed the male envy of female reproductive physiology was directed towards it.

Boehm (1930) called it parturition envy instead, Zilboorg (1944) called it women envy, and Phyllis Chesler (1978) called it uterus envy.

[ 6 ] Vagina envy [ edit ] Vagina envy denotes the envy males may feel towards females for having a vagina . In Psychoanalysis and Male Sexuality (1966), Hendrik Ruitenbeek relates vagina envy to men's desire to be able to give birth and to urinate  and to masturbate in ways physically different from those available to men, and that such psychological envy might produce misogyny in neurotic men.

[ 15 ] Moreover, in Vagina Envy in Men (1993), the physician Harold Tarpley elucidates the theoretic differences among the constructs of "vagina envy", "womb envy", "breast envy", and "parturition envy", emotions wherein men suffer envy—"a grudging desire for another's excellence or advantage"—of women's female biologic capabilities of pregnancy, parturition, breast feeding, and of the social-role freedom to physically nurture children.

[ 16 ] Criticism [ edit ] The theory of "womb envy" or "vaginal envy" is criticized based on the position that it indicates how the essence of being a woman lies in motherhood.

[ 17 ] There are scholars [ who?

] who point out that the woman defined in terms of her essential maternity reduces her to her gender characteristics and could, hence, be exploited or be defined according to the terms of patriarchal logic and phallocentric impositions.

[ 18 ] Domna Stanton, for instance, drew from Jacques Derrida 's work to support this argument, [ 18 ] particularly, the theorist's position that "the maternal, which is metaphorized as total being to substantiate a notion that can combat the paternal, represents only one aspect of potential female difference." [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Feminism portal Autogynephilia References [ edit ] ^ a b Horney, Karen (1967).

Feminine Psychology . W.W. Norton Company, New York.

^ "Karen Horney | German psychoanalyst" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 2016-01-25 .

^ McElvaine, Robert S. (2001).

Eve's Seed: Biology, the Sexes, and the Course of History . New York: McGraw-Hill.

^ Warnes, H.; Hill, G. (1974).

"Gender Identity and the Wish to be a Woman" .

Psychosomatics .

15 (1): 25– 29.

doi : 10.1016/S0033-3182(74)71290-7 .

PMID 4413549 .

^ Horney, Karen (1942).

The collected works of Karen Horney (volume II) . W.W. Norton Company, New York.

^ a b Bayne, Emma (2011). "Womb envy: The cause of misogyny and even male achievement?".

Women's Studies International Forum .

35 (2): 151– 160.

doi : 10.1016/j.wsif.2011.01.007 .

^ Hockenberry, Lindsy (28 March 2017).

"How Womb Envy Has Caused Men to Control Women's Bodies" .

A Medium Corporation .

^ Horney, Karen. 1926. The Flight from Womanhood: The Masculinity-Complex in Women as Viewed by Men and by Women. International Journal of Psychoanalysis 7:324–39.

^ Mead, Margaret. 1949. Male and Female: A Study of the Sexes in a Changing World. New York: William Morrow.

^ a b Luke, Brian (2007-01-01).

Brutal: Manhood and the Exploitation of Animals . University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 9780252074240 .

^ a b Kittay, Eva Feder (1984-01-01). "Rereading Freud on 'femininity' or why not womb envy?".

Women's Studies International Forum .

7 (5): 385– 391.

doi : 10.1016/0277-5395(84)90038-4 .

^ a b Engler, Barbara (2008-08-25).

Personality Theories . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-0547148342 .

^ Carducci, Bernardo J.

The Psychology of Personality: Viewpoints, Research, and Applications . Wiley. p. 185.

^ McElvaine, Robert S. (2000) Eve's Seed: Biology, the Sexes, and the Course of History McGraw-Hill, New York pp. 72–78.

^ Ruitenbeek, Hendrik (1966) Psychoanalysis and Male Sexuality Rowman & Littlefield, New York p. 144 ^ Tarpley, Harold (1993). "Vagina Envy in Men".

Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis and Dynamic Psychiatry .

21 (3): 457– 464.

doi : 10.1521/jaap.1.1993.21.3.457 .

PMID 8226185 .

^ Engler, Barbara (2009).

Personality Theories . Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. p. 128.

ISBN 9780547148342 .

^ a b Walker, Michelle (2003).

Philosophy and the Maternal Body: Reading Silence . London: Routledge. p. 137.

ISBN 0415168570 .

^ Allen, Jeffner; Young, Iris Marion (1989).

The Thinking Muse: Feminism and Modern French Philosophy . Bloomington: Indiana University Press. pp.

171 .

ISBN 0253359805 .

External links [ edit ] Karen Horney Horney & Humanistic Psychoanalysis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Womb_envy&oldid=1292760026 " Categories : Feminism and health Feminism and the family Men and sexuality Psychoanalytic theory Vagina Vulva Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2025 This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 17:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Womb envy 7 languages Add topic

