Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Notable examples 3 Formation and evolution 4 References Toggle the table of contents Wolf–Rayet nebula 12 languages العربية Català Čeština Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Македонски Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nebula which surrounds a Wolf–Rayet star WR 31a is surrounded by a bubble nebula.

AB7 is one of the highest-excitation nebulae in the Magellanic Clouds , two satellite galaxies of the Milky Way .

A Wolf-Rayet nebula is a type of nebula created from stellar winds expelled by Wolf-Rayet stars . Wolf-Rayet stars are very hot, highly luminous , and rapidly evolving massive stars that are fusing helium or heavier elements in their cores.

Characteristics [ edit ] The strong, dense stellar winds from Wolf-Rayet stars consist of streams of charged particles traveling at speeds of thousands of kilometers per second. These winds slam into the surrounding interstellar medium, generating shock waves that heat and ionize the gas and dust, causing it to glow and emit radiation in visible and other wavelengths .

This process creates an enveloping nebula around the Wolf-Rayet star with a distinctive multi-ring structure. The nebula contains shells and cavities carved out by the stellar winds, surrounded by dense swept-up material. These structures become visible due to fluorescent emission from ionized gas as well as scattered starlight.

[ 1 ] Notable examples [ edit ] Some well-studied Wolf-Rayet nebulae include: NGC 6888 (Crescent Nebula) NGC 2359 (Thor's Helmet Nebula) M1-67 (Luminous Blue Variable Nebula) NGC 3199 (Nebula around WR 18) These nebulae exhibit intricate structures revealed in visible light as well as infrared, X-ray, and other wavelengths, providing insight into the powerful stellar winds and evolutionary processes around Wolf-Rayet stars.

Formation and evolution [ edit ] Wolf-Rayet stars represent a brief late stage in the evolution of some very massive stars.

[ 2 ] They have shed their outer hydrogen envelopes and their stellar winds now consist of heavier elements like helium, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen.

[ 3 ] As a Wolf-Rayet star evolves and loses mass, its winds shape the surrounding gas and dust into bubble-like nebular structures. The inner region forms from the current stellar wind, while outer shells are remnants of previous mass-loss episodes.

[ citation needed ] Eventually the star will shed more matter, ending its life in a spectacular supernova explosion that will dramatically alter the Wolf-Rayet nebula's structure and composition.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Toalá, J. A.; Guerrero, M. A.; Ramos-Larios, G.; Guzmán, V. (2015). "WISE morphological study of Wolf-Rayet nebulae".

Astronomy & Astrophysics .

578 : A66.

arXiv : 1503.06878 .

Bibcode : 2015A&A...578A..66T .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361/201525706 .

S2CID 55776698 .

^ Zavala, S.; Toalá, J. A.; Santamaría, E.; Ramos-Larios, G.; Sabin, L.; Quino-Mendoza, J. A.; Rubio, G.; Guerrero, M. A. (2022).

"3D mapping of the Wolf–Rayet nebula M 1-67: Clues for post-common envelope evolution in massive stars" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

513 (3): 3317– 3325.

arXiv : 2204.07778 .

doi : 10.1093/mnras/stac1097 .

^ a b McClelland, L. A. S.; Eldridge, J. J. (2016).

"Helium stars: Towards an understanding of Wolf–Rayet evolution" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

459 (2): 1505– 1518.

arXiv : 1602.06358 .

doi : 10.1093/mnras/stw618 .

v t e Nebulae Visible nebula Dark nebula Diffuse nebula Emission nebula Planetary nebula Supernova remnant Nova remnant H II region Reflection nebula Variable nebula Protoplanetary nebula Pre-stellar nebulae Giant molecular cloud Bok globule Evaporating gaseous globule Solar nebula Stellar nebula Nova remnant Protoplanetary nebula Wolf–Rayet nebula Post-stellar nebulae Planetary nebula Supernova remnant Pulsar wind nebula Supershell Clouds Interstellar cloud Molecular cloud Infrared cirrus Integrated Flux Nebula High-velocity cloud H I region Morphology Bipolar nebula Pinwheel nebula Intergalactic blobs Lyman-alpha blob Lists Diffuse Largest Nebulae Planetary (PNe) Protoplanetary (PPNe) Supernova remnants (SNRs) Related Cometary knot Category Commons Wiktionary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wolf–Rayet_nebula&oldid=1255793181 " Categories : Wolf–Rayet nebulae Nebulae Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 This page was last edited on 6 November 2024, at 18:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wolf–Rayet nebula 12 languages Add topic

