Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History 3 Beliefs 4 Texts 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Friends of God 8 languages Deutsch Español 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Norsk bokmål Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medieval mystical group This article is about the medieval mystical group. For the documentary about evangelicals by Alexandra Pelosi, see Friends of God (film) .

Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e The Friends of God (German: Gottesfreunde ; or gotesvriunde ) was a medieval mystical group of both ecclesiastical and lay persons [ 1 ] within the Catholic Church (though it nearly became a separate sect) and a center of German mysticism . It was founded between 1339 and 1343 during the Avignon Papacy , a time of great turmoil for the Catholic Church. The Friends of God were originally centered in Basel , Switzerland and were also fairly important in Strasbourg and Cologne . Some late-nineteenth century writers made large claims for the movement, seeing it both as influential in fourteenth-century mysticism and as a precursor of the Protestant Reformation . Modern studies of the movement have emphasised the derivative and often second-rate character of its mystical literature, and its limited impact on medieval literature in Germany.

[ 2 ] Some of the movement's ideas still prefigured the Protestant reformation .

[ 3 ] Name [ edit ] The name "Friends of God" may have been influenced by various sources. A number of biblical passages use the term (e.g. Judges 8:22, James 2:23, Exodus 33:11, Psalm 138:17, Wisdom 7:27, Luke 12:4, and John 15:15). The concept of friendship with God had also been applied by various medieval authors, and particularly among Meister Eckhart and his followers.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The movement grew out of the preaching and teaching of Meister Eckhart , and especially his Dominican spiritual heirs, the preacher John Tauler and the writer Henry Suso . An influence on the Friends of God, although remaining in the background, was the secular priest Henry of Nördlingen , [ 4 ] from the Bavarian Oberland , who met Tauler and Suso in Basel in 1339.

Henry had a great deal of interaction with other Bavarian and German mystics [ 5 ] and introduced the Friends of God to The Flowing Light of the Deity by Mechthild of Magdeburg .

The group achieved a nascent institutional form in 1367 when wealthy layman Rulman Merswin purchased and restored a derelict monastery in Strasbourg known as the grünenwörth ('Green Isle').

[ 6 ] Grünenwörth served as a refuge for study for the Friends of God and as a “school of prophets” which produced a number of mystical texts.

[ 7 ] Merswin is suspected of being the anonymous author The Friend of God from the Oberland .

[ 8 ] The Friends of God, as led by Tauler and Suso, sought a mystical path in line with established Catholic doctrine, following Thomas Aquinas. Rulman Merswin, under the guidance of The Friend of God from the Oberland, wanted to purify the Church. This stress on reform brought The Friends of God into conflict with the Church and not long after Merswin’s death in 1382, they were condemned.

[ 1 ] After Merswin's death, some sources claim that Nicholas of Basel became the leader. He was eventually burned at the stake with two of his followers for heresy at Vienna around 1395.

[ 9 ] The relationship of Nicholas of Basel to the Friends of God is unclear as he was condemned as a Beghard .

[ 10 ] Another prominent member, Martin of Mainz, a follower of Nicholas of Basel, was also burned for heresy in 1393.

[ 10 ] Beliefs [ edit ] Many leaders of the group were executed for heresy because they criticized the corruption of Catholicism : they believed that there would soon be judgment from God on the church. The group was a democratic lay movement, and they held holiness, love, piety and devotion as important.

[ 11 ] The movement was a mysticist movement and they held great importance in rescuing other peoples' souls.

[ 12 ] Texts [ edit ] A number of mystical texts are associated with The Friends of God, most notably the Theologia Germanica and the Book of the Nine Rocks . Many of the works were attributed to The Friend of God from the Oberland , although probably written by Rulman Merswin himself.

[ 7 ] Christianity portal See also [ edit ] Margaretha Ebner The Friend of God from the Oberland Theologia Germanica References [ edit ] ^ a b Walsh, Reginald. "Friends of God." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 6. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. 6 December 2017 ^ a b McGinn 2005 , p. 408.

^ "Friends of God | religious group | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2021-12-19 .

^ Dictionary of German Biography Volume 8 , Walther Killy et al., eds; K G Saur Verlag Gmbh & Co; Reprint 2011 ed. Edition p. 493 ^ Catholic Encyclopedia ^ McGinn 2005 , p. 417.

^ a b Jones, Rufus M.

, Studies in Mystical Religion , Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, no date pp. 247–252 (originally published London: Macmillan, 1909) ^ Weeks, Andrew.

German Mysticism From Hildegard of Bingen to Ludwig Wittgenstein , SUNY Press, 1993, p. 94 , ISBN 9780791414194 ^ "Nicholas of Basel", BrillOnLine ^ a b Leff, Gordon.

Heresy in the Later Middle Ages: The Relation of Heterodoxy to Dissent, c. 1250 – c. 1450 , Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1967 (reprinted by Sandpiper Book, 1999), p. 383 ^ "Friends of God | religious group | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2021-12-13 .

^ "Philip Schaff: History of the Christian Church, Volume VI: The Middle Ages. A.D. 1294-1517 - Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org . Retrieved 2021-12-28 .

Works cited [ edit ] McGinn, Bernard (2005).

The Harvest of Mysticism in Medieval Germany (The Presence of God Volume 4) . The Crossroad Publishing Company.

Further reading [ edit ] Rufus M. Jones , Studies in Mystical Religion, Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, no date (originally published London: Macmillan, 1909) Gordon Leff, Heresy in the Later Middle Ages: The Relation of Heterodoxy to Dissent, c. 1250 – c. 1450, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1967 (reprinted by Sandpiper Book, 1999) External links [ edit ] "The Friends of God" (Schaff - CCEL) Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Israel 2 Other IdRef v t e Proto-Protestantism 400–1100 AD People Jovinian Claudius of Turin Gottschalk of Orbais Ratramnus Berengar of Tours Sects and groups Pataria Berengarians 1100–1400 AD People Tanchelm Peter of Bruys Henry of Lausanne Arnold of Brescia Peter Waldo Milíč of Kroměříž John Wycliffe Matthias of Janov Marsilius of Padua Sects and groups Arnoldists Waldensians Lollardy Strigolniki Friends of God Petrobrusians 1400–1500 AD People Jan Hus Jan Žižka Mikuláš of Pelhřimov Petr Chelčický Johannes von Goch Johann Ruchrat von Wesel Wessel Gansfort Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples Lorenzo Valla Girolamo Savonarola Luke of Prague Sects and groups Bohemian Reformation Hussites Taborites Utraquism Czech Brethren Piagnoni Events Oldcastle Revolt Hussite Wars Compacts of Basel Peace of Kutná Hora Mérindol massacre Savoyard–Waldensian wars Piedmontese Easter Literature Wycliffe Bible Hussite Bible Jistebnice hymn book Ecclesiae Regimen Twelve Conclusions of the Lollards Triumph of the Cross (Girolamo Savonarola) Other Comparison of Catharism and Protestantism Italics indicate their inclusion to be controversial or disputed.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friends_of_God&oldid=1299845961 " Categories : Christian mysticism History of mystic traditions Former Christian denominations Christian communities 14th-century Catholicism Christian mystics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 19:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friends of God 8 languages Add topic

