Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Drafting 2 Promulgation 3 Publication 4 Doctrinal value 5 Contents Toggle Contents subsection 5.1 Paragraph 2267 (capital punishment) 6 Reception 7 Derived works 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle External links subsection 12.1 Promulgations 12.2 Text of the Catechism 12.3 Text of the Compendium Toggle the table of contents Catechism of the Catholic Church 38 languages العربية Беларуская Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Jawa Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Papiamentu Patois Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Summary of doctrine of the Catholic Church This article is about the 1992 catechism. For other Catholic catechisms, see Catechism § Catholic catechisms .

The Good Shepherd logo on the cover of many editions is adapted from a Christian tombstone in the catacombs of Domitilla in Rome.

[ 1 ] Part of a series on the Catholic Church St. Peter's Basilica , Vatican City Overview Pope : Leo XIV Hierarchy History ( timeline ) Theology Liturgy Sacraments Mary Background Jesus Christ Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Early Christianity Peter Paul Fathers History of the Catholic Church History of the papacy Ecumenical councils Magisterium Four Marks of the Church One true church Apostolic succession Organisation Holy See Roman Curia College of Cardinals Ecumenical councils Episcopal polity Latin Church Eastern Churches Canon law Theologies Doctrine God Trinity Father Son Holy Ghost Consubstantialitas Filioque Divinum illud munus Divine law Decalogus Ex Cathedra Deificatio Realms beyond the States of the Church Heaven Purgatory Limbo Hell Paschal mystery Passion of Jesus Crucifixion of Jesus Harrowing of Hell Resurrection of Jesus Ascension of Jesus Blessed Virgin Mary Mariology Veneration Immaculate Conception Mater Dei Perpetual virginity Assumption Dormition Titles Queen Apparition Mediatrix Salvation Baptism of desire Baptism of blood Divine grace Outside the Church there is no salvation Infused righteousness Invincible ignorance Justification Means of grace Merit Mortal sin Satisfaction Moral influence Sanctification Synergism Venial sin Ecclesiology College of Bishops Deposit of faith Infallibility of the Church Mystical Body of Christ Papal primacy People of God Perfect community Subsistit in Other teachings Josephology Morality Body Sexuality Apologetics Amillennialism Original sin Hypostatic union Predestination Seven deadly sins Beatific vision Saints Dogma Texts Bible Old Testament New Testament Official Bible Vulgate Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Peshitta Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Catechism of the Catholic Church Papal bull Apostolic exhortation Epistula Encyclica Philosophy Cardinal virtues Just war Natural law Catholic ethics Personalism Probabilism Social teaching Philosophy of canon law Philosophers Virtue ethics Schools Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Christian humanism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Traditionalist Catholicism Sedevacantism Worship Liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Mass Divine Liturgy Holy Qurbana Holy Qurobo Liturgy of the Hours Liturgical year Sacraments Baptism Penance Eucharist Confirmation Anointing of the Sick Matrimony Holy orders Prayer Devotions Bible Biblical canon Rites Latin liturgy : Roman Post-Vatican II Tridentine Use of Sarum Anglican Use Zaire Use Gallican Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Eastern Catholic liturgy : Alexandrian Antiochene West Syriac Malankara East Syriac Armenian Byzantine Miscellaneous Antipopes Anti-Catholicism Criticism Deism / Pandeism Ecumenism Monasticism Relations with: Islam Judaism ( Zionism ) Orthodoxy Protestantism Societal issues Art Evolution Health care HIV/AIDS Homosexuality Sexual abuse Music Nazi Germany Politics ( in the United States ) Role in civilization Science Sex and gender roles Slavery the Age of Discovery Links and resources Index Outline Glossary Category Media Templates WikiProject Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e The Catechism of the Catholic Church ( Latin : Catechismus Catholicae Ecclesiae ; commonly called the Catechism or the CCC ) is a reference work that summarizes the Catholic Church 's doctrine. It was promulgated by Pope John Paul II in 1992 as a reference for the development of local catechisms , directed primarily to those (in the church) responsible for catechesis and offered as "useful reading for all other Christian faithful ".

[ 2 ] It has been translated into and published in more than twenty languages worldwide.

John Paul II referred to it as "the Catechism of the Second Vatican Council ".

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Drafting [ edit ] The decision to publish an official catechism was taken at the Second Extraordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops , which was convened by Pope John Paul II on 25 January 1985 to evaluate the progress of implementing the Vatican II council 's goals on the 20th anniversary of its closure. The assembly participants expressed the desire that "a catechism or compendium of all Catholic doctrine regarding both faith and morals be composed, that it might be, as it were, a point of reference for the catechisms or compendiums that are prepared in various regions. The presentation of doctrine must be biblical and liturgical . It must be sound doctrine suited to the present life of Christians".

[ 5 ] John Paul II says that in 1986 he formed a commission composed of 12 cardinals and bishops chaired by cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (who later became Pope Benedict XVI ) to prepare the first draft of the Catechism .

[ 6 ] The commission was assisted by a committee consisting of seven diocesan bishops , experts in theology and catechesis .

[ 6 ] The first principal part of the Catechism , which deals with the Profession of Faith, was drafted by Bishop José Manuel Estepa Llaurens and Bishop Alessandro Maggiolini . The second principal part, on the sacraments, was drafted by future Cardinals Jorge Medina and Estanislao Esteban Karlic . The third principal part, on life in Christ, was drafted by the future Cardinal Jean Honoré and Bishop David Konstant . The final principal part, on prayer, was drafted by Fr. Jean Corbon, a Lebanese Melkite priest. Future CDF Prefect William Levada wrote the Catechism' s glossary. The project's editorial secretary was the future Cardinal Christoph Schönborn , OP.

[ 7 ] Reminiscing those days, Benedict said in 2011: "I must confess that even today it seems a miracle to me that this project [the Catechism of the Catholic Church ] was ultimately successful".

[ 8 ] Cardinal Georges Cottier said he had worked on the catechism.

[ 9 ] Promulgation [ edit ] "Fidei depositum" redirects here. For the body of revealed truth in the scriptures and sacred tradition, see Deposit of faith .

The Catechism of the Catholic Church , which I approved 25 June last and the publication of which I today order by virtue of my Apostolic Authority, is a statement of the Church's faith and of Catholic doctrine, attested to or illumined by Sacred Scripture , Apostolic Tradition and the Church's Magisterium . I declare it to be a valid and legitimate instrument for ecclesial communion and a sure norm for teaching the faith.

— John Paul II, Fidei depositum , part IV The Catechism was promulgated by John Paul II on 11 October 1992, the 30th anniversary of the opening of the Second Vatican Council , with his apostolic constitution Fidei depositum (in English, The Deposit of Faith ).

[ 6 ] [ 10 ] On 15 August 1997, the Solemnity of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary , John Paul II promulgated the Latin typical edition , with his apostolic letter Laetamur magnopere .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Publication [ edit ] The CCC was published in the French language in 1992.

[ 13 ] In the United States, the English translation was published in 1994 and more than 250,000 copies had been pre-ordered before its release, [ 14 ] with a note that it was "subject to revision according to the Latin typical edition ( editio typica ) when it is published".

[ 15 ] The Latin typical edition, the official text of reference promulgated on 15 August 1997, [ 16 ] amended the contents of the provisional French text at a few points.

[ 17 ] As a result, the earlier translations from the French into other languages (including English) had to be amended and re-published as "second editions".

[ note 1 ] Over eight million copies have been sold worldwide and the book has been published in more than twenty languages.

[ 19 ] Doctrinal value [ edit ] In the apostolic constitution Fidei depositum , John Paul II declared that the Catechism of the Catholic Church is "a valid and legitimate instrument for ecclesial communion and a sure norm for teaching the faith", and stressed that it "is not intended to replace the local catechisms duly approved by the ecclesiastical authorities, the diocesan Bishops and the Episcopal Conferences ".

[ 6 ] The Catechism states: [ 20 ] 11 This catechism aims at presenting an organic synthesis of the essential and fundamental contents of Catholic doctrine, as regards both faith and morals , in the light of the Second Vatican Council and the whole of the Church's Tradition . Its principal sources are the Sacred Scriptures , the Fathers of the Church , the liturgy , and the Church's Magisterium . It is intended to serve "as a point of reference for the catechisms or compendia that are composed in the various countries".

12 This work is intended primarily for those responsible for catechesis : first of all the bishops , as teachers of the faith and pastors of the Church. It is offered to them as an instrument in fulfilling their responsibility of teaching the People of God. Through the bishops, it is addressed to redactors of catechisms , to priests, and to catechists . It will also be useful reading for all other Christian faithful.

Contents [ edit ] The Catechism is a source on which to base other Catholic catechisms (e.g., YOUCAT or the Youth Catechism of the Catholic Church ) and other expositions of Catholic doctrine. As stated in the apostolic constitution Fidei depositum , with which its publication was ordered, it was given so "that it may be a sure and authentic reference text for teaching Catholic doctrine and particularly for preparing local catechisms".

[ 21 ] The Catechism includes 2865 paragraphs, arranged in four principal parts: [ 22 ] The Profession of Faith (the Apostles' Creed ) The Celebration of the Christian Mystery (the Sacred Liturgy , and especially the sacraments ) Life in Christ (including the Ten Commandments ) Christian Prayer (including the Lord's Prayer ).

The section on Scripture in the Catechism covers the Patristic tradition of "spiritual exegesis " as further developed through the scholastic doctrine of the " four senses ".

[ 23 ] The Catechism by specifies that the necessary spiritual interpretation should be sought through the four senses of Scripture.

[ 24 ] The literal sense pertains to the meaning of the words themselves, including any figurative meanings.

[ 25 ] The spiritual senses pertain to the significance of the things (persons, places, objects or events) denoted by the words. Of the three spiritual senses, the allegorical sense is foundational. It relates persons, events, and institutions of earlier covenants to those of later covenants, and especially to the New Covenant . Building on the allegorical sense, the moral sense instructs in regard to action, and the anagogical sense points to man's final destiny.

[ 26 ] The teaching of the Catechism on Scripture has encouraged the pursuit of covenantal theology , an approach that employs the four senses to structure salvation history via the biblical covenants.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Paragraph 2267 (capital punishment) [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church and capital punishment § Modification to the Catechism (2018) One of the changes in the 1997 update consisted of the inclusion of the position on the death penalty that is defended in John Paul II's encyclical Evangelium vitae of 1995.

[ 29 ] [ better source needed ] The paragraph dealing with the death penalty (2267) was revised again by Pope Francis in 2018.

The text previously stated (1997): [ 30 ] Assuming that the guilty party's identity and responsibility have been fully determined, the traditional teaching of the Church does not exclude recourse to the death penalty, if this is the only possible way of effectively defending human lives against the unjust aggressor.

If, however, non-lethal means are sufficient to defend and protect people's safety from the aggressor, authority will limit itself to such means, as these are more in keeping with the concrete conditions of the common good and more in conformity to the dignity of the human person.

Today, in fact, as a consequence of the possibilities which the state has for effectively preventing crime, by rendering one who has committed an offense incapable of doing harm – without definitely taking away from him the possibility of redeeming himself – the cases in which the execution of the offender is an absolute necessity "are very rare, if not practically nonexistent." The 2018 change to the Catechism reads: [ 31 ] [ 30 ] Recourse to the death penalty on the part of legitimate authority, following a fair trial, was long considered an appropriate response to the gravity of certain crimes and an acceptable, albeit extreme, means of safeguarding the common good.

Today, however, there is an increasing awareness that the dignity of the person is not lost even after the commission of very serious crimes. In addition, a new understanding has emerged of the significance of penal sanctions imposed by the state. Lastly, more effective systems of detention have been developed, which ensure the due protection of citizens but, at the same time, do not definitively deprive the guilty of the possibility of redemption.

Consequently, the Church teaches, in the light of the Gospel, that "the death penalty is inadmissible because it is an attack on the inviolability and dignity of the person", and the Catholic Church works with determination for its abolition worldwide.

Reception [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2022 ) In 1992, cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI ) stated: [ 32 ] [The Catechism of the Catholic Church ] clearly show[s] that the problem of what we must do as human beings, of how we should live our lives so that we and the world may become just, is the essential problem of our day, and basically of all ages. After the fall of ideologies, the problem of man—the moral problem—is presented to today's context in a totally new way: What should we do? How does life become just? What can give us and the whole world a future which is worth living? Since the catechism treats these questions, it is a book which interests many people, far beyond purely theological or ecclesial circles.

Ulf Ekman , former Charismatic pastor and the founder of Livets Ord , says that the Catechism is "the best book he has ever read".

[ 33 ] Derived works [ edit ] The Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic Church was published in 2005, and the first edition in English in 2006. It is a more concise, dialogic and illustrated version of the Catechism .

[ 34 ] : Introduction The text of the Compendium is available in fourteen languages on the Vatican website, which also gives the text of the Catechism itself in ten languages.

[ 34 ] Youcat is a 2011 publication aimed at helping youth understand the Catechism .

Cardinal Francis Arinze commented in 2023 on the need for pamphlets and booklets to communicate the contents of specific aspects of the Catechism and the Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church , because of their size.

[ 35 ] See also [ edit ] Catholicism portal Christianity portal Catechism of Saint Pius X Roman Catechism The Common Catechism Baltimore Catechism Catholic Catechist Catholic spirituality History of the Catholic Church since 1962 Christ - Our Pascha Outline of Catholicism Pastoral care in Catholicism Timeline of the Catholic Church Notes [ edit ] ^ In the U.S., the bishops then published a new English translation, from the official Latin text. (English translation of the Catechism of the Catholic Church: Modifications from the Editio Typica , copyright 1997, United States Catholic Conference, Inc.—Libreria Editrice Vaticana.) The U.S. bishops added a "Glossary and Index Analyticus " (copyright 2000, United States Catholic Conference, Inc.) and published the new translation, with glossary and index, as the Catechism of the Catholic Church, Second Edition, "revised in accordance with the official Latin text promulgated by John Paul II". (From the title page.) It was noted that "a glossary had been proposed" previously, before initial promulgation, "to provide assistance to those who would use the new Catechism".

[ 18 ] References [ edit ] ^ From the Copyright Information , pg. iv.

[ full citation needed ] ^ " CCC , 12" . Vatican.va . Retrieved 4 April 2023 .

This work is intended primarily for those responsible for catechesis: first of all the bishops, as teachers of the faith and pastors of the Church....

^ "Address of John Paul II to the International Catechetical Congresso" . 11 October 2002.

The Catechism so often refers to it that it might well be called the Catechism of the Second Vatican Council. The conciliar texts constitute a sure "compass" for the believers of the third millennium.

^ Pope John Paul II, Apostolic Letter " Porta Fidei " 11. Quote: "In order to arrive at a systematic knowledge of the content of the faith, all can find in the Catechism of the Catholic Church a precious and indispensable tool. It is one of the most important fruits of the Second Vatican Council. In the Apostolic Constitution Fidei Depositum, signed, not by accident, on the thirtieth anniversary of the opening of the Second Vatican Council, Blessed John Paul II wrote: “this catechism will make a very important contribution to that work of renewing the whole life of the Church ... I declare it to be a valid and legitimate instrument for ecclesial communion and a sure norm for teaching the faith." ^ John, Paul II (11 October 1992).

"Apostolic Constitution Fidei Depositum" .

vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

^ a b c d " Fidei depositum " . Libreria Editrice Vaticana. 11 October 1992 . Retrieved 5 October 2007 .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 19 August 2023 .

^ "Preface Written by the Holy Father Benedict XVI in YOUCAT, Aids to the Catechism of the Catholic Church for Young People, in view of WYD 2011 in Madrid" .

Vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 20 November 2019 . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

^ " "If everything is grace, then grace is no more" (by Gianni Valente)" .

30Giorni .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2014 . Retrieved 23 December 2021 .

Going back to the early years, the first 'big' text I worked on was the social encyclical Centesimus annus . And then the Ut unum sint on ecumenicalism, the moral encyclical Veritatis splendor , and the Fides et ratio … also the Catechism of the Catholic Church ^ "INTRODUCTION".

United States Catholic Catechism for Adults . Washington, DC: United States Conference of Catholic Bishops . 2006. pp. xv.

^ "Laetamur magnopere (August 15, 1997) | John Paul II" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 13 December 2022 .

^ Bill Dodds (14 June 2017).

"Surfing the Catechism on its silver anniversary" . Our Sunday Visitor. Archived from the original on 5 January 2018 . Retrieved 5 January 2018 .

^ Catéchisme de l'Église Catholique (in French). Tours/Paris: Mame/Plon. 1992.

ISBN 2-266-00585-5 .

^ Steinfels, Peter (28 May 1994).

"After Long Delay, a New Catechism Appears in English" .

The New York Times .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church . Libreria Editrice Vaticana. 1994. pp. ii.

ISBN 978-0-8294-0772-3 .

^ "Latin Edition of Catechism Promulgated" .

L'Osservatore Romano . 17 September 1997. Archived from the original on 21 October 2000 . Retrieved 5 October 2007 .

^ "Modifications from the Editio Typica " .

St. Charles Borromeo Catholic Church . Amministrazione Del Patrimonio Della Sede Apostolica . Retrieved 30 May 2016 .

^ United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, Glossary: Prefatory Note to the Glossary , archived 18 September 2008, accessed 21 May 2023 ^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (With Modifications From The Editio Typica ed.). New York: Image Doubleday. 1997. p. 868.

ISBN 0-385-47967-0 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraphs 11–2 .

^ "Fidei Depositum – John Paul II – Apostolic Constitution (11 October 1992)" . Vatican.va . Retrieved 31 July 2014 .

^ "Table of Contents" .

Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraphs 101–141 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraphs 111,  113,  115–119 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraph 116 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraph 117 .

^ Scott W. Hahn (2009).

Covenant and Communion: The Biblical Theology of Pope Benedict XVI . Brazos Press. pp.

108– 109.

ISBN 9781441205230 .

^ Scott Hahn , ed. (2011).

For the Sake of Our Salvation: The Truth and Humility of God's Word . Volume 6 of Letter & spirit. Emmaus Road Publishing. pp.

126– 127.

ISBN 9781931018685 .

^ "The death penalty and the catechism" .

United States Conference of Catholic Bishops . Archived from the original on 12 March 2013 . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

^ a b "Pope Francis: 'death penalty inadmissable' – Vatican News" .

www.vaticannews.va . 2 August 2018.

^ "Nuova redazione del n. 2267 del Catechismo della Chiesa Cattolica sulla pena di morte" .

Holy See Press Office . Retrieved 9 August 2018 .

^ "The Catechism of the Catholic Church in Context" . United States Conference of Catholic Bishops Office for the Catechism. 9 December 1992. Archived from the original on 26 September 2007 . Retrieved 5 October 2007 .

^ Berggren, Lukas (14 March 2014).

"Ulf Ekman Says Prophetic Word Confirmed His Catholic Conversion" . Charisma News . Retrieved 3 January 2018 .

^ a b "Catechism of the Catholic Church and Catechism of the Catholic Church: Compendium" .

Vatican.va . 28 June 2005 . Retrieved 22 May 2023 .

^ Arinze, F., Expanding Communications Opportunities in the Apostolate (From Vatican II Inter Mirifica to 21st Century Communications Challenges in the Apostolate of the Church) , EJ 14 (2023) 11-16, Academic Journals Online , published in 2023, archived on 18 November 2024, accessed on 14 August 2025 Further reading [ edit ] Wrenn, Michael J.; Whitehead, K. D. (1996).

Flawed Expectations: The Reception of the Catechism of the Catholic Church .

Ignatius Press .

ISBN 978-0-89870-591-1 .

Ratzinger, Joseph ; Schönborn, Christoph von (1994).

Introduction to the Catechism of the Catholic Church . Ignatius Press.

ISBN 978-0-89870-485-3 .

Schönborn, Christoph (31 December 2022).

"Benedict XVI: 'Father of Catechism of the Catholic Church' " .

Vatican News . Retrieved 31 December 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Catechism of the Catholic Church .

Promulgations [ edit ] Fidei depositum , the apostolic constitution promulgating the Catechism Laetamur magnopere , on the promulgation of the editio typica of the Catechism Text of the Catechism [ edit ] The Holy See – Archive – Catechism of the Catholic Church (in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, German, Italian, Latin, Latvian, Malagasy, Portuguese, and Spanish) (as of 29 May 2021 [update] ) United States Conference of Catholic Bishops ; English – Second edition (revised in accordance with the Latin editio typica ) Text of the Compendium [ edit ] Compendium at Vatican/Holy See website v t e Pope John Paul II Born Karol Józef Wojtyła; 18 May 1920 – 2 April 2005 Archbishop of Kraków (1963–1978) Cardinal Priest of San Cesareo de Appia (1967–1978) Pope (1978–2005) Biography Early life Karol Wojtyła (father) Beatification and canonization Coat of arms Pope John Paul II Papacy October 1978 papal conclave Inauguration Apologies Cardinals created People declared venerable Beatifications Canonizations Papal mediation in the Beagle conflict Assassination attempt World Youth Day World Day of the Sick Death and funeral dignitaries Visits (selected) Brazil Ireland Nicaragua United Kingdom United States Relations Eastern Orthodox Church Judaism Other topics Abbà Pater Criticism Family home (historic house) Health John Paul II Foundation Monuments Totus tuus Bibliography Teachings Constitutions Sacrae disciplinae leges Pastor bonus Ex corde Ecclesiae Fidei depositum Universi Dominici gregis Exhortations Catechesi tradendae Familiaris consortio Redemptionis donum Reconciliatio et paenitentia Christifideles laici Redemptoris custos Pastores dabo vobis Ecclesia in Africa Vita consecrata Une espérance nouvelle pour le Liban Ecclesia in America Ecclesia in Asia Ecclesia in Oceania Ecclesia in Europa Pastores gregis Letters Dominicae cenae Salvifici doloris Mulieris dignitatem Ordinatio sacerdotalis Tertio millennio adveniente Letter to Women Ad tuendam fidem Novo millennio ineunte Misericordia Dei Rosarium Virginis Mariae The Rapid Development Encyclicals Redemptor hominis Dives in misericordia Laborem exercens Slavorum Apostoli Dominum et vivificantem Redemptoris Mater Sollicitudo rei socialis Redemptoris missio Centesimus annus Veritatis splendor Evangelium vitae Ut unum sint Fides et ratio Ecclesia de Eucharistia Books Love and Responsibility Crossing the Threshold of Hope Memory and Identity Other writings The Jeweler's Shop Theology of the Body " Roman Triptych " Testament Documents Catechism of the Catholic Church Quattuor abhinc annos We Remember: A Reflection on the Shoah Dominus Iesus Related Papal Concert to Commemorate the Shoah Political views Scriptural Way of the Cross Eponymous places In popular culture Secondary schools United States Huntsville, AL Boca Raton, FL Tallahassee, FL Slidell, LA Hyannis, MA Greenville, NC Royersford, PA Hendersonville, TN Corpus Christi, TX Plano, TX Schertz, TX Dumfries, VA Lacey, WA Other countries Australia: Sydney Canada: London Canada: Toronto New Zealand: Greymouth New Zealand: Rotorua Poland: Tarnów Colleges and universities John Paul II Catholic University of Lublin John Paul II Institute John Paul the Great Catholic University Pontifical University of John Paul II Pope John Paul II College of Education St. John Paul II Minor Seminary Airports Bari Karol Wojtyła Airport João Paulo II Airport John Paul II International Airport Kraków–Balice Bridges El Puente del Papa John Paul II Bridge, Puławy Juan Pablo II Bridge Third Millennium John Paul II Bridge Other places Saint John Paul II National Shrine Ioannes Paulus II Peninsula John Paul II Center for the New Evangelization John Paul II Center for Interreligious Dialogue John Paul II Foundation for Research and Treatment Museum of John Paul II and Primate Wyszyński Museum of John Paul II Collection Pope John Paul II Park Reservation Films Pope John Paul II The Papal Chase Have No Fear: The Life of Pope John Paul II The Pope's Toilet Nine Days that Changed the World TV miniseries Pope John Paul II Karol: A Man Who Became Pope Karol: The Pope, The Man In Search of the Pope's Children Other media The Planet Is Alive...Let It Live!

Red Rabbit The Pope's Children Credo: John Paul II v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Israel Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Catechism_of_the_Catholic_Church&oldid=1305808498 " Categories : Catechisms of the Catholic Church Pope John Paul II Hidden categories: All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from December 2021 CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2016 Articles to be expanded from August 2022 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Arabic-language sources (ar) Articles with Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with Latvian-language sources (lv) Articles with Malagasy-language sources (mg) Articles with Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Articles containing potentially dated statements from May 2021 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 06:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Catechism of the Catholic Church 38 languages Add topic

