Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 In the petrochemical industry 3 In the laboratory 4 References Toggle the table of contents Hydrogenolysis 12 languages Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chemical reaction in which a C–C or C–R bond is cleaved by hydrogen Hydrogenolysis is a chemical reaction whereby a carbon–carbon or carbon– heteroatom single bond is cleaved or undergoes lysis (breakdown) by hydrogen .

[ 1 ] The heteroatom may vary, but it usually is oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur. A related reaction is hydrogenation , where hydrogen is added to the molecule, without cleaving bonds. Usually hydrogenolysis is conducted catalytically using hydrogen gas.

History [ edit ] The term "hydrogenolysis" was coined by Carleton Ellis in reference to hydrogenolysis of carbon–carbon bonds.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Earlier, Paul Sabatier had already observed the hydrogenolysis of benzyl alcohol to toluene , [ 3 ] and as early as 1906, Padoa and Ponti had observed the hydrogenolysis of furfuryl alcohol .

[ 4 ] Homer Burton Adkins and Ralph Connor were the first to call the carbon–oxygen bond cleavage "hydrogenolysis".

[ 1 ] In the petrochemical industry [ edit ] Main article: hydrodesulfurization In petroleum refineries , catalytic hydrogenolysis of feedstocks is conducted on a large scale to remove sulfur from feedstocks, releasing gaseous hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S). The hydrogen sulfide is subsequently recovered in an amine treater and finally converted to elemental sulfur in a Claus process unit. In those industries, desulfurization process units are often referred to as hydrodesulfurizers (HDS) or hydrotreaters (HDT). Catalysts are based on molybdenum sulfide containing smaller amounts of cobalt or nickel. Hydrogenolysis is accompanied by hydrogenation.

[ 5 ] Another hydrogenolysis reaction of commercial importance is the hydrogenolysis of esters into alcohols by catalysts such as copper chromite .

The hydrodeoxygenation reaction used in the Neste Renewable Diesel process, the vegetable oil refining process of largest production capacity, is a hydrogenolysis of triglycerides into alkanes .

In the laboratory [ edit ] In the laboratory, hydrogenolysis is used in organic synthesis .  Debenzylation is most common and involves the cleavage of benzyl ethers: [ 6 ] R − OCH 2 C 6 H 5 + H 2 →  R − OH + CH 3 C 6 H 5 Thioketals undergo hydrogenolysis using Raney nickel in the Mozingo reduction .

Laboratory hydrogenolysis is operationally similar to hydrogenation , and may be accomplished at atmospheric pressure by stirring the reaction mixture under a slight positive pressure of hydrogen gas, having flushed the apparatus with more of this gas. The hydrogen may be provided by attaching a balloon to a needle, filling it from a bottle, and inserting the needle into the reaction flask via a rubber septum . At high pressure, a hydrogenation autoclave (i.e., a Buchi or Parr hydrogenator ) or similar piece of equipment is required.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Ralph Connor, Homer Adkins. Hydrogenolysis Of Oxygenated Organic Compounds. J. Am. Chem. Soc.; 1932; 54(12); 4678–4690.

doi : 10.1021/ja01351a026 ^ Carleton Ellis. Hydrogenation of Organic Substances, 3rd ed., Van Nostrand Company, New York, 1930, p. 564 (as referred by Connor and Adkins).

^ Sabatier and Murat. Ann. Chim. [9] 4, 258, (1915), according to Connor and Adkins.

^ Furfuryl alcohol hydrogenation is accompanied by hydrogenolysis into 2-methylfuran, which gives 2-methyltetrahydrofuran, and further hydrogenolysis opens the ring to give 2-pentanol. Original: Padoa and Ponti. Atti. R. accad. Lincei, 15, [5] 610 (1906); Gazz. chim. ital. 37, [2] 105 (1907), according to Kaufmann: W. E. Kaufmann, Roger Adams. The Use Of Platinum Oxide As A Catalyst In The Reduction Of Organic Compounds. Iv. Reduction Of Furfural And Its Derivatives. J. Am. Chem. Soc.; 1923; 45(12); 3029–44.

doi : 10.1021/ja01665a033 ^ Topsøe, H.; Clausen, B. S.; Massoth, F. E., Hydrotreating Catalysis, Science and Technology, Springer-Verlag: Berlin, 1996.

^ For example, Organic Syntheses , Coll. Vol. 7, p. 386 (1990); Vol. 60, p. 92 (1981).

http://orgsynth.org/orgsyn/pdfs/CV7P0386.pdf . For an example of C-N scission, see Organic Syntheses , Coll. Vol. 8, p. 152 (1993); Vol. 68, p. 227 (1990).

http://orgsynth.org/orgsyn/pdfs/CV8P0152.pdf Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hydrogenolysis&oldid=1233162809 " Categories : Organic redox reactions Hydrogen Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 July 2024, at 16:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hydrogenolysis 12 languages Add topic

