Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Authorship and date 2 Content 3 Canonical rank 4 Sources 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents First Epistle of Clement 29 languages العربية Asturianu Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Latina Magyar Malagasy Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This documentation needs attention from an expert in religion . The specific problem is: sources does not support the statement about date (AD 70).

WikiProject Religion may be able to help recruit an expert.

( March 2025 ) Letter addressed to the Christians in the city of Corinth Part of a series on New Testament apocrypha First page of the Gospel of Judas (page 33 of Codex Tchacos ) Apostolic Fathers 1 Clement 2 Clement Epistles of Ignatius Polycarp to the Philippians Martyrdom of Polycarp Didache Barnabas Diognetus The Shepherd of Hermas Apocryphal gospels Jewish–Christian gospels Ebionites Hebrews Nazarenes Infancy gospels James Thomas Arabic Pseudo-Matthew History of Joseph the Carpenter Gnostic gospels Judas Mary Philip Truth Secret Mark The Saviour Other gospels Thomas Marcion Nicodemus Peter Barnabas Lost gospels Bartholomew Matthias Cerinthus Basilides Mani Gospel of the Hebrews Apocalypses Paul Peter Pseudo-Methodius Thomas Stephen 1 James 2 James 2 John Epistles Apocryphon of James Apocryphon of John Epistula Apostolorum Pseudo-Titus Peter to Philip Paul and Seneca Lost epistles Alexandrians Laodiceans Acts Andrew Andrew and Bartholomew Barnabas John Mar Mari The Martyrs Paul Peter Peter and Andrew Peter and Paul Peter and the Twelve Philip Pilate Thaddeus Thomas Timothy Xanthippe, Polyxena, and Rebecca Miscellany Other apocrypha Clementine literature Diatessaron Doctrine of Addai Pilate cycle Prayer of the Apostle Paul Questions of Bartholomew Resurrection of Jesus Christ Related topics Nag Hammadi library Christianity portal v t e The First Epistle of Clement ( Ancient Greek : Κλήμεντος πρὸς Κορινθίους , romanized : Klēmentos pros Korinthious , lit.

'Clement to Corinthians') is a letter addressed to the Christians in the city of Corinth . The work is attributed to Clement I , the fourth bishop of Rome and was almost certainly written by him.

[ 1 ] Based on internal evidence some scholars say the letter was composed some time before AD 70, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] but another common time given for the epistle's composition is at the end of the reign of Domitian (c. AD 96).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] As the name suggests, a Second Epistle of Clement is known, but this is a later work by a different author.

The letter is a response to events in Corinth, where the congregation had deposed certain bishops . The author called on the congregation to repent, to restore the bishops to their position, and to obey their superiors. He said that the Apostles had appointed the church leadership and directed them on how to perpetuate the ministry. In Corinth, the letter was read aloud from time to time. This practice spread to other churches, and Christians translated it from the original Greek into Latin, Syriac, and other languages.  The work was lost for centuries, but since the 1600s various copies or fragments have been found and studied. It has provided valuable evidence about the structure of the early church .

Part of the Apostolic Fathers collection, some early Christians treated the work as a sacred text . It was included in some Bibles, such as the Codex Alexandrinus and Codex Hierosolymitanus , but not in the 27-book New Testament canon that is shared across most modern Christian churches. Such works are known as New Testament apocrypha , and 1 Clement ranks Didache as one of the earliest, if not the earliest, of those that still exist.

Authorship and date [ edit ] Original Greek and Latin translation Although traditionally attributed to Clement of Rome , [ 9 ] the letter does not include Clement's name, and is anonymous, though scholars generally consider it to be genuine.

[ 7 ] The epistle is addressed as "the Church of God which sojourneth in Rome to the Church of God which sojourneth in Corinth". Its stylistic coherence suggests a single author.

[ 10 ] Scholars have proposed a range of dates, but most limit the possibilities to the last three decades of the 1st century, [ 11 ] [ 12 ] and no later than AD 140.

[ 13 ] The common time given for the epistle's composition is at the end of the reign of Domitian (c. AD 96).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The phrase "sudden and repeated misfortunes and hindrances which have befallen us" (1:1) is taken as a reference to persecutions under Domitian.  Some scholars believe that 1 Clement was written around the same time as the Book of Revelation (c. AD 95–97).

[ 14 ] Irenaeus ( c.

130 – c. 202 AD) mentions the letter in his book Against Heresies III (180 AD).

[ 15 ] In the time of this Clement, no small dissension having occurred among the brethren at Corinth, the Church in Rome dispatched a most powerful letter to the Corinthians, exhorting them to peace, renewing their faith, and declaring the tradition which it had lately received from the apostles, proclaiming the one God, omnipotent, the Maker of heaven and earth, the Creator of man, who brought on the deluge, and called Abraham, who led the people from the land of Egypt, spoke with Moses, set forth the law, sent the prophets, and who has prepared fire for the devil and his angels. From this document, whosoever chooses to do so, may learn that He, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, was preached by the Churches, and may also understand the apostolic tradition of the Church, since this Epistle is of older date than these men who are now propagating falsehood, and who conjure into existence another god beyond the Creator and the Maker of all existing things.

— St. Irenaeus, Against Heresies III, Chapter 3:3 Content [ edit ] The letter was occasioned by a dispute in Corinth, which had led to the removal from office of several presbyters . Since none of the presbyters were charged with moral offences, 1 Clement charges that their removal was high-handed and unjustifiable. The letter is extremely lengthy—twice as long as the Epistle to the Hebrews —and includes many references to the Old Testament.

[ 16 ] 1 Clement offers valuable evidence about the state of the ministry in the early church. He calls on the Corinthians to repent and to reinstate the leaders that they had deposed. He explains that the Apostles had appointed "bishops and deacons", that they had given instructions on how to perpetuate the ministry, and that Christians were to obey their superiors. The author uses the terms bishops (overseers, episkopos ) and elders (presbyters) interchangeably.

[ 7 ] New Testament references include admonition to "Take up the epistle of the blessed Paul the Apostle" (xlvii. 1) which was written to this Corinthian audience; a reference which seems to imply written documents available at both Rome and Corinth. 1 Clement also alludes to the first epistle of Paul to the Corinthians ; and alludes to Paul's epistles to the Romans, Galatians, Ephesians, and Philippians, Titus, 1 Timothy, numerous phrases from the Epistle to the Hebrews , and possible material from Acts. There is no trace in Clement of a knowledge of 1 and 2 Thessalonians or the epistle of Philemon; [ a ] however, Clement may have had indirect knowledge of 2 Corinthians, Colossians, and 2 Timothy because of the relationship with the other epistles alluded to.

[ 17 ] In several instances, the author asks their readers to "remember" the words of Jesus , although they do not attribute these sayings to a specific written account. These New Testament allusions are employed as authoritative sources which strengthen the letter's arguments to the Corinthian church. According to Bruce Metzger , Clement never explicitly refers to these New Testament references as "Scripture".

[ 16 ] Additionally, 1 Clement possibly references the martyrdom of Paul and Peter (sections 5:4 to 6:1).

[ 18 ] 1 Clement was written at a time when some Christians were keenly aware that Jesus had not returned as they had expected. Like the Second Epistle of Peter , this epistle criticizes those who had doubts about the faith because the Second Coming had not yet occurred.

[ 19 ] Canonical rank [ edit ] Facsimile of the Epistle of Clement, from the Codex Alexandrinus The epistle was publicly read from time to time in Corinth, and by the 4th century this usage had spread to other churches. It was included in the 5th century Codex Alexandrinus , which contained the entire Old and New Testaments.

[ 20 ] It was included with the Gospel of John in the fragmentary early Greek and Akhmimic Coptic papyrus designated Papyrus 6 . First Clement is listed as canonical in "Canon 85" of the Canons of the Apostles , showing that First Clement had canonical rank in at least some regions of early Christendom.

Ibn Khaldun also mentions it as part of the New Testament, [ 21 ] suggesting that the book may have been in wide and accepted use in either 14th century Spain or Egypt.

[ citation needed ] Sources [ edit ] Though known from antiquity, the first document to contain the Epistle of Clement and to be studied by Western scholars was found in 1628, having been included with an ancient Greek Bible given by the Patriarch of Constantinople Cyril I to King Charles I of England .

[ 22 ] The first complete copy of 1 Clement was rediscovered in 1873, some four hundred years after the Fall of Constantinople , when Philotheos Bryennios found it in the Greek Codex Hierosolymitanus , written in 1056. This work, written in Greek , was translated into at least three languages in ancient times: a Latin translation from the 2nd or 3rd century was found in an 11th-century manuscript in the seminary library of Namur , Belgium, and published by Germain Morin in 1894; a Syriac manuscript, now at Cambridge University, was found by Robert Lubbock Bensly in 1876, and translated by him into English in 1899; and a Coptic translation has survived in two papyrus copies, one published by C. Schmidt in 1908 and the other by F. Rösch in 1910.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The Namur Latin translation reveals its early date in several ways. Its early date is attested to by not being combined with the pseudepigraphic later Second Epistle of Clement, as all the other translations are found, and by showing no knowledge of the church terminology that became current later—for example, translating Greek presbyteroi as seniores rather than transliterating to presbyteri .

See also [ edit ] Papyrus 6 Second Epistle of Clement Notes [ edit ] ^ This may be, however, due to the brevity of 1 and 2 Thessalonians and the epistle of Philemon, as well as their particular purpose of writing or their content.

References [ edit ] ^ "First Letter of Clement | Description, History, Summary, & Facts | Britannica" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2024-03-24 .

^ Herron, Thomas J. (2008).

Clement and the Early Church of Rome: On the Dating of Clement's First Epistle to the Corinthians . Steubenville, OH: Emmaus Road.

^ Thiede, Carsten Peter (1996).

Rekindling the Word: In Search of Gospel Truth . Gracewing publishing. p. 71.

ISBN 1-56338-136-2 .

^ Carrier, Richard (2014).

On the Historicity of Jesus Sheffield . Phoenix Press. pp.

271– 272.

ISBN 978-1-909697-49-2 .

^ Licona, Michael (2010).

The Resurrection of Jesus: A New Historiographical Approach . Apollos.

ISBN 978-1844744855 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "First Letter of Clement | Description, History, Summary, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2023-08-21 .

^ a b c d "Clement of Rome, St." Cross, F. L. (ed.), The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005).

^ a b Harris p. 363 ^ Jurgens, W A, ed. (1970), The Faith of the Early Fathers: A Source-book of Theological and Historical Passages from the Christian Writings of the Pre-Nicene and Nicene Eras , Liturgical Press, p. 6, ISBN 978-0-8146-0432-8 , retrieved 18 April 2013 ^ Holmes, Michael (1 November 2007), Apostolic Fathers, The: Greek Texts and English Translations , Baker Academic, p. 34, ISBN 978-0-8010-3468-8 , retrieved 18 April 2013 ^ Holmes, Michael (1 November 2007), Apostolic Fathers, The: Greek Texts and English Translations , Baker Academic, p. 35, ISBN 978-0-8010-3468-8 , retrieved 18 April 2013 ^ Herron, Thomas (2008).

Clement and the Early Church of Rome: On the Dating of Clement's First Epistle to the Corinthians . Steubenville, OH: Emmaus Road. p. 47.

In the context of 1 Clement's strategy to win over the Corinthians to a renewed sense of order in their community, any reference to a Temple which stood in ruins would simply make no sense . . . It is easier to believe that 1 Clement wrote while the Temple still stood, i.e. in circa A.D. 70.

^ L.L. Welborn, "The preface to 1 Clement: the rhetorical situation and the traditional date", in Breytenbach and Welborn, p. 201 ^ W.C. van Unnik, "Studies on the so-called First Epistle of Clement. The literary genre," in Cilliers Breytenbach and Laurence L. Welborn, Encounters with Hellenism: Studies on the First Letter of Clement , Leiden & Boston: Brill, 2004, p. 118.

ISBN 9004125264 .

^ "CHURCH FATHERS: Against Heresies, III.3 (St. Irenaeus)" .

New Advent . Retrieved 2024-04-17 .

^ a b Bruce M. Metzger , Canon of the New Testament ( Oxford University Press ) 1987:42–43.

^ Donald Hagner. (1973). The Use of the Old and New Testaments in Clement of Rome. pp 237.

^ McDowell, Sean (2015).

The Fate of the Apostles . London and New York: Routledge. pp.

55– 114.

^ Harris, Stephen L.

, Understanding the Bible . Palo Alto: Mayfield. 1985. p. 363 ^ Aland, Kurt ; Aland, Barbara (1995).

The Text of the New Testament: An Introduction to the Critical Editions and to the Theory and Practice of Modern Textual Criticism . Erroll F. Rhodes (trans.). Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company . pp. 107, 109.

ISBN 978-0-8028-4098-1 .

^ Ibn Khaldun (1958) [1377], "Chapter 3.31. Remarks on the words "Pope" and "Patriarch" in the Christian religion and on the word "Kohen" used by the Jews" , Muqaddimah , translated by Rosenthal, Franz .

^ Staniforth, Maxwell (1975).

Early Christian writings: the Apostolic Fathers . Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1968. p.

14 .

ISBN 0-14-044197-2 .

^ A second manuscript containing a Syriac version of 1 Clement is mentioned in Timothy B. Sailors, "Bryn Mawr Classical Review: Review of The Apostolic Fathers: Greek Texts and English Translations " . Retrieved 21 May 2023 .

^ JB Lightfoot and JR Harmer, ed. (1891), The Apostolic Fathers: Revised Greek Texts with Introductions and English Translations , Baker Books, 1988 reprint, p. 4 , retrieved 21 April 2016 Further reading [ edit ] Balch, David L. (2023).

Jesus, Paul, Luke-Acts, and 1 Clement: studies in class, ethnicity, gender, and orientation . Eugene: Cascade Books.

ISBN 9781532659577 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: First Epistle of Clement Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Κλήμεντος πρὸς Κορινθίους Αʹ Wikiquote has quotations related to First Epistle of Clement .

An extensive list of English translations of 1 Clement Catholic Encyclopedia article on Clement of Rome Early Christian writings: The First Epistle of Clement – Useful links Lexundria: 1 Clement: Epistle of the Romans to the Corinthians – English translation by Kirsopp Lake The Use of Material Deriving from the Synoptic Gospels in the Letter of Clement to the Corinthians Archived 2010-09-29 at the Wayback Machine 2012 Translation & Audio Version The First Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Greece Sweden Vatican Israel Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐m4knj
Cached time: 20250814215248
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.927 seconds
Real time usage: 1.134 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3385/1000000
Revision size: 18131/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 187981/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5568/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 115527/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.562/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27270343/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  872.520      1 -total
 24.19%  211.068      2 Template:Reflist
 14.54%  126.880      1 Template:Langx
 10.67%   93.062      1 Template:New_Testament_Apocrypha
 10.40%   90.770      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.38%   90.526      3 Template:Cite_web
 10.03%   87.514      2 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
  9.66%   84.268      2 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
  9.65%   84.241      3 Template:Sister_project
  9.65%   84.232      1 Template:Wikisource Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8977499:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215248 and revision id 1305125079. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=First_Epistle_of_Clement&oldid=1305125079 " Categories : Apocryphal epistles 2nd-century Christian texts 1st-century Christian texts Apostolic Fathers Documents of Clement of Rome Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles needing expert attention from March 2025 All articles needing expert attention Religion articles needing expert attention Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents First Epistle of Clement 29 languages Add topic

