Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Petroleum engineering salaries 2 Sub-disciplines 3 Education Toggle Education subsection 3.1 Petroleum Geostatistics 3.2 Petroleum Geology 3.3 Well Drilling Technology 4 Professional associations 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Petroleum engineering 34 languages العربية Asturianu Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Jawa Kurdî Latina Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Extracting crude oil and natural gas For petroleum refinery engineering, see Process engineering .

Example of a map used by reservoir engineers to determine where to drill a well. This screenshot is of a structure map generated by contour map software for an 8500 ft deep gas and oil reservoir in the Earth field, Vermilion Parish , Erath, Louisiana. The left-to-right gap near the top of the contour map indicates a fault line . This fault line is between the blue/green contour lines and the purple/red/yellow contour lines. The thin red circular contour line in the middle of the map indicates the top of the oil reservoir. Because gas floats above oil, the thin red contour line marks the gas/oil contact zone.

Petroleum engineering is a field of engineering concerned with the activities related to the production of hydrocarbons , which can be either crude oil or natural gas  or both .

[ 1 ] Exploration and production are deemed to fall within the upstream sector of the oil and gas industry.

Exploration , by earth scientists , and petroleum engineering are the oil and gas industry's two main subsurface disciplines, which focus on maximizing economic recovery of hydrocarbons from subsurface reservoirs.

Petroleum geology and geophysics focus on provision of a static description of the hydrocarbon reservoir rock, while petroleum engineering focuses on estimation of the recoverable volume of this resource using a detailed understanding of the physical behavior of oil, water and gas within porous rock at very high pressure.

The combined efforts of geologists and petroleum engineers throughout the life of a hydrocarbon accumulation determine the way in which a reservoir is developed and depleted, and usually they have the highest impact on field economics. Petroleum engineering requires a good knowledge of many other related disciplines, such as geophysics, petroleum geology, formation evaluation ( well logging ), drilling , economics , reservoir simulation , reservoir engineering , well engineering, artificial lift systems, completions and petroleum production engineering .

Recruitment to the industry has historically been from the disciplines of physics , mechanical engineering , chemical engineering and mining engineering . Subsequent development training has usually been done within oil companies.

Overview [ edit ] The profession got its start in 1914 within the American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers (AIME). The first Petroleum Engineering degree was conferred in 1915 by the University of Pittsburgh .

[ 2 ] Since then, the profession has evolved to solve increasingly difficult situations. Improvements in computer modeling, materials and the application of statistics, probability analysis, and new technologies like horizontal drilling and enhanced oil recovery , have drastically improved the toolbox of the petroleum engineer in recent decades. Automation, [ 3 ] sensors, [ 4 ] and robots [ 5 ] [ 6 ] are being used to propel the industry to more efficiency and safety.

Deep-water, arctic and desert conditions are usually contended with. High temperature and high pressure (HTHP) environments have become increasingly commonplace in operations and require the petroleum engineer to be savvy in topics as wide-ranging as thermo-hydraulics, geomechanics, and intelligent systems.

The Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE) is the largest professional society for petroleum engineers and publishes much technical information and other resources to support the oil and gas industry. It provides free online education (webinars), mentoring, and access to SPE Connect, an exclusive platform for members to discuss technical issues, best practices, and other topics. SPE members also are able to access the SPE Competency Management Tool to find knowledge and skill strengths and opportunities for growth.

[ 7 ] SPE publishes peer-reviewed journals, books, and magazines.

[ 8 ] SPE members receive a complimentary subscription to the Journal of Petroleum Technology and discounts on SPE's other publications.

[ 9 ] SPE members also receive discounts on registration fees for SPE organized events and training courses.

[ 9 ] SPE provides scholarships and fellowships to undergraduate and graduate students.

According to the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics, petroleum engineers are required to have a bachelor's degree in engineering, generally a degree focused on petroleum engineering is preferred, but degrees in mechanical, chemical, and civil engineering are satisfactory as well.

[ 10 ] Petroleum engineering education is available at many universities in the United States and throughout the world - primarily in oil producing regions.

U.S. News & World Report maintains a list of the Best Undergraduate Petroleum Engineering Programs.

[ 11 ] SPE and some private companies offer training courses.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Some oil companies have considerable in-house petroleum engineering training classes.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Petroleum engineering salaries [ edit ] Petroleum engineering has historically been one of the highest-paid engineering disciplines, although there is a tendency for mass layoffs when oil prices decline and waves of hiring as prices rise. In 2020, the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics reported the median pay for petroleum engineers was US$137,330, or roughly $66.02 per hour.

[ 17 ] The same summary projects there will be 3% job growth in this field from 2019 to 2029.

[ 17 ] SPE annually conducts a salary survey . In 2017, SPE reported that the average SPE professional member reported earning US$194,649 (including salary and bonus).

[ 18 ] The average base pay reported in 2016 was $143,006.

[ 18 ] Base pay and other compensation was on average was highest in the United States where the base pay was US$174,283. Drilling and production engineers tended to make the best base pay, US$160,026 for drilling engineers and US$158,964 for production engineers. Average base pay ranged from US$96,382-174,283.

[ 19 ] There are still significant gender pay gaps, plus or minus 5% of the US average pay gap which was 18% difference in 2017.

[ 20 ] [ 19 ] Also in 2016, U.S. News & World Report named petroleum engineering the top college major in terms of highest median annual wages of college-educated workers (age 25–59).

[ 21 ] The 2010 National Association of Colleges and Employers survey showed petroleum engineers as the highest paid 2010 graduates, at an average annual salary of $125,220.

[ 22 ] For individuals with experience, salaries can range from $170,000 to $260,000. They make an average of $112,000 a year and about $53.75 per hour. In a 2007 article, Forbes.com reported that petroleum engineering was the 24th best paying job in the United States.

[ 23 ] Sub-disciplines [ edit ] Petroleum engineers divide themselves into several types: [ 1 ] Reservoir engineers work to optimize production of oil and gas via proper placement, production rates, and enhanced oil recovery techniques.

Drilling engineers manage the technical aspects of drilling exploratory, production and injection wells.

Drilling fluid engineers A mud engineer (correctly called a Drilling Fluids Engineer, but most often referred to as the "Mud Man") works on an oil well or gas well drilling rig, and is responsible ensuring the properties of the drilling fluid, also known as drilling mud, are within designed specifications.

Completion engineers (also known as subsurface engineers) work to design and oversee the implementation of techniques aimed at ensuring wells are drilled stably and with the maximum opportunity for oil and gas production.

Production engineers manage the interface between the reservoir and the well, including perforations, sand control, downhole flow control, and downhole monitoring equipment; evaluate artificial lift methods; and select surface equipment that separates the produced fluids (oil, natural gas, and water).

Petrophysicists gather information about subsurface properties to build wellbore stability models and study rock properties Education [ edit ] Petroleum Engineering, like most forms of engineering, requires a strong foundation in physics , chemistry , and mathematics .

[ 24 ] Other fields pertinent to petroleum engineering include geology , formation evaluation, fluid flow in porous media, well drilling technology, economics , geostatistics , etc.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Petroleum Geostatistics [ edit ] Geostatistics as applied to petroleum engineering uses statistical analysis to characterize reservoirs and create flow simulations that quantify uncertainties of the location of oil and gas.

[ 26 ] Petroleum Geology [ edit ] Petroleum geology is an interdisciplinary field composed of geophysics , geochemistry , and paleontology .

[ 27 ] The main focus of petroleum geology is the exploration and appraisal of reservoirs containing hydrocarbons via technical forms of analysis.

[ 27 ] Well Drilling Technology [ edit ] Well drilling technology is primarily the focus for drilling engineers. The two forms of well drilling are percussion and rotary drilling, rotary being the most common of the two. An important aspect of drilling is the drill bit , which creates a borehole of approximately three and a half to thirty inches in diameter. The three classes of drill bits, roller cone , fixed cutter, and hybrid, each use teeth to break up the rock.

[ 28 ] To optimize drilling efficiency and cost, drilling engineers make use of drilling simulators that allow them to identify drilling conditions.

[ 29 ] Drilling technologies including horizontal drilling and directional drilling have been developed to obtain hydrocarbons profitably from impermeable and coal-bed methane accumulations.

Professional associations [ edit ] Society of Petroleum Engineers American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers See also [ edit ] Petroleum industry Petroleum geology Seismic to simulation Society of Petroleum Engineers SPE Certified Petroleum Professional References [ edit ] ^ a b "Petroleum Engineers: Occupational Outlook Handbook: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics" .

www.bls.gov . Retrieved 2018-02-06 .

^ "Petroleum Engineering" .

Britannica . Retrieved 3 February 2012 .

^ "Drilling Automation" .

Journal of Petroleum Technology . December 14, 2017.

^ "JPT Flow Sensor Technology Seeks to Replace the Coriolis Meter" .

www.spe.org . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ "JPT Competing Companies Building Robots to Place Receivers" .

www.spe.org . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ "JPT Robot Removes Operators From Extreme Environments" .

www.spe.org . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ "SPE Member Resource Guide" (PDF) .

Society of Petroleum Engineers . Retrieved December 12, 2017 .

^ "Publications | The Society of Petroleum Engineers" .

www.spe.org . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ a b "Professional Membership Benefits | Society of Petroleum Engineers" .

www.spe.org . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ "Petroleum Engineers: Occupational Outlook Handbook: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics" .

www.bls.gov . Retrieved 2018-02-06 .

^ "Best Undergraduate Petroleum Engineering Programs (Doctorate)" .

U.S. News & World Report . February 6, 2018.

^ "PEICE – Practical Professional Career Training for the Oil & Gas Industry" .

www.peice.com . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ "PetroSkills Oil and Gas Training | World's Petroleum Training" .

www.petroskills.com . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ "Online Training, Online Courses, Web-based Learning Management System - Learning Management Express(LMX) - NexLearn" .

www.oilandgastraining.com . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ "Energy Pipeline: Noble Energy's outdoor training facility brings industry to community's fingertips" . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ "Oil and Gas Training & Career Development | Schlumberger" .

www.slb.com . Archived from the original on 2017-12-18 . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ a b "Petroleum Engineers : Occupational Outlook Handbook: : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics" .

www.bls.gov . Retrieved 2021-04-28 .

^ a b "Oil and Gas Pay | Salary Survey | Society of Petroleum Engineers" .

www.spe.org . Retrieved 2017-12-14 .

^ a b "2017 SPE Membership Salary Survey Highlight Report-November 2017" (PDF) .

Society of Petroleum Engineers . January 3, 2018 . Retrieved January 3, 2018 .

^ "Highlights of women's earnings in 2017 : BLS Reports: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics" .

www.bls.gov . Retrieved 2021-04-28 .

^ "Top 10 College Majors That Earn the Highest Salaries" .

U.S. News & World Report . February 6, 2018.

^ "NACE" . Naceweb.org . Retrieved 2011-12-18 .

^ "America's Best- And Worst-Paying Jobs" .

Forbes . 2007-06-04 . Retrieved 2011-12-18 .

^ a b Cunha, Luciane B.; Cunha, J. C. (2004-01-01).

Petroleum Engineering Education - Challenges and Changes for the Next 20 Years . Society of Petroleum Engineers.

doi : 10.2118/90556-MS .

ISBN 9781555631512 .

^ Petroleum Engineering: Principles and Practice . Springer Science & Business Media. 2012-12-06.

ISBN 9789401096010 .

^ Chambers, Richard L.; Yarus, Jeffrey M. (2006-11-01).

"Practical Geostatistics - An Armchair Overview for Petroleum Reservoir Engineers" .

Journal of Petroleum Technology .

58 (11): 78– 86.

doi : 10.2118/103357-JPT .

ISSN 0149-2136 .

^ a b Selley, Richard C.; Sonnenberg, Stephen A. (2014-11-08).

Elements of Petroleum Geology . Academic Press.

ISBN 9780123860323 .

^ Ma, Tianshou; Chen, Ping; Zhao, Jian (2016-12-01).

"Overview on vertical and directional drilling technologies for the exploration and exploitation of deep petroleum resources" .

Geomechanics and Geophysics for Geo-Energy and Geo-Resources .

2 (4): 365– 395.

Bibcode : 2016GGGG....2..365M .

doi : 10.1007/s40948-016-0038-y .

ISSN 2363-8427 .

^ Boonyapaluk, P.; Hareland, G.; Rampersad, P. R. (1994-01-01).

Drilling Optimization Using Drilling Data and Available Technology . Society of Petroleum Engineers.

doi : 10.2118/27034-MS .

ISBN 9781555634704 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bradley, Howard B. (1987).

Petroleum Engineering Handbook .

Richardson, Texas : Society of Petroleum Engineers .

ISBN 1-55563-010-3 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Petroleum engineering .

Wikiversity has learning resources about Petroleum engineering The Society of Petroleum Engineers Schlumberger Oilfield Glossary: An Online Glossary of Oilfield Terms Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers Petroleum Engineering Schools What is Forensic Petroleum Engineering?

Petroleum Engineering - Best Petroleum Engineering Schools & Colleges, Jobs in USA About Petroleum Engineering Career Opportunities in Petroleum Engineering oil and gas online certification courses v t e Engineering History Outline List of engineering branches Specialties and interdisciplinarity Civil Architectural Coastal Construction Earthquake Ecological Environmental Sanitary Geological Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Municipal/urban Offshore River Structural Transportation Traffic Railway Mechanical Acoustic Aerospace Automotive Biomechanical Energy Manufacturing Marine Naval architecture Railway Sports Thermal Tribology Electrical Broadcast outline Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Optical Power Radio-frequency Signal processing Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical/bioprocess Biological Bioresource Genetic Tissue Chemical reaction Electrochemical Food Molecular Paper Petroleum Process Reaction Materials Biomaterial Ceramics Corrosion Metallurgy Molecular Nanotechnology Polymers Semiconductors Surfaces Computer AI Computer Cybersecurity Data Networks Robotics Software Engineering education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Science Master's degree Doctorate Graduate certificate Engineer's degree Licensed engineer Related topics Engineer Glossaries Engineering A–L M–Z Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering Other Agricultural Audio Automation Biomedical Bioinformatics Clinical Health technology Pharmaceutical Rehabilitation Building services MEP Design Explosives Facilities Fire Forensic Climate Geomatics Graphics Industrial Information Instrumentation Instrumentation and control Logistics Management Mathematics Mechatronics Military Nuclear Ontology Packaging Physics Privacy Safety Security Survey Sustainability Systems Textile Category Commons Wikiproject Portal v t e Petroleum industry Petroleum Primary energy Benchmarks Argus Sour Bonny Light Brent Dubai Indian Basket Indonesian Isthmus-34 Light Japan Cocktail OPEC Reference Basket Tapis Urals West Texas Intermediate Western Canadian Select Data Natural gas Consumption Production Reserves Imports Exports Price Petroleum Consumption Production Reserves Imports Exports Posted oil price Price of gasoline and diesel Exploration Core sampling Geophysics Integrated asset modelling Petroleum engineering Reservoir simulation Reservoir modeling Petroleum geology Petrophysics Reflection seismology Seismic inversion Seismic source Drilling Blowout Completion Squeeze job Differential sticking Directional drilling Geosteering Drill stem test Drilling engineering Drilling fluid invasion Lost circulation Measurement Shale oil extraction Ljungström method Tracers Underbalanced drilling Well logging Production Petroleum fiscal regime Concessions Production sharing agreements Artificial lift Gas lift Pumpjack Submersible pump (ESP) Downstream Enhanced oil recovery (EOR) Gas reinjection Steam injection Midstream Petroleum product Pipeline Refining Upstream Water injection Well intervention XT History 1967 Oil Embargo 1973 oil crisis 1979 oil crisis 1980s oil glut 1990 oil price shock 2000s energy crisis 2010s oil glut 2020 Russia–Saudi Arabia oil price war Nationalization GECF OPEC Seven Sisters Standard Oil Canada France India Iraq Norway Saudi Arabia United States Venezuela Provinces and fields List of natural gas fields List of oil fields Caspian Sea East Midlands Oil Province East Texas Gulf of Mexico Niger Delta North Sea Permian Basin Persian Gulf Prudhoe Bay Russia Venezuela Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin Other topics Abbreviations Classification sweet oil sour oil Oil shale gas Orphan wells Peak oil fossil fuel phase-out timing Petrocurrency Petrodollar recycling Petrofiction Shale band Shale gas Swing producer Unconventional (oil and gas) reservoir heavy crude oil sands oil shale tight oil Companies and organisations Major petroleum companies Supermajors BP Chevron Eni ExxonMobil Shell TotalEnergies National oil companies Abu Dhabi National Oil Company ANCAP Bharat Petroleum China National Offshore Oil Corporation China National Petroleum Corporation Ecopetrol Equinor Gazprom Hindustan Petroleum Indian Oil Corporation Iraq National Oil Company KazMunayGas Kuwait Petroleum Corporation Lotos Naftogaz National Iranian Oil Company National Iranian South Oil Company NNPC Limited Oil & Gas Development Company Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Orlen PDVSA Pemex Pertamina Petrobangla Petrobras PetroChina Petronas Petrovietnam PTT Public Company Limited QatarEnergy Rosneft Saudi Aramco Sinopec SOCAR Sonangol Sonatrach TPAO YPF Energy trading Enron Glencore Gunvor Mercuria Naftiran Intertrade Trafigura Vitol Others APA Corporation Cenovus Energy Cepsa ConocoPhillips Devon Energy Eneos Holdings Galp Energia Hess Corporation Husky Energy Imperial Oil Lukoil Marathon Oil Marathon Petroleum Occidental Petroleum OMV Phillips 66 Port Harcourt Refining Company Reliance Industries Repsol Suncor Energy Sunoco Surgutneftegas TechnipFMC TNK-BP Tullow Oil Tüpraş Valero Energy Major services companies Amec Foster Wheeler Baker Hughes Cameron International CGG CH2M Chicago Bridge & Iron Company China Oilfield Services Enbridge GE Power Halliburton Nabors Industries Naftiran Intertrade NOV Inc.

Petrofac Saipem Schlumberger Snam Subsea 7 TC Energy Transocean Valaris Limited Weatherford International John Wood Group Others American Petroleum Institute Canadian petroleum companies Intercontinental Exchange Futures International Association of Oil & Gas Producers International Energy Agency Society of Petroleum Engineers World Petroleum Council Category Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Petroleum_engineering&oldid=1297767272 " Categories : Petroleum engineering Engineering disciplines Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 10:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Petroleum engineering 34 languages Add topic

