Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Negationism and denial 3 Basis for historical revision Toggle Basis for historical revision subsection 3.1 Access to new data/records 3.2 New sources in other languages 3.3 Developments in other fields of science 3.4 Nationalism 3.5 Culture 3.6 Ideology 3.7 Historical causation 4 Specific issues Toggle Specific issues subsection 4.1 Dark Ages 4.2 Feudalism 4.3 New World discovery and European colonization of the Americas 4.4 New Qing history 4.5 French Revolution 4.6 French attack formations in the Napoleonic wars 4.7 Argentine Civil Wars 4.8 Within the United States of America 4.9 World War I 4.9.1 German guilt 4.9.2 Poor British and French military leadership 4.10 Reconstruction in the United States 4.11 American business and "robber barons" 4.12 Excess mortality in the Soviet Union under Stalin 4.13 Soviet Union and Russia 4.14 Guilt for causing World War II 4.15 Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 4.16 Cold War 4.16.1 Vietnam War 4.17 Chronological revisionism 5 See also Toggle See also subsection 5.1 Cases of revisionism 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Historical revisionism 42 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reinterpretation of a historical account This article is about the reinterpretation of the historical record. For the denial and distortion of the historical record, see Historical negationism .

This article may contain excessive or irrelevant examples .

Please help improve it by removing less pertinent examples and elaborating on existing ones.

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In historiography , historical revisionism is the reinterpretation of a historical account.

[ 1 ] It involves challenging the orthodox (established, accepted or traditional) scholarly views or narratives regarding a historical event , timespan, or phenomenon by introducing contrary evidence or reinterpreting the motivations of the people involved. Revision of the historical record can reflect new discoveries of fact, evidence, and interpretation as they come to light. The process of historical revision is a common, necessary, and usually uncontroversial process which develops and refines the historical record to make it more complete and accurate.

One form of historical revisionism involves denying the moral significance or accuracy of the historical record .

[ 2 ] This type of historical revisionism is called historical negationism , and is contentious as it often includes denying the veracity of genuine documents, or deliberately manipulating statistical data to reach predetermined conclusions. The destruction or alteration of cultural heritage sites is also considered a form of illegitimate historical revisionism when it serves to deny the cultural or historical claims of ethnic groups.

[ 3 ] Negationists may use the term "revisionism" to portray their pseudoscholarship as legitimate, especially in the context of genocide denial .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Background [ edit ] See also: Historical method Historical revisionism is the means by which the historical record , the history of a society, as understood in its collective memory , continually accounts for new facts and interpretations of the events.

Revisionist historians contest the mainstream or traditional view of historical events and raise views at odds with traditionalists. In the field of historiography , the historian who works within the existing establishment of society and has produced a body of history books from which he or she can claim authority , usually benefits from the status quo .

[ citation needed ] As such, historical revisionism can produce significant controversy within society.

Revisionist history is often practiced by those who are in the minority, such as feminist historians, ethnic minority historians, those working outside of mainstream academia in smaller and less known universities, or the youngest scholars, essentially historians who have the most to gain and the least to lose in challenging the status quo. In the friction between the mainstream of accepted beliefs and the new perspectives of historical revisionism, received historical ideas are either changed, solidified, or clarified. If over a period of time, the revisionist ideas become the new establishment status quo a paradigm shift is said to have occurred.

Historians are influenced by the zeitgeist (spirit of the time), and the usually progressive changes to society, politics, and culture, such as occurred after the Second World War (1939–1945); in The Future of the Past (1989), the historian C. Vann Woodward said: ...these developments will and should raise new questions about the past, and affect our reading of large areas of history, and my belief is that future revisions may be extensive enough to justify calling the coming age of historiography an "Age of Reinterpretation". The first illustration happens to come mainly from American history, but this should not obscure the broader scope of the revolution, which has no national limitations.

[ 6 ] The philosopher of science, Thomas Kuhn , said, in contrast to the quantifiable hard sciences , characterized by a single paradigm, the social sciences are characterized by several paradigms that derive from a "tradition of claims, counterclaims, and debates over [the] fundamentals" of research.

[ 7 ] The philosopher Karl Popper said that "each generation has its own troubles and problems, and, therefore, its own interests and its own point of view." [ 8 ] Negationism and denial [ edit ] Main article: Historical negationism Historians distinguish historical revisionism from historical negationism, which is a form of denialism .

In contrast, historical revisionism entails the refinement of existing knowledge about a historical event, not a denial of the event, itself; that such refinement of history emerges from the examination of new, empirical evidence, and a re-examination, and consequent re-interpretation of the existing documentary evidence. That legitimate historical revisionism acknowledges the existence of a "certain body of irrefutable evidence" and the existence of a "convergence of evidence", which suggest that an event – such as the Black Death , American slavery , and the Holocaust – did occur; whereas the denialism of history rejects the entire foundation of historical evidence.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Historian Deborah Lipstadt states that Holocaust deniers , such as Harry Elmer Barnes , disingenuously self-identify as "historical revisionists" to obscure their denialism as academic revision of the historical record.

Basis for historical revision [ edit ] The process of historical revision involves updating the historical record to accommodate developments as they arise. The historical record may be revised to accommodate for a number of academic reasons, including the following: Access to new data/records [ edit ] The release, discovery, or publicization of documents previously unknown may lead scholars to hold new views of well established events. For example, archived or sealed government records (often related to national security) will become available under the thirty-year rule and similar laws. Such documents can provide new sources and therefore new analyses of past events that will alter the historical perspective.

With the release of the ULTRA archives in the 1970s under the British thirty-year rule, much of the Allied high command tactical decisionmaking process was re-evaluated, particularly the Battle of the Atlantic . Before the release of the ULTRA archives, there was much debate over whether Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery could have known that Arnhem was heavily garrisoned. With the release of the archives, which indicated that they were, the balance of the evidence swung in the direction of his detractors. The release of the ULTRA archives also forced a re-evaluation of the history of the electronic computer .

[ notes 1 ] New sources in other languages [ edit ] As more sources in other languages become available historians may review their theories in light of the new sources. The revision of the meaning of the Dark Ages is an example.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Developments in other fields of science [ edit ] DNA analysis has had an impact in various areas of history either confirming established historical theories or presenting new evidence that undermines the current established historical explanation. Professor Andrew Sherratt , a British prehistorian, was responsible for introducing the work of anthropological writings on the consumption of legal and illegal drugs and how to use the papers to explain certain aspects of prehistoric societies.

[ 14 ] Carbon dating , the examination of ice cores and tree rings , palynology , scanning electron microscope analysis of early metal samples, and measuring oxygen isotopes in bones, have all provided new data in the last few decades with which to argue new hypotheses. Extracting ancient DNA allows historians to debate the meaning and importance of race and indeed current identities.

[ 15 ] Nationalism [ edit ] Government bodies may engage in historical revisionism for political gain.

[ 16 ] For example, in schoolbooks' history on Europe, it is possible to read about an event from completely different perspectives. In the Battle of Waterloo , most British, French, Dutch and German schoolbooks slant the battle to emphasise the importance of the contribution of their nations. Sometimes, the name of an event is used to convey political or a national perspective. For example, the same conflict between two English-speaking countries is known by two different names: the " American War of Independence " and the " American Revolutionary War ". As perceptions of nationalism change, so do the areas of history that are driven by such ideas.  Wars are contests between enemies, and postwar histories select the facts and interpretations to suit their internal needs, The Korean War , for example, has sharply different interpretations in textbooks in the countries involved.

[ 17 ] Culture [ edit ] For example, as regionalism has regained some of its old prominence in British politics, some historians have suggested that the older studies of the English Civil War were centred on England and that to understand the war, events that had previously been dismissed as on the periphery should be given greater prominence. To emphasise this, revisionist historians have suggested that the English Civil War becomes just one of a number of interlocking conflicts known as Wars of the Three Kingdoms . Furthermore, as cultures develop, it may become strategically advantageous for some revision-minded groups to revise their public historical narrative in such a way so as to either discover, or in rarer cases manufacture, a precedent which contemporary members of the given subcultures can use as a basis or rationale for reform or change.

[ 18 ] Ideology [ edit ] For example, in the 1940s, it became fashionable to see the English Civil War from a Marxist school of thought. In the words of Christopher Hill , "the Civil War was a class war." After World War II , the influence of Marxist interpretation waned in British academia and by the 1970s this view came under attack by a new school of revisionists and it has been largely overturned as a major mainstream explanation of the mid-17th-century conflict in England , Scotland , and Ireland .

Historical causation [ edit ] Issues of causation in history are often revised with new research: for example, by the mid-20th century the status quo was to see the French Revolution as the result of the triumphant rise of a new middle class. Research in the 1960s prompted by revisionist historians like Alfred Cobban and François Furet revealed the social situation was much more complex, and the question of what caused the revolution is now closely debated.

[ citation needed ] Specific issues [ edit ] Dark Ages [ edit ] As non- Latin texts, such as Welsh , Gaelic and the Norse sagas have been analysed and added to the canon of knowledge about the period, and as much more archaeological evidence has come to light, the period known as the Dark Ages has narrowed to the point that many historians no longer believe that such a term is useful. Moreover, the term dark implies less of a void of culture and law but more a lack of many source texts in Mainland Europe. Many modern scholars who study the era tend to avoid the term altogether for its negative connotations and find it misleading and inaccurate for any part of the Middle Ages.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Feudalism [ edit ] The concept of feudalism has been questioned. Revisionist scholars led by historian Elizabeth A. R. Brown have rejected the term .

New World discovery and European colonization of the Americas [ edit ] In recounting the European colonization of the Americas , some history books of the past paid little attention to the indigenous peoples of the Americas , usually mentioning them only in passing and making no attempt to understand the events from their point of view. That was reflected in the description of Christopher Columbus having discovered America. Those events' portrayal has since been revised to avoid the word "discovery." [ 21 ] In his 1990 book, The Conquest of Paradise , Kirkpatrick Sale argued that Christopher Columbus was an imperialist bent on conquest from his first voyage. In a New York Times book review, historian and member of the Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Committee William Hardy McNeill wrote about Sale: "He has set out to destroy the heroic image that earlier writers have transmitted to us. Mr. Sale makes Columbus out to be cruel, greedy and incompetent (even as a sailor), and a man who was perversely intent on abusing the natural paradise on which he intruded." [ 22 ] McNeill declares Sale's work to be "unhistorical, in the sense that [it] selects from the often-cloudy record of Columbus's actual motives and deeds what suits the researcher's 20th-century purposes." McNeill states that detractors and advocates of Columbus present a "sort of history [that] caricatures the complexity of human reality by turning Columbus into either a bloody ogre or a plaster saint, as the case may be." [ 22 ] New Qing history [ edit ] Main article: New Qing History Historians in China and from abroad long wrote that the Manchus who conquered China and established the Qing dynasty (1636–1912) adopted the customs and institutions of the Han Chinese dynasties that preceded them and were "sinicized", that is, absorbed into Chinese culture. In 1990 American historians explored Manchu language sources and newly accessible imperial archives, and discovered that the emperors retained their Manchu culture and that they regarded China proper as only one part of their larger empire. These scholars differ among themselves but agree on a major revision of the history of the Qing dynasty.

[ 23 ] French Revolution [ edit ] See also: Historiography of the French Revolution French attack formations in the Napoleonic wars [ edit ] This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The military historian James R. Arnold argues: The writings of Sir Charles Oman and Sir John Fortescue dominated subsequent English-language Napoleonic history. Their views [that the French infantry used heavy columns to attack lines of infantry] became very much the received wisdom.... By 1998 a new paradigm seemed to have set in with the publication of two books devoted to Napoleonic battle tactics. Both claimed that the French fought in line at Maida and both fully explored French tactical variety. The 2002 publication of The Battle of Maida 1806: Fifteen Minutes of Glory , appeared to have brought the issue of column versus line to a satisfactory conclusion: "The contemporary sources are... the best evidence and their conclusion is clear: General Compère 's brigade formed into line to attack Kempt 's Light Battalion." The decisive action at Maida took place in less than 15 minutes. It had taken 72 years to rectify a great historian's error about what happened during those minutes.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Argentine Civil Wars [ edit ] After the proclamation of the Argentine Republic in late 1861, its first de facto President, Bartolomé Mitre , wrote the first Argentine historiographical works: Historia de Belgrano y de la Independencia Argentina and Historia de San Martín y de la emancipación sudamericana . Although these were criticised by notorious intellectuals such as Dalmacio Vélez Sarsfield and Juan Bautista Alberdi and even by some colleagues like Adolfo Saldías , both stated a liberal-conservative bias on Argentine history through the National Academy of History established in 1893, despite the existence of caudillos and gauchos .

During the Radical Civic Union government of Hipólito Yrigoyen , historians followed the revisionist view of anti-mitrist politicians such as Carlos D'Amico, Ernesto Quesada and David Peña and their theories reached the academy thanks to Dardo Corvalán Mendilharsu. Argentine historical revisionism could reach its peak during the peronist government . In 2011, the Manuel Dorrego National Institute of Argentine and Iberoamerican Historical Revisionism was established by the Secretary of Culture, [ 26 ] but this one suffered a rupture between 21st century socialists and nationalists . Three weeks after the Inauguration of Mauricio Macri , the institute was closed.

Within the United States of America [ edit ] The historian and American Historical Association member James M. McPherson has said: The fourteen-thousand members of this association [i.e., the American Historical Association], however, know that revision is the lifeblood of historical scholarship. History is a continuing dialogue , between the present and the past. Interpretations of the past are subject to change in response to new evidence, new questions asked of the evidence, new perspectives gained by the passage of time. There is no single, eternal, and immutable " truth " about past events and their meaning.
The unending quest of historians for understanding the past – that is, revisionism – is what makes history vital and meaningful ... Supreme Court decisions often reflect a "revisionist" interpretation of history as well as of the Constitution.

[ 27 ] On resistance to the works of revised history that present a culturally-comprehensive historical narrative of the US, the perspectives of black people , women , and the labour movement , the historian David Williams said: These, and other, scholarly voices, called for a more comprehensive treatment of American history, stressing that the mass of Americans, not simply the power élites, made history. Yet, it was mainly white males of the power élite who had the means to attend college, become professional historians, and shape a view of history that served their own class, race, and gender interests at the expense of those not so fortunate – and, quite literally, to paper over aspects of history they found uncomfortable. "One is astonished in the study of history", wrote Du Bois in 1935, "at the recurrence of the idea that evil must be forgotten, distorted, skimmed over.... The difficulty, of course, with this philosophy is that history loses its value, as an incentive and [as] an example; it paints perfect men and noble nations, but it does not tell the truth".

[ 28 ] After the Second World War, the study and production of history in the US was expanded by the G.I. Bill , which funding allowed "a new and more broadly-based generation of scholars" with perspectives and interpretations drawn from the feminist movement , the Civil Rights Movement , and the American Indian Movement .

[ 29 ] That expansion and deepening of the pool of historians voided the existence of a definitive and universally-accepted history, therefore, is presented by the revisionist historian to the national public with an history that has been corrected and augmented with new facts, evidence, and interpretations of the historical record. In The Cycles of American History (1986), in contrasting and comparing the US and the Soviet Union during the Cold War (1945–1991), the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

said: ... but others, especially in the United States.... represent what American historians call revisionism – that is readiness to challenge official explanations. No one should be surprised by this phenomenon. Every war in American history has been followed, in due course, by skeptical reassessments of supposedly sacred assumptions... for [historical] revisionism is an essential part of the process, by which history, through the posing of new problems and the investigation of new possibilities, enlarges its perspectives and enriches its insights.

[ 30 ] The historian Forrest McDonald is often critical of the turn that revisionism has taken but admits that the turmoil of the 1960s America has changed the way history was written: The result, as far as the study of history was concerned, was an awakened interest in subjects that historians had previously slighted. Indian history, black history, women's history, family history, and a host of specializations arose. These expanded horizons enriched our understanding of the American past, but they also resulted in works of special pleading, trivialization, and downright falsification.

[ 31 ] In 1986, the historian John Hope Franklin described four stages in the historiography of the African experience of life in the US, which were based upon different models of historical consensus.

[ 32 ] World War I [ edit ] See also: Causes of World War I German guilt [ edit ] In reaction to the orthodox interpretation enshrined in the Versailles Treaty , which declared that Germany was guilty of starting World War I, the self-described "revisionist" historians of the 1920s rejected the orthodox view and presented a complex causation in which several other countries were equally guilty. Intense debate continues among scholars.

[ 33 ] Poor British and French military leadership [ edit ] The military leadership of the British Army during World War I was frequently condemned as poor by historians and politicians for decades after the war ended. Common charges were that the generals commanding the army were blind to the realities of trench warfare , ignorant of the conditions of their men and unable to learn from their mistakes, thus causing enormous numbers of casualties (" lions led by donkeys ").

[ 34 ] However, during the 1960s, historians such as John Terraine began to challenge that interpretation. In recent years, as new documents have come forth and the passage of time has allowed for more objective analysis, historians such as Gary D. Sheffield and Richard Holmes observe that the military leadership of the British Army on the Western Front had to cope with many problems that they could not control, such as a lack of adequate military communications, which had not occurred. Furthermore, military leadership improved throughout the war, culminating in the Hundred Days Offensive advance to victory in 1918. Some historians, even revisionists, still criticise the British High Command severely but are less inclined to portray the war in a simplistic manner with brave troops being led by foolish officers.

There has been a similar movement regarding the French Army during the war with contributions by historians such as Anthony Clayton . Revisionists are far more likely to view commanders such as French General Ferdinand Foch , British General Douglas Haig and other figures, such as American John Pershing , in a sympathetic light.

Reconstruction in the United States [ edit ] Revisionist historians of the Reconstruction era of the United States rejected the dominant Dunning School that stated that Black Americans were used by carpetbaggers , and instead stressed economic greed on the part of northern businessmen.

[ 35 ] Indeed, in recent years a " neoabolitionist " revisionism has become standard; it uses the moral standards of racial equality of the 19th century abolitionists to criticize racial policies. "Foner's book represents the mature and settled Revisionist perspective", historian Michael Perman has concluded regarding Eric Foner 's Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877 (1988).

[ 36 ] American business and "robber barons" [ edit ] The role of American business and the alleged "robber barons" began to be revised in the 1930s. Termed "business revisionism" by Gabriel Kolko , historians such as Allan Nevins , and then Alfred D. Chandler emphasized the positive contributions of individuals who were previously pictured as villains.

[ 37 ] Peter Novick writes, "The argument that whatever the moral delinquencies of the robber barons, these were far outweighed by their decisive contributions to American military [and industrial] prowess, was frequently invoked by Allan Nevins." [ 38 ] Excess mortality in the Soviet Union under Stalin [ edit ] Main article: Excess mortality in the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin Prior to the collapse of the Soviet Union and the archival revelations, Western historians estimated that the numbers killed by Stalin's regime were 20 million or higher.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] After the Soviet Union dissolved, evidence from the Soviet archives also became available and provided information that led to a significant revision in death toll estimates for the Stalin regime, with estimates in the range from 3 million [ 41 ] to 9 million.

[ 42 ] In post-1991 Russia the KGB archives remained briefly open during 1990's, which helped creation of organisations such as Memorial , which engaged in research of the archives and search of secret mass burial grounds. After Putin came to power however, access to archives was restricted again and research in this area once again became politically incorrect, [ 43 ] culminating with forcibly shutting down the organization in 2021.

[ 44 ] Soviet Union and Russia [ edit ] Main article: Censorship of images in the Soviet Union Soviet Union frequently resorted to changing its official history to suit changes in state policy, especially after splits in the Bolshevik leadership or change of political alliances.

[ 43 ] The book History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) was subject to numerous such changes to reflect removal of Bolshevik leaders previously trusted by Stalin but did not support him unanimously.

[ 45 ] Great Soviet Encyclopedia was also redacted frequently, with subscribers of the paper book receiving letter to cut out pages e.g. about Lavrentiy Beria or Nikolai Bukharin and replace them with unrelated articles.

[ 46 ] Historic photos were also frequently edited to remove people who later lost trust of the Party.

[ 43 ] [ 47 ] The process of rewriting history of USSR and post-1991 Russia was once again restarted in 2010's after Russia's first attack on Ukraine and intensified after 2022 full-scale invasion in Ukraine . History school books received significant changes which reflected the changes in the official history narratives: for example, while 2010 books openly mentioned decrease of life expectancy in Soviet Union caused shortages and insufficient spending on public healthcare, new 2023 books vaguely states that life expectancy has generally increased and instead focused on unspecified "achievements in the sphere of education and science". In chapters on Stalin, he's once again presented as a great tragedy to ordinary Russians and any mentions of repressions have disappeared. Similar changes were introduced in chapters discussing Soviet economy, space program, Brezhnev , collapse of USSR , perestroika and glasnost , where the phrase "freedom of speech" started to be used in scare quotes and presented as something harmful.

Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in 1979 which was presented as Soviet contribution into the fight against radical Islamism, completely contradicting both Soviet and post-Soviet narratives.

[ 48 ] Also, since 2014, Russian law enforcement started to prosecute public statements which do not comply with the current version of Russian history. Article 354.1 of Criminal Code of Russia which makes "rehabilitation of Nazism" a crime has been applied both to actual statements praising Nazism , but also to statements which recalled Nazi-Soviet cooperation 1939–1941 or Soviet war crimes conducted in other countries. In some cases article 20.3 of Code of the Russian Federation on Administrative Offenses is also being applied in these cases.

[ 49 ] Guilt for causing World War II [ edit ] See also: Causes of World War II and Churchill, Hitler and the Unnecessary War The orthodox interpretation blamed Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan for causing the war. Revisionist historians of World War II, notably Charles A. Beard , said the United States was partly to blame because it pressed the Japanese too hard in 1940 and 1941 and rejected compromises.

[ 50 ] Other notable contributions to this discourse include Charles Tansill, Back Door To War (1952); Frederic Sanborn, Design For War (1951); and David Hoggan, The Forced War (1989). The British historian A. J. P. Taylor controversially argued that Hitler was an ineffective and inexperienced diplomat and did not deliberately set out to cause a world war.

[ 51 ] Patrick Buchanan , an American paleoconservative pundit, argued that the Anglo–French guarantee in 1939 encouraged Poland not to seek a compromise over Danzig. He further argued that Britain and France were in no position to come to Poland's aid, and Hitler was offering the Poles an alliance in return. Buchanan argued the guarantee led the Polish government to transform a minor border dispute into a major world conflict, and handed Eastern Europe, including Poland, to Stalin. Buchanan also argued the guarantee ensured the country would be eventually invaded by the Soviet Union, as Stalin knew the British were in no position to declare war on the Soviet Union in 1939, due to their military weakness.

[ 52 ] Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki [ edit ] Main article: Debate over the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki The atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki have generated controversy and debate . Historians who accepted President Harry Truman 's reasoning in justifying dropping atomic bombs to force Japanese surrender end of World War II are known as "orthodox," while "revisionists" generally deny that the bombs were necessary. Some also claim that Truman knew they were not necessary but wanted to pressure the Soviet Union. These historians see Truman's decision as a major factor in starting the Cold War . This perspective asserts that Truman ignored or downplayed predictions of casualties.

[ 53 ] Cold War [ edit ] Main article: Historiography of the Cold War Historians debate the causes and responsibility for the Cold War . The "orthodox" view puts the major blame on the Soviet Union , while a "revisionist" view puts more responsibility on the United States.

[ 54 ] Vietnam War [ edit ] America in Vietnam (1978), by Guenter Lewy , is an example of historical revisionism that differs much from the popular view of the U.S. in the Vietnam War (1955–75) for which the author was criticized and supported for belonging to the revisionist school on the history of the Vietnam War.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Lewy's reinterpretation was the first book of a body of work by historians of the revisionist school about the geopolitical role and the U.S. military behavior in Vietnam.

In the introduction, Lewy said: It is the reasoned conclusion of this study ... that the sense of guilt created by the Vietnam war in the minds of many Americans is not warranted and that the charges of officially, condoned illegal and grossly immoral conduct are without substance. Indeed, detailed examination of battlefield practices reveals that the loss of civilian life in Vietnam was less great than in World War II [1939–45] and Korea [1950–53] and that concern with minimizing the ravages of the war was strong. To measure and compare the devastation and loss of human life caused by different war will be objectionable to those who repudiate all resort to military force as an instrument of foreign policy and may be construed as callousness. Yet as long as wars do take place at all it remains a moral duty to seek to reduce the agony caused by war, and the fulfillment of this obligation should not be disdained.

— America in Vietnam (1979), p. vii.

[ 57 ] Other reinterpretations of the historical record of the U.S. war in Vietnam , which offer alternative explanations for American behavior, include Why We Are in Vietnam (1982), by Norman Podhoretz , [ 55 ] Triumph Forsaken: The Vietnam War, 1954–1965 (2006), by Mark Moyar , [ 58 ] and Vietnam: The Necessary War (1999), by Michael Lind .

[ 59 ] Chronological revisionism [ edit ] It is generally accepted that the foundations of modern chronology were laid by the humanist Joseph Scaliger .

Isaac Newton in his work The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms made one of the first attempts to revise the "Scaligerian chronology".

[ 60 ] In the twentieth century the " revised chronology " of Immanuel Velikovsky can be singled out in this direction, perhaps it initiated a wave of new broad interest in the revision of chronology.

[ 61 ] In general, revisionist chronological theories suggest halving the duration of the Christian era , or consider certain historical periods to be erroneously dated, such as Heribert Illig 's Phantom time hypothesis [ 62 ] or the materials of the " New Chronology ", a proposed revision of eras by academician Anatoly Fomenko , albeit one widely rejected by mainstream scholars as pseudoscience .

[ 63 ] See also [ edit ] Denial Dialectic Dialectical research Mea culpa Official history Pseudohistory Holocaust denial Holodomor denial Historical negationism Cambodian genocide denial Post-publication peer review Denial of the October 7 attacks Cases of revisionism [ edit ] The 1619 Project , a revisionist look at American history with a focus on slavery and its legacy Afrocentrism , historical scholarship with a focus on African peoples Christ myth theory , a theory that Jesus never existed Donation of Constantine , exposure of a forgery Historical revision of the Inquisition New Historians , a group of Israeli historians with alternative views about Israel's history Revisionism (Spain) Revisionist school of Islamic studies References [ edit ] Informational notes ^ In 1972, before the release of official documents about ULTRA, Herman Goldstine wrote in The Computer from Pascal to von Neumann page 321 that: "Britain had such vitality that it could immediately after the war embark on so many well-conceived and well-executed projects in the computer field." In 1976 after the archive were opened Brian Randell wrote in The COLOSSUS on page 87 that: "the COLOSSUS project was an important source of this vitality, one that has been largely unappreciated, as has the significance of its places in the chronology of the invention of the digital computer." Citations ^ Krasner, Barbara, ed. (2019).

Historical Revisionism . Current Controversies. New York: Greenhaven Publishing LLC. p. 15.

ISBN 9781534505384 .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2021 . Retrieved April 4, 2020 .

The ability to revise and update historical narrative – historical revisionism – is necessary, as historians must always review current theories and ensure they are supported by evidence. … Historical revisionism allows different (and often subjugated) perspectives to be heard and considered.

^ Evans, Richard J.

(2001) Lying About Hitler: History, Holocaust, and the David Irving Trial . p.145.

ISBN 0-465-02153-0 . The author is a professor of Modern History at the University of Cambridge , and was a major expert witness in the Irving v. Lipstadt trial; the book presents his perspective of the trial, and the expert-witness report, including his research about the Dresden death count.

^ González Zarandona, José Antonio; Cunliffe, Emma; Saldin, Melathi (July 18, 2023).

The Routledge Handbook of Heritage Destruction . pp. 6, 16, 119, 186, 334.

doi : 10.4324/9781003131069 .

ISBN 978-1-003-13106-9 .

^ DER MATOSSIAN, BEDROSS (May 1, 2023), "INTRODUCTION" , Denial of Genocides in the Twenty-First Century , Nebraska, pp.

1– 32, doi : 10.2307/jj.1507451.5 , ISBN 978-1-4962-3555-8 , retrieved June 22, 2025 ^ Tablet, James Kirchick | (March 14, 2017).

"Hungary's Ugly State-Sponsored Holocaust Revisionism" .

genocidewatch . Retrieved June 22, 2025 .

^ Woodward, C. Vann (1989).

The Future of the Past . Oxford University Press. p.

76 .

ISBN 978-0195057447 .

^ Kuhn, Thomas N.

(1972) [1970].

"Logic of Discovery or Psychology of Research" . In Lakatos, Imre ; Musgrave, Alan (eds.).

Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge (second ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.

6 .

ISBN 0-521-09623-5 .

^ Novick, Peter (1988).

That Noble Dream: The Objectivity Question and the American Historical Profession . Cambridge University Press. p.

395 .

ISBN 978-0521357456 .

^ "Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory" by Deborah E. Lipstadt .

ISBN 0-452-27274-2 , 1993, p. 21 ^ Shermer, Michael ; Grobman, Alex (2009).

Denying History: Who Says the Holocaust Never Happened and Why Do They Say It? Updated and Expanded . University of California Press. p. 34.

ISBN 978-0-520-94409-1 .

^ Ronald J. Berger.

Fathoming the Holocaust: A Social Problems Approach , Aldine Transaction, 2002, ISBN 0-202-30670-4 , p. 154.

^ Gabriele, Matthew; Perry, David M. (2021).

The Bright Ages: A New History of Medieval Europe . HarperCollins Publishers.

ISBN 978-0062980892 .

^ Nelson, Janet L. (Spring 2007).

"The Dark Ages" .

History Workshop Journal .

63 (63): 191– 201.

doi : 10.1093/hwj/dbm006 .

JSTOR 25472909 . Retrieved June 28, 2024 .

^ Halstead, Paul (March 6, 2006).

"Obituaries: Professor Andrew Sherratt" .

The Independent .

^ Christine Kenneally, The Invisible History of the Human Race: How DNA and History Shape Our Identities and Our Futures (2014) ^ Cunliffe, Emma (July 18, 2023), "Methods, Motivations, and Actors" , The Routledge Handbook of Heritage Destruction (1 ed.), London: Routledge, pp.

110– 126, doi : 10.4324/9781003131069-9 , ISBN 978-1-003-13106-9 , retrieved June 23, 2025 ^ L. Lin, et al. "Whose history? An analysis of the Korean war in history textbooks from the United States, South Korea, Japan, and China." Social Studies 100.5 (2009): 222–232.

online Archived February 17, 2022, at the Wayback Machine ^ Shindler, Michael (2014).

"A Discussion on the Purpose of Cultural Identity" .

The Apollonian Revolt . Archived from the original on April 19, 2015 . Retrieved April 10, 2015 .

^ Snyder, Christopher A.

(1998).

An Age of Tyrants: Britain and the Britons A.D. 400–600 . University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. pp.

xiii– xiv.

ISBN 0-271-01780-5 .

, for example. The work contains over 100 pages of footnoted citations to source material and bibliographic references (pp. 263–387). In explaining his approach to writing the work, he refers to the "so-called Dark Ages" and notes, "Historians and archaeologists have never liked the label Dark Ages... there are numerous indicators that these centuries were neither "dark" nor "barbarous" in comparison with other eras." ^ Jordan, Chester William (2004).

Dictionary of the Middle Ages , Supplement 1. Verdun, Kathleen, "Medievalism" pp. 389–397. Sections 'Victorian Medievalism', 'Nineteenth-Century Europe', 'Medievalism in America 1500–1900', 'The 20th Century'. Same volume, Freedman, Paul , "Medieval Studies", pp. 383–389.

^ Kay Larson, and Edith Newhall, "It's a Map, Map, Map World" New York Magazine Nov 1992 25#43 pp 97+  online Archived February 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b William H. McNeill, Review of Kirkpatrick Sale's The Conquest of Paradise Archived April 14, 2020, at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times , October 7, 1990.

^ Waley-Cohen, Johanna (2004). "The New Qing History".

Radical History Review .

88 (1): 193– 206.

doi : 10.1215/01636545-2004-88-193 .

S2CID 144544216 .

^ Arnold, James R.

A Reappraisal of Column Versus Line in the Peninsular War Oman and Historiography Archived February 10, 2020, at the Wayback Machine , The Napoleon Series , August 2004.

^ James R. Arnold, "A Reappraisal of Column Versus Line in the Napoleonic Wars" Journal of the Society for Army Historical Research LX no. 244 (Winter 1982): pp. 196–208.

^ |Decreto 1880/2011 , published by the Argentine Government's Official Website ^ "Revisionist Historians" .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2013 . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

^ Williams, David.

A People's History of the Civil War: Struggles for the Meaning of Freedom.

(2005) pp. 10–11.

^ Williams p. 11 ^ Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr.

The Cycles of American History.

(1986) p. 165.

^ McDonald, Forest.

Recovering the Past: A Historian's Memoir.

(2004) p. 114 ^ African-American History: Origins, Development, and Current State of the Field | Joe W. Trotter | Organization of American Historians Magazine of History ^ See Selig Adler, "The War-Guilt Question and American Disillusionment, 1918–1928", Journal of Modern History , Vol. 23, No. 1 (Mar. 1951), pp. 1–28 in JSTOR Archived February 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ^ Lions Led By Donkeys Thompson, P.A.

Lions Led By Donkeys: Showing How Victory In The Great War Was Achieved By Those Who Made the Fewest Mistakes Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine T. Werner Laurie, Ltd. 1st English Edition. 1927 Bournes, John.

"Lions Led By Donkeys" Archived December 8, 2009, at the Wayback Machine , Centre for First World War Studies, University of Birmingham .

^ Bernard Weisberger, "The Dark and Bloody Ground of Reconstruction Historiography", The Journal of Southern History, Vol. 25, No. 4 (November 1959), pp. 427–447 in JSTOR Archived February 17, 2022, at the Wayback Machine ^ Michael Perman, "Review: Eric Foner's Reconstruction: A Finished Revolution", Reviews in American History , Vol. 17, No. 1 (March 1989), pp. 73–78 in JSTOR Archived February 17, 2022, at the Wayback Machine ^ Kolko, Gabriel. "The Premises of Business Revisionism" in The Business History Review , Vol. 33, No. 3 (Autumn, 1959), p. 334 ^ Novick, Peter (1988).

That Noble Dream: The Objectivity Question and the American Historical profession . Cambridge University Press. p.

343 .

ISBN 978-0521357456 .

^ Conquest, Robert (1990).

The Great Terror . Oxford University Press. p.

486 .

ISBN 978-0195055801 . Retrieved May 6, 2019 .

20 million.

^ Rummel, Rudolph.

"61,911,000 Soviet Victims: Totals, Estimates, and Years" .

Archived from the original on August 7, 2019 . Retrieved May 6, 2019 .

^ Ellman, Michael.

"Soviet Repression Statistics: Some Comments" (PDF) .

From 1921 onwards about 3–3.5 million seem to have died from shooting, while in detention, or while being deported or in deportation .

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2019 . Retrieved May 6, 2019 .

^ Snyder, Timothy (January 27, 2011).

"Hitler vs. Stalin: Who Was Worse?" .

The total number of noncombatants killed by the Germans – about 11 million – is roughly what we had thought. The total number of civilians killed by the Soviets, however, is considerably less than we had believed. We know now that the Germans killed more people than the Soviets did [...] All in all, the Germans deliberately killed about 11 million noncombatants, a figure that rises to more than 12 million if foreseeable deaths from deportation, hunger, and sentences in concentration camps are included. For the Soviets during the Stalin period, the analogous figures are approximately six million and nine million. These figures are of course subject to revision, but it is very unlikely that the consensus will change again as radically as it has since the opening of Eastern European archives in the 1990s .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2019 . Retrieved May 6, 2019 .

^ a b c Satter, David (2011).

It Was a Long Time Ago, and It Never Happened Anyway: Russia and the Communist Past . Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300192377 .

^ Hopkins, Valerie; Nechepurenko, Ivan (December 29, 2021).

"As the Kremlin Revises History, a Human Rights Champion Becomes a Casualty" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved September 6, 2023 .

^ Kołakowski, Leszek.

Main Currents of Marxism .

Its lies and suppressions were too obvious to be overlooked by readers who had witnessed the events in question: all but the youngest party members knew who Trotsky was and how collectivization had taken place in Russia, but, obliged as they were to parrot the official version, they became co-authors of the new past and believers in it as party-inspired truth. If anyone challenged this truth on the basis of manifest experience, the indignation of the faithful was perfectly sincere. In this way Stalinism really produced the ' new Soviet man ': an ideological schizophrenic, a liar who believed what he was saying, a man capable of incessant, voluntary acts of intellectual self- mutilation.

^ The Materiality of Text – Placement, Perception, and Presence of Inscribed Texts in Classical Antiquity: Placement, perception, and presence of inscribed texts in classical antiquity . BRILL. October 22, 2018.

ISBN 978-90-04-37943-5 .

^ King, David (1997).

The Commissar Vanishes . Canongate Books.

ISBN 978-0-86241-724-6 .

^ " "Именовали умершего вождя тираном": что изменилось в учебнике истории" .

Коммерсантъ (in Russian). September 2, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 2, 2023 . Retrieved September 6, 2023 .

^ "Как в России судят за "фальсификацию истории": доклад "Агоры" " .

Meduza (in Russian) . Retrieved September 6, 2023 .

^ Samuel Flagg Bemis, "First Gun of a Revisionist Historiography for the Second World War", Journal of Modern History , Vol. 19, No. 1 (Mar. 1947), pp. 55–59 in JSTOR Archived February 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ^ Martel, Gordon ed. (1999) The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered: A.J.P. Taylor and the Historians.

(2nd ed.) ^ Buchanan, Patrick J.

(2009).

Churchill, Hitler and the Unnecessary War: How Britain Lost Its Empire and the West Lost the World .

Three Rivers Press.

ISBN 978-0307405166 .

[ page needed ] ^ Kort (2007) , p. 31-32.

^ Morris, Saga Helgason (2018).

The Evolving Interpretations of the Origins of the Cold War: Have Historians Reached a Consensus on the Origins of the Cold War?

(PDF) .

University of Iceland - School of Humanities (Bachelor's thesis) (in English and Icelandic).

hdl : 1946/31413 – via Skemman.

^ a b Horwood, Ian (February 2007).

"Book review: Triumph Forsaken: The Vietnam War, 1954–1965" .

Reviews in History .

Institute of Historical Research . Archived from the original on December 23, 2012.

^ Divine, Robert A.; Lewy, Guenter; Millett, Allan R.

(September 1979). "Review: Revisionism in Reverse".

Reviews in American History .

7 (3): 433– 438.

doi : 10.2307/2701181 .

JSTOR 2701181 .

^ Guenter Lewy, America in Vietnam , p. VII.

^ Mark Moyar (2006).

Triumph Forsaken: The Vietnam War, 1954–1965 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-86911-0 .

^ Lind, Michael (1999).

Vietnam: The Necessary War . Free Press.

ISBN 978-0684842547 .

[ page needed ] ^ Hunt, Lynn (2008).

Measuring Time, Making History . Central European University Press.

ISBN 978-9639776142 .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2021 . Retrieved September 21, 2021 .

^ Meynell, Hugo (February 1985).

"Ancient History in Chaos—Velikovsky's Chronological Reconstruction" .

New Blackfriars .

66 (776): 56– 61.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-2005.1985.tb02681.x .

JSTOR 43247679 .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2021 . Retrieved September 21, 2021 .

^ Illig, Heribert (1996).

Das erfundene Mittelalter. Die größte Zeitfälschung der Geschichte . Econ.

ISBN 3-430-14953-3 .

^ Ginzburg, Vitaly L.

(2000).

"Pseudoscience and the Need to Combat It" .

Nauka i Zhizn ' . No. 11. Translated from the Russian by Gary Goldberg. Russian Humanist Society: humanism.al.ru.

Also, in the original Russian .

Archived from the original on October 24, 2021 . Retrieved December 12, 2021 .

Further reading Banner Jr., James M. (2021).

The Ever-Changing Past: Why All History Is Revisionist History .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0300238457 .

Burgess, Glenn (1990). "On Revisionism: An Analysis of Early Stuart Historiography in the 1970s and 1980s." Historical Journal , vol. 33. no. 3, pp. 609–627.

JSTOR 2639733 .

Comninel, George C. (1987).

Rethinking the French Revolution: Marxism and the Revisionist Challenge .

Verso .

Confino, Michael (2009). "The New Russian Historiography, and the Old—Some Considerations." History & Memory , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 7–33.

JSTOR 10.2979/HIS.2009.21.2.7 .

Gaither, Milton (2012).

"The Revisionists Revived: The Libertarian Historiography of Education." History of Education Quarterly , vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 488–505.

Jainchill, Andrew, and Samuel Moyn (2004). "French Democracy Between Totalitarianism and Solidarity: Pierre Rosanvallon and Revisionist Historiography." Journal of Modern History , vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 107–154.

JSTOR 10.1086/421186 .

Kopecek, Michal (2008).

Past in the Making: Historical Revisionism in Central Europe After 1989 .

Central European University Press .

Kort, Michael (2007).

"The Historiography of Hiroshima: The Rise and Fall of Revisionism" (PDF) .

New England Journal of History .

64 (1): 31– 48. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 10, 2017 . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

Lenin, V.I.

(1908).

"Marxism and Revisionism." Karl Marx—1818–1883 ( symposium ).

Markwick, Roger (2001).

Rewriting History in Soviet Russia: The Politics of Revisionist Historiography 1956–1974 .

Springer.

Melosi, Martin V. (1983). "The Triumph of Revisionism: The Pearl Harbor Controversy, 1941–1982." Public Historian , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 87–103.

JSTOR 3377253 .

Palmer, William (2010). "Aspects of Revision in History in Great Britain and the United States, 1920–1975." Historical Reflections/Réflexions Historiques , vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 17–32.

JSTOR 41403681 .

Riggenbach, Jeff (2009).

Why American History Is Not What They Say: An Introduction to Revisionism .

Auburn, Alabama: Ludwig von Mises Institute .

Rothbard, Murray N.

(February 1976).

"Revisionism and Libertarianism." Libertarian Forum , pp. 3–6.

Viola, Lynne (2002). "The Cold War in American Soviet Historiography and the End of the Soviet Union." Russian Review , vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 25–34.

JSTOR 2679501 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Historical revisionism at Wikimedia Commons v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐779wd
Cached time: 20250812014141
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.141 seconds
Real time usage: 1.334 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10323/1000000
Revision size: 61738/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 426034/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17371/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 58/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 200282/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.601/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9481039/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1080.137      1 -total
 36.15%  390.506      2 Template:Reflist
 27.28%  294.610      1 Template:Historiography
 27.00%  291.612      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 23.21%  250.735     16 Template:Navbox
 15.62%  168.713     18 Template:Cite_book
 10.80%  116.683     36 Template:Ill
  7.74%   83.549      2 Template:Ambox
  5.92%   63.914      1 Template:Short_description
  5.48%   59.148      4 Template:Flatlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13293:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014141 and revision id 1302923226. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historical_revisionism&oldid=1302923226 " Categories : Historical revisionism Historiography Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2021 CS1 Icelandic-language sources (is) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2014 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2024 Articles with too many examples from September 2023 All articles with too many examples Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015 Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2025 All articles with style issues Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 04:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historical revisionism 42 languages Add topic

