Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Mythology 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Chronos 47 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek personification of time Not to be confused with Cronus , the Titan father of Zeus.

For other uses, see Chronos (disambiguation) .

Time Clipping Cupid's Wings (1694), by Pierre Mignard Chronos ( / ˈ k r oʊ n ɒ s , - oʊ s / ; Ancient Greek : Χρόνος , romanized : Khronos , lit.

'Time'; [kʰrónos] , Modern Greek: ['xronos] ), also spelled Chronus , is a personification of time in Greek mythology , who is also discussed in pre-Socratic philosophy and later literature.

[ 1 ] Chronos is frequently confused with, or perhaps consciously identified with, the Titan , Cronus , in antiquity, due to the similarity in names.

[ 2 ] The identification became more widespread during the Renaissance, giving rise to the iconography of Father Time wielding the harvesting scythe.

[ 3 ] Greco-Roman mosaics depicted Chronos as a man turning the zodiac wheel .

[ 4 ] He is comparable to the deity Aion as a symbol of cyclical time.

[ 5 ] He is usually portrayed as an old callous man with a thick grey beard, personifying the destructive and stifling aspects of time.

[ 6 ] Name [ edit ] Chronos and His Child by Giovanni Francesco Romanelli , National Museum in Warsaw , a 17th-century depiction of Chronos as Father Time, wielding a harvesting scythe During antiquity, Chronos was occasionally interpreted as Cronus .

[ 7 ] According to Plutarch , the Greeks believed that Cronus was an allegorical name for Chronos.

[ 8 ] Mythology [ edit ] In the Orphic tradition, the unaging Chronos was "engendered" by "earth and water", and produced Aether , Chaos , and an egg.

[ 9 ] The egg produced the hermaphroditic god Phanes who gave birth to the first generation of gods and is the ultimate creator of the cosmos .

Pherecydes of Syros in his lost Heptamychos (" The seven recesses" ), around 6th century BC, claimed that there were three eternal principles: Chronos , Zas ( Zeus ) and Chthonie (the chthonic ). The semen of Chronos was placed in the recesses of the Earth and produced the first generation of gods.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Kairos Father Time Notes [ edit ] ^ LSJ s.v.

Κρόνος .

^ LSJ s.v.

Κρόνος ; Meisner, p. 145.

^ Macey, p. 209 .

^ Delaere, p. 97 .

^ Levi, p. 274.

^ Marcus Tullius, Cicero.

"De Natura Deorum, § 2.64" .

^ LSJ s.v.

Κρόνος .

^ Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris , 32 .

^ West, p. 178.

^ Kirk, Raven, and Schofield, pp.

24 , 56 .

References [ edit ] Delaere, Mark, Unfolding Time: Studies in Temporality in Twentieth-century Music , Leuven University Press , 2009.

ISBN 9789058677358 .

Kirk, G. S., J. E. Raven, M. Schofield.

The Presocratic Philosophers: A Critical History with a Selection of Texts .

Cambridge University Press ; 2 edition (February 24, 1984).

ISBN 0521274559 .

Liddell, Henry George , Robert Scott .

A Greek-English Lexicon , revised and augmented throughout by Sir Henry Stuart Jones with the assistance of Roderick McKenzie, Clarendon Press Oxford, 1940.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Levi, Doro , "Aion," Hesperia 13.4 (1944).

Macey, Samuel L., Encyclopedia of Time , Routledge.

ISBN 9781136508905 .

Meisner, Dwayne A., Orphic Tradition and the Birth of the Gods , Oxford University Press , 2018.

ISBN 978-0-190-66352-0 .

Online version at Oxford University Press .

Google Books .

Plutarch , Moralia, Volume V: Isis and Osiris. The E at Delphi. The Oracles at Delphi No Longer Given in Verse. The Obsolescence of Oracles . Translated by Frank Cole Babbitt.

Loeb Classical Library No. 306. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press , 1936.

ISBN 978-0-674-99337-2 .

Online version at Harvard University Press .

West, M. L.

(1983), The Orphic Poems , Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-814854-8 .

External links [ edit ] Listen to this article ( 3 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 4 December 2023 ( 2023-12-04 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chronos .

v t e Time in religion and mythology Aeon Calendar Deities Destiny Divination Eschatology Eternity Aevum Heortology Golden Age Prophecy Wheel of the Year Yuga v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany People DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronos&oldid=1299911368 " Categories : Greek gods Greek primordial deities Personifications in Greek mythology Personifications Time and fate gods Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 03:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chronos 47 languages Add topic

