Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Background and education 1.2 Early engagement in Social Democratic Party 1.3 Fight for women's rights 1.4 Opposition to First World War 1.5 Joining Communist Party 1.6 Publications 1.7 Exile and death 1.8 Legacy 2 Works 3 Posthumous honors 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Clara Zetkin 88 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Bikol Central Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German politician (1857–1933) Clara Zetkin Zetkin c.

1920 Chairwoman of the International Red Aid In office 1925–1927 Preceded by Julian Marchlewski Succeeded by Elena Stasova Chairwoman of the Rote Hilfe Deutschlands In office 1925–1933 Preceded by Wilhelm Pieck Succeeded by Position abolished Member of the Reichstag for Chemnitz–Zwickau In office 24 June 1920 – 28 February 1933 Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Office abolished Personal details Born Clara Josephine Eißner 5 July 1857 Wiederau , Kingdom of Saxony , German Confederation Died 20 June 1933 (aged 75) Arkhangelskoye, near Moscow , Russian SFSR , Soviet Union Resting place Kremlin Wall Necropolis , Moscow Political party SPD (1875–1917) USPD (1917–1918) KPD (1918–1933) Other political affiliations Spartacus League (1914–1918) Domestic partner(s) Ossip Zetkin [ de ] (1850–1889) Georg Friedrich Zundel (1899–1928) Children Maxim Zetkin (1883–1965) Konstantin "Kostja" Zetkin (1885–1980) Occupation Politician, peace activist and women's rights activist Signature Clara Zetkin ( / ˈ z ɛ t k ɪ n / ; German: [ˈtsɛtkiːn] ; née Eißner [ˈaɪsnɐ] ; 5 July 1857 – 20 June 1933) was a German Marxist theorist, communist activist, and advocate for women's rights .

[ 1 ] Until 1917, she was active in the Social Democratic Party of Germany .

[ 2 ] She then joined the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) and its far-left wing, the Spartacist League , which later became the Communist Party of Germany (KPD). She represented that party in the Reichstag during the Weimar Republic from 1920 to 1933.

[ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Background and education [ edit ] In July 1857, [ 4 ] Clara Josephine Eißner (Eissner) was born the eldest of three children in Wiederau [ de ] , a peasant village in Saxony that is now part of the municipality of Königshain-Wiederau .

[ 5 ] Her father, Gottfried Eissner, was a schoolmaster, church organist and a devout Protestant . Her mother, Josephine Vitale, who had French roots, came from a middle-class family from Leipzig and was highly educated.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] In 1872, her family moved to Leipzig, where she was educated at the Leipzig Teachers' College for Women. There, she established contacts with the infant Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands (SPD; Social Democratic Party).

[ citation needed ] Zetkin during a congress in Zürich in 1897 Because of the ban placed on socialist activity in Germany by Otto von Bismarck in 1878, Zetkin left for Zürich in 1882 and then went into exile in Paris , where she studied to be a journalist and a translator. During her time in Paris, she played an important role in the foundation of the Socialist International group.

[ 1 ] She also adopted the name of her lover, the Russian-Jewish Ossip Zetkin [ de ] , a devoted Marxist, with whom she had two sons, Maxim and Konstantin (known as Kostja). Ossip Zetkin became severely ill in early 1889 and died in June of that year. After the loss of her lover, Zetkin moved to Stuttgart with her children. She married artist Georg Friedrich Zundel , who was eighteen years her junior, from 1899 to 1928.

[ 8 ] Early engagement in Social Democratic Party [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Her political career began after being introduced to Zetkin. Within a few months of attending and taking part in socialist meetings, Zetkin became entirely committed to the party, which offered a Marxist approach to the demand for women's liberation. Around the time of 1880, due to the political climate in Germany, Zetkin went into exile in Switzerland and later in France. Upon her return to Germany, nearly a decade later, she became the editor of the Social Democratic Party of Germany 's newspaper for women, Die Gleichheit (Equality), a post that she occupied for 25 years.

[ 9 ] Having studied to become a teacher, Zetkin developed connections with the women's movement and the labour movement in Germany from 1874. In 1878 she joined the Socialist Workers' Party ( Sozialistische Arbeiterpartei , SAP). This party had been founded in 1875 by merging two previous parties: the ADAV formed by Ferdinand Lassalle and the SDAP of August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht . In 1890, its name was changed to its modern version Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD).

[ citation needed ] Zetkin and Rosa Luxemburg on their way to the SPD Congress in 1910 Around 1898, Zetkin formed a friendship with the younger Rosa Luxemburg that lasted 20 years. Despite Luxemburg's indifference to the women's movement, which absorbed so much of Zetkin's energies, they became firm political allies on the far left of the SDP. Luxemburg once suggested that their joint epitaph would be "Here lie the last two men of German Social Democracy".

[ 10 ] In the debate on Revisionism at the turn of the 20th century, they jointly attacked the reformist theses of Eduard Bernstein , who had rejected the ideology of a revolutionary change in favour of "evolutionary socialism".

[ 11 ] Fight for women's rights [ edit ] Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Zetkin was very interested in women's politics , including the fight for equal opportunities and women's suffrage , through socialism. She helped to develop the social-democratic women's movement in Germany. From 1891 to 1917, she edited the SPD women's newspaper Die Gleichheit [ a ] (Equality). In 1907 she became the leader of the newly founded "Women's Office" at the SPD. She also contributed to International Women's Day (IWD).

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] In August 1910, an International Women's Conference was organized to precede the general meeting of the Socialist Second International in Copenhagen , Denmark .

[ 15 ] Inspired in part by American socialists' actions, Zetkin, Käte Duncker and others proposed that "a special Women's Day" be organized annually, but no date was specified at that conference.

[ 16 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Delegates (100 women from 17 countries) agreed with the idea as a strategy to promote suffrage for women.

[ 17 ] The following year on 19 March 1911, IWD was marked for the first time, by over a million people in Austria, Denmark, Germany, and Switzerland.

[ 18 ] However, Zetkin was deeply opposed to the concept of "bourgeois feminism," which she claimed was a tool to divide the unity of the working classes .

[ 19 ] In a speech that she delivered to the Second International in 1889, she stated: The working women, who aspire to social equality, expect nothing for their emancipation from the bourgeois women's movement, which allegedly fights for the rights of women. That edifice is built on sand and has no real basis. Working women are absolutely convinced that the question of the emancipation of women is not an isolated question which exists in itself, but part of the great social question. They realize perfectly clear that this question can never be solved in contemporary society, but only after a complete social transformation.

[ 20 ] She viewed the feminist movement as being primarily composed of upper-class and middle-class women who had their own class interests in mind, which were incompatible with the interests of working-class women. Thus, feminism and the socialist fight for women's rights were incompatible. In her mind, socialism was the only way to truly end the oppression of women. One of her primary goals was to get women out of the house and into work so that they could participate in trade unions and other workers rights organizations to improve conditions for themselves. While she argued that the socialist movement should fight to achieve reforms that would lessen female oppression, she was convinced that such reforms could only prevail if they were embedded into a general move towards socialism; otherwise, they could easily be eradicated by future legislation.

[ 21 ] She interviewed Vladimir Lenin on "The Women's Question" in 1920.

[ 22 ] From Zetkin's perspective, the women's movement was a key component to the whole of women's rights.

[ 23 ] Not only was the movement essential to the women's rights movement, but it was also essential to building the Communist state.

[ 24 ] Lenin made it a point to mention that everyone who has been exploited or oppressed under the capitalist system should be included in the women's rights movement, further pushing the movement in Communist ideals.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Lenin and Zetkin's work as colleagues in the work of pushing the Communist and women's rights agendas progressed the liberation of women in the Soviet Union.

[ 23 ] By associating the movement with the larger proletarian revolution, they advanced the cause of women's liberation.

[ 24 ] Their combined efforts pushed for systematic changes such as labor protections, childcare facilities, women's suffrage, and dismantling the bourgeois societal norms.

[ 25 ] All of this would eventually become for naught as Stalin assumed political power in the Soviet Union, as women's reproductive health and personal liberties began to be stripped away.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Opposition to First World War [ edit ] During the period of the First World War , at the international women's peace conference in Switzerland, activists, revolutionaries, and supporters gathered to confront the concern for unity among workers across the battle lines.

[ 9 ] There, Zetkin spoke: Who profits from this war? Only a tiny minority in each nation: The manufacturers of rifles and cannons, of armor-plate and torpedo boats, the shipyard owners and the suppliers of the armed forces' needs. In the interests of their profits, they have fanned the hatred among the people, thus contributing to the outbreak of the war. The workers have nothing to gain from this war, but they stand to lose everything that is dear to them.

[ 9 ] Zetkin, along with Karl Liebknecht , Rosa Luxemburg , Luise Kähler and other influential SPD politicians, rejected the party's policy of Burgfrieden (a truce between political parties the government and a promise to refrain from strikes during the war).

[ 28 ] Among other anti-war activities, Zetkin organized an international socialist women's anti-war conference in Berlin in 1915.

[ 29 ] Because of her anti-war opinions, she was arrested several times during the war and was in 1916 taken into "protective custody" from which she was later released on account of illness.

[ 1 ] Joining Communist Party [ edit ] Zetkin's official Reichstag portrait, 1930 In 1916 Zetkin was one of the co-founders of the Spartacist League and the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) which had split off in 1917 from its mother party, the SPD, in protest at its pro-war stance.

[ 1 ] In January 1919, after the German Revolution in November of the previous year, the KPD ( Communist Party of Germany ) was founded. Zetkin also joined it and represented the party from 1920 to 1933 in the Reichstag .

[ 30 ] Zetkin became further enveloped in the Communist movement through her interactions and fellowship with Vladimir Lenin .

[ 31 ] The relationship between Zetkin and Lenin first began in 1920 when she conducted and recorded interviews with him.

[ 32 ] In her journal entries outlining their conversations, she discussed her admiration for his leadership as he used his position of power to give a voice to the oppressed people.

[ 31 ] Three separate lifetime editions of Zetkin's memoirs about Lenin (Clara Zetkin. Memories of Lenin; Clara Zetkin. From a Notebook; Clara Zetkin. Lenin and the Masses) were included in the 5th volume of “Memories of Lenin,” published by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism under the Central Committee, and became canonical for citation in the USSR.

[ 33 ] Included in speaking for the voices of the oppressed, Lenin discussed with Zetkin the need to establish an international women's movement.

[ 34 ] From the outline of the conversations, it's apparent that Lenin respected Zetkin as a colleague who could help him implement his political strategy, not as an inferior.

[ 32 ] In addition to the conversation's rhetoric, Lenin's respect for Zetkin is evident as he employed her to establish the women's movement based on the principles of Marxist theory.

[ 32 ] Zetkin was allocated a position to provide support to the women's rights committee drafting a resolution, theses, and directives to move along the progression of the movement.

[ 32 ] Because of its previous success in bringing women's emancipation in both theory and practice, Zetkin subscribed to the socialist movement in the early 1920s.

[ 31 ] Until 1924, Zetkin was a member of the KPD's central office. From 1927 to 1929, she was a member of the party's central committee. She was also a member of the executive committee of the Communist International ( Comintern ) from 1921 to 1933. She also presided over an international secretariat for women, which was created by the Communist International in October 1920. In June 1921, the Second International Conference of Communist Women, which was held in Moscow and was chaired by her, changed the date of the International Women's Day to 8 March. That has remained the date of the IWD.

[ 20 ] In summer 1922, Zetkin was part of the prosecution team during the Trial of the Socialist Revolutionaries in Moscow, but at other times, she was critical of Moscow's influence over the German Communist Party within which she was part of the right wing. She was removed from the Central Committee of the KPD when the left, led by Ruth Fischer , took control. She opposed a policy decision made in Moscow in 1928 to get communist trade unions in Germany to split from the main socialist-dominated federation and form the rival Rote Gewerkschaftsbund . When Joseph Stalin put this to the executive of Comintern, in December 1928, Zetkin was one of only three members of the executive to vote against.

[ 35 ] In August 1932, despite having recently fallen gravely ill in Moscow, she returned to Berlin to preside over the opening of the newly elected Reichstag, as its oldest deputy. She used her opening address [ 36 ] to call for workers to unite in the struggle against fascism: The most important immediate task is the formation of a United Front of all workers in order to turn back fascism [..] in order to preserve for the enslaved and exploited, the force and power of their organization as well as to maintain their own physical existence. Before this compelling historical necessity, all inhibiting and dividing political, trade union, religious and ideological opinions must take a back seat. All those who feel themselves threatened, all those who suffer and all those who long for liberation must belong to the United Front against fascism and its representatives in government.

She was a recipient of the Order of Lenin (1932) and the Order of the Red Banner (1927).

[ 8 ] Publications [ edit ] An example of a cover page of Die Gleichheit edited by Clara Zetkin from 1892 to 1917.

Zetkin's literary involvement began in 1892 when she started editing and writing for the SDP women's newspaper, Die Gleichheit , which translates to Equality .

[ 37 ] Originally, the newspaper was titled Die Arbeiterin (The Woman Worker), however, its publications received little success.

[ 37 ] She edited this newspaper until 1917. Her publications aimed at mobilizing the female working class, which included workers and mothers, to adopt socialism and feminism.

[ 37 ] Which might seem contrary to Zetkin's adamant protest of being called a feminist. The topics covered ranged from female worker strikes in Germany, women's suffrage, and child labor.

[ 37 ] Under Zetkin's leadership, the newspaper grew forty-fold by 1910.

[ 37 ] In 1921, Clara Zetkin began to write for the communist periodical, Die Kommunistische Fraueninternationale . Her purpose in writing for the periodical was to convince women of the effectiveness of socialist reform thinking over capitalist thought.

[ 38 ] The published periodicals expanded globally and became a forum for communist women to hear about the lives of other communists.

[ 37 ] The periodical focused on the lives of women in Russia, which had experienced a successful communist revolution. As Zetkin subscribed to the communist model of reform, her writings continued to outline and advocate for women to join her in her adherence.

[ 38 ] Of the periodicals Zetkin produced and edited for, Die Kommunistische Fraueninternationale portrayed the most accuracy in her actual worldviews.

[ 39 ] The periodical rejected “ bourgeois feminism ,” which was not an outrageous claim for Zetkin and advocated for women to become workers in the proletarian state.

[ 39 ] Zetkin's published works began to be stalled during the rise of the Stalinist government in the early 1920s.

[ 40 ] Stalin's politics stunted and regressed much of the progress of the women's movement in the Soviet Union, returning the country to be based in conservative ideals.

[ 40 ] The May-June 1925 issue of Die Kommunistische Fraueninternationale was the last issue to ever be published.

[ 41 ] This was an appendage to the decision to move the International Women's Secretariat from Berlin back to Moscow.

[ 41 ] By April 1926, the International Women's Secretariat lost its independence and became absorbed into the Women's Section of the Comintern Executive.

[ 42 ] The rise of Stalin's bureaucracy in the Soviet Union dissolved the relationship the women's movement established with the government under the leadership of Lenin.

[ 43 ] Exile and death [ edit ] Memorial bust of Clara Zetkin in Dresden A plaque commemorating where Clara Zetkin once lived in Jena Soon after Adolf Hitler and his Nazi Party took power in 1933, the Reichstag fire gave the Nazi government opportunity to outright ban the KPD and other dissenting political parties. Zetkin went into exile for the last time, this time to the Soviet Union . She died there, at Arkhangelskoye , near Moscow , in 1933, aged nearly 76.

[ 1 ] Her ashes were placed in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis , [ 1 ] by the Moscow Kremlin Wall , near the Red Square . The funeral was attended by leading communists from all over Europe, including Joseph Stalin and Nadezhda Krupskaya (Lenin's widow).

[ 44 ] After 1949, Zetkin became a much-celebrated heroine in the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), and every major city had a street named after her. Her name can still be found on the maps of the former lands of the GDR.

[ 8 ] A street in Tula, Russia , named for Zetkin (ул. Клары Цеткин) as well as a street in Belgrade , Serbia (ul. Klare Cetkin).

[ citation needed ] Legacy [ edit ] Part of a series on Socialism in Germany Ideologies Anarchism Communism and Marxism Leninism Marxism-Leninism Maoism Trotskyism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Orthodox Marxism Christian socialism Catholic socialism Democratic socialism Eco-socialism Liberal socialism Revolutionary socialism Social democracy Bernsteinism State socialism Lassallism Principles Anti-capitalism Anti-fascism Environmental justice Equality Equality of opportunity Progress Proletariat Radical democracy Redistribution Social justice Solidarity State intervention Sustainability History Anti-Socialist Laws German resistance to Nazism March Revolution November Revolution Kiel mutiny Spartacist uprising Post-war period in Germany East Germany SPD Programs Gotha Erfurt Godesberg Staatssozialismus Weimar Constitution West German student movement Intellectuals Benjamin Brecht Eisler Engels Fromm Hess Kautsky Lassalle Luxemburg Marcuse Marx Mühsam Niekisch Zetkin Politicians Bebel Bernstein Brandt Ebert Honecker Kaiser Lafontaine Liebknecht (Karl) Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Müller Naumann Pieck Ramelow Schmidt Schulz Schumacher Thälmann Ulbricht Wagenknecht Parties Active Communist Party of Germany (KPD) Die Linke Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance (BSW) Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) Defunct Communist Party of Germany (KPD) General German Workers' Association (ADAV) Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) Lassallean General German Workers' Association (LADAV) Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany (MSPD) Old Social Democratic Party of Germany (ASPD) Social Democratic Workers' Party of Germany (SDAP) Socialist Workers' Party of Germany (SAPD) Organisations Active Friedrich Ebert Foundation Rosa Luxemburg Foundation Defunct Antifaschistische Aktion Black Band Red Army Faction Iron Front Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold Roter Frontkämpferbund Ruhr Red Army Media Junge Welt Neues Deutschland Die Tageszeitung Related topics Antifa Fantifa Frankfurt School History of the Social Democratic Party of Germany Three Arrows Germany portal Socialism portal v t e In the decade preceding her exile and death, Zetkin's legacy has been largely forgotten.

[ 45 ] There appeared to be a negative connotation associated with her name as political figures, even the former Soviet Union Prime Minister Joseph Stalin labeled her as an ‘old witch.’ [ 45 ] Attempts have been made to renounce International Women's Day in Germany, one of the highlights of Zetkin's political career. Her demonstration on March 8th has been heralded as the ‘an event of the devil’ by some.

[ 46 ] In 1994, Christian Democrat Chancellor Helmult Kohl , put a stop to naming a street by the Reichstag in Berlin after Zetkin. His hard stop to acknowledging her legacy is because he believed her works played a part in destroying the first German democracy.

[ 45 ] Her legacy was further tarnished because her works were unpalatable to the feminist movements of the 60s and 70s.

[ 45 ] In 1960s and 70s Europe, Western Europe began its transition into second-wave feminist ideologies.

[ 47 ] As second-wave feminist ideologies took hold, a direct consequence was the exclusion of men from participation in women's movements.

[ 47 ] This is contrary to Zetkin's philosophy of the need for men and women within the working class to work together to achieve women's liberation.

[ 45 ] Today, many authors attempt to attribute Zetkin's work under the categories of “ socialist feminism ” or “ Marxist feminism .” However, during her lifespan, the term “socialist feminism” did not exist.

[ 45 ] In analyzing her published works, the term “ Frauenrechtlerei” has been mistakenly translated as “feminist” or “feminism.” In its truest translations, however, the term was used in demeaning rhetoric to separate Zetkin's political efforts from the bourgeois feminists.

[ 45 ] Her son, Maxim Zetkin , continued her legacy of Communist leadership through his medical practice in the Soviet healthcare system.

[ 48 ] In the 1920s, Maxim joined Clara in attending several Comintern congresses and worked for a number of Comintern missions.

[ 48 ] Maxim eventually joined the Soviet Communist Party after being commissioned to practice surgery in Moscow.

[ 48 ] Works [ edit ] Main article: Clara Zetkin bibliography Posthumous honors [ edit ] Zetkin was memorialized on the ten mark banknote and twenty mark coin of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) ( East Germany ).

After 1949, every major city in the GDR had a street named after her.

In 1954, the GDR established the Clara Zetkin Medal (Clara-Zetkin-Medaille).

In 1955, the city council of Leipzig established a new recreation area near the city center called " Clara-Zetkin-Park " [ 49 ] In 1967, a statue of Clara Zetkin, sculpted by GDR artist Walter Arnold , was erected in Johannapark , Leipzig in commemoration of her 110th birthday.

In 1987, the GDR issued a stamp with her picture.

Since 2011, the German party Die Linke issues an annual " Clara-Zetkin-Frauenpreis [ de ] ".

There is also a street named after Clara Zetkin in the city of Tula, Russia, which is located near the intersection of Leyteyzena Street and Red Army Prospect. (Red Army Prospect is a major thoroughfare In Tula which leads to the main train station.) See also [ edit ] Communism portal Socialism portal Organized Labour portal Feminism portal Germany portal Soviet Union portal Russia portal List of peace activists Alexandra Kollontai Nadezhda Krupskaya Rosa Luxemburg Alexander Deubner References [ edit ] ^ Die Gleichheit had appeared in early 1890 as Die Arbeiterin (The Worker), a successor to the short-lived Die Staatsbürgerin (The Citizenestatic.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2012/7/31/1343750637045/Zetkin-profile-001.jpgss) founded by Gertrud Guillaume-Schack and banned in June 1886. Zetkin renamed the paper Die Gleichheit when she took over.

[ 12 ] ^ a b c d e f "Zetkin, Clara * 5.7.1857, † 20.6.1933: Biographische Angaben aus dem Handbuch der Deutschen Kommunisten" . Bundesstiftung zur Aufarbeitung der SED-Diktatur: Biographische Datenbanken . Retrieved 15 November 2014 .

^ Clara Zetkin | bpb ^ Gilbert Badia, Clara Zetkin: Féministe Sans Frontières (Paris: Les Éditions Ouvrières 1993).

^ "Clara Zetkin (1857-1933) | Towards Emancipation?".

hist259.web.unc.edu . Retrieved 2024-10-22.

^ a b Young, James D. (1988).

Socialism since 1889: a biographical history . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 169.

ISBN 978-0-389-20813-6 .

^ Encyclopedia of World Biography: Vitoria-Zworykin . Gale Research. 1998. pp.

504 .

ISBN 978-0-7876-2556-6 .

^ Zetkin, Klara; Philip Sheldon Foner (1984).

Clara Zetkin, selected writings . International Publishers. pp.

17 .

ISBN 978-0-7178-0620-1 .

^ a b c Clara Zetkin biography from the University of Leipzig (in German) ^ a b c Schulte, Elisabeth (7 November 2014).

"Clara Zetkin, Socialism and Women's Liberation" .

^ Nettl, J.P. (1966).

Rosa Luxemburg . London: Oxford U.P. p. 371.

^ Clara Zetkin biography , Fembio.org. Accessed 14 October 2022. (in German)] ^ Mutert 1996 , p. 84.

^ a b Kaplan, Temma (1985). "On the Socialist Origins of International Women's Day".

Feminist Studies .

11 (1): 163– 171.

doi : 10.2307/3180144 .

JSTOR 3180144 .

^ a b "History of International Women's Day" . United Nations . Retrieved 26 May 2012 .

^ Ruthchild, Rochelle Goldberg (2012). "From West to East: International Women's Day, the First Decade".

Aspasia .

6 : 1– 24.

doi : 10.3167/asp.2012.060102 .

^ " "International Socialist Congress, 1910; Second International Conference of Socialist Women" . p. 21 . Retrieved 7 March 2020 .

^ "About International Women's Day" . Internationalwomensday.com. 8 March 1917 . Retrieved 26 February 2016 .

^ "United Nations page on the background of the IWD" . Un.org.

Archived from the original on 11 March 2012 . Retrieved 8 March 2012 .

^ Boxer, M. J. (2007).

"Rethinking the Socialist Construction and International Career of the Concept "Bourgeois Feminism" " .

The American Historical Review .

112 : 131– 158.

doi : 10.1086/ahr.112.1.131 .

^ a b Gaido, Daniel; Frencia, Cintia (2018). " "A Clean Break": Clara Zetkin, the Socialist Women's Movement, and Feminism".

International Critical Thought .

8 (2): 277– 303.

doi : 10.1080/21598282.2017.1357486 .

S2CID 158348988 .

^ Holland, Shelly.

"The IWD Story" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 30 November 2018 .

^ The interview transcript (in English) is available at The Emancipation of Women: From the Writings of V.I. Lenin , interview with Clara Zetkin, International Publishers, on the Marxist Archives ^ a b c Kelly, Marie (15 December 2023).

"V.I. Lenin and Clara ZetkinRevolutionary fighters aimed to abolish capitalism and win gender liberation" .

Workers World . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ a b c "Clara Zetkin: Lenin on the Women's Question - 1" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ "Clara Zetkin, socialism and women's liberation" .

SocialistWorker.org . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Randall, Amy E. (2011).

" "Abortion Will Deprive You of Happiness!": Soviet Reproductive Politics in the Post-Stalin Era" .

Journal of Women's History .

23 (3): 13– 38.

doi : 10.1353/jowh.2011.0027 .

ISSN 1527-2036 .

^ Talaver, Sasha.

"When Soviet Women Won the Right to Abortion (For the Second Time)" .

jacobin.com . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Heynen, Robert (2015).

Degeneration and Revolution. Radical Cultural Politics and the Body in Weimar Germany . Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. p. 80.

ISBN 978-90-04-27626-0 .

^ Timeline of Clara Zetkin's life, at the Lebendiges Museum Online (LEMO) ^ Marxist Internet Archive Biography ^ a b c "Clara Zetkin: Reminiscences of Lenin" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ a b c d Kelly, Marie (15 December 2023).

"V.I. Lenin and Clara ZetkinRevolutionary fighters aimed to abolish capitalism and win gender liberation" .

Workers World . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ “Воспоминания о Ленине», Институт марксизма-ленинизма при ЦК КПСС, Москва, издательство «Политической литературы», 1979 (“Memories of Lenin”, Institute of Marxism-Leninism under the Central Committee of the CPSU, Moscow, Political Literature Publishing House, 1979).

^ "Clara Zetkin: Lenin on the Women's Question - 1" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Drachkovitch, Milorad M.; Lazitch, Branko (1966).

The Comintern - Historical Highlights . New York: Frederick A, Praeger. p. 227.

^ Zetkin, Clara.

"Fascism Must Be Defeated" .

The Socialist Worker .

^ a b c d e f "Die Gleichheit (Equality) (1892-1923) | Towards Emancipation?" .

hist259.web.unc.edu . Retrieved 3 December 2024 .

^ a b Sproat, Liberty P. (1 January 2012).

"The Soviet Solution for Women in Clara Zetkin's Journal Die Kommunistische Fraueninternationale, 1921-1925" .

Aspasia .

6 (1).

doi : 10.3167/asp.2012.060105 .

ISSN 1933-2882 .

^ a b Sproat, Liberty (15 April 2008).

"How Soviet Russia Liberated Women: The Soviet Model in Clara Zetkin's Periodical 'Die Kommunistische Fraueninternationale' " .

Theses and Dissertations .

^ a b Best, Mark (13 March 2024).

"The Communist women's movement: Women and the revolution" .

Socialist Party . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ a b Paul, Hampton (7 November 2023).

"The Communist Women's Movement: A High Point of First Wave Feminism" .

Workers' Liberty .

^ Hampton, Paul (7 November 2023).

"The Communist Women's Movement: A High Point of First Wave Feminism" .

Workers' Liberty .

^ Best, Mark (13 March 2024).

"The Communist women's movement: Women and the revolution" .

Socialist Party . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ "Clara Zetkin facts" .

Your Dictionary . Archived from the original on 2 April 2019 . Retrieved 23 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g Lewis, Ben.

"Clara Zetkin Was a Marxist Champion of the Struggle Against Women's Oppression" .

jacobin.com . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Lewis, Ben.

"Clean breaks and clear principles" .

weeklyworker.co.uk . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ a b Briatte, Anne-Laure.

"Feminisms and Feminist Movements in Europe | EHNE" .

ehne.fr . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ a b c Reinisch, Jessica (6 June 2013), " 'Can we distinguish the sheep from the wolves?': Émigrés, Allies, and the Reconstruction of Germany" , The Perils of Peace: The Public Health Crisis in Occupied Germany , OUP Oxford , retrieved 10 December 2024 ^ Clara-Zetkin-Park - Stadt Leipzig Sources [ edit ] Mutert, Susanne (1996).

"Femmes et syndicats en Bavière" .

Métiers, corporations, syndicalismes (in French). Presses Univ. du Mirail.

ISBN 978-2-85816-289-5 . Retrieved 4 November 2014 .

Further reading [ edit ] Full works of Clara Zetkin available (in English) at the Marxist Internet archive Full works of Clara Zetkin available (in German) at the Marxist Internet archive Timeline of Clara Zetkin's life (in German), at the Lebendiges Museum Online (LEMO) Clara Zetkin, Clara Zetkin: Selected Writing , 1991, ISBN 0-7178-0611-1 .

Dorothea Reetz, Clara Zetkin as a Socialist Speaker , Intl. Pub, 1987, ISBN 0-7178-0649-9 .

Gilbert Badia, Clara Zetkin: Féministe Sans Frontières (Paris: Les Éditions Ouvrières 1993).

Florence Hervé. (2023). "Clara Zetkin (1857–1933): A Rebel Building the Socialist and Communist International Women's Movements." In: de Haan, F. (eds) The Palgrave Handbook of Communist Women Activists around the World. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-13127-1_2 Luise Dornemann , Clara Zetkin: Leben und Wirken, Dietz; 9., überarbeit. Aufl edition (1989), ISBN 978-3320012281 Karen Honeycutt, "Clara Zetkin: A left-wing socialist and feminist in Wilhelmian Germany," Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University, 1975 Clara Zetkin biography at FemBio.org (in German) Clara Zetkin biography from the University of Leipzig (in German) External links [ edit ] Media related to Clara Zetkin at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Clara Zetkin at Wikiquote Works by Clara Zetkin at Project Gutenberg Clara Zetkin at Spartacus Educational (biography, extracts) Zetkin at marxists.org (biography, some writings, links) Newspaper clippings about Clara Zetkin in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW My Recollections of Lenin by Clara Zetkin Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Latvia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dnzqg
Cached time: 20250817132835
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.485 seconds
Real time usage: 1.821 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14788/1000000
Revision size: 41690/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 428194/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12075/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 239810/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.850/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21760764/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1410.335      1 -total
 22.44%  316.538      2 Template:Reflist
 15.69%  221.239      8 Template:Navbox
 14.06%  198.342      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 13.26%  186.942     23 Template:Cite_web
 10.17%  143.482      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.85%  124.879      1 Template:Feminism
  8.39%  118.362      1 Template:Marxism
  8.26%  116.475      2 Template:IPA
  7.57%  106.717      3 Template:Excerpt Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1424386:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817132835 and revision id 1304825569. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clara_Zetkin&oldid=1304825569 " Categories : 1857 births 1933 deaths People from Mittelsachsen Politicians from the Kingdom of Saxony Social Democratic Party of Germany politicians Independent Social Democratic Party politicians Communist Party of Germany politicians Members of the Politburo of the Communist Party of Germany Members of the Reichstag of the Weimar Republic Members of the Reichstag 1920–1924 Members of the Reichstag 1924 Members of the Reichstag 1924–1928 Members of the Reichstag 1928–1930 Members of the Reichstag 1930–1932 Members of the Reichstag 1932 Members of the Reichstag 1932–1933 20th-century German women politicians Executive Committee of the Communist International German anti-war activists German Comintern people German suffragists German people of French descent Luxemburgists Marxist feminists Marxist theorists Burials at the Kremlin Wall Necropolis Refugees from Nazi Germany in the Soviet Union German Marxists German communists German socialists German socialist feminists Recipients of the Order of Lenin Recipients of the Order of the Red Banner 19th-century German writers 20th-century German writers 19th-century German women writers 20th-century German women writers Women Marxists Female revolutionaries Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 Pages with German IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images CS1 French-language sources (fr) Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 11:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Clara Zetkin 88 languages Add topic

