Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 National Library Services in Kenya 2 History 3 Transfer to the Counties 4 Core functions of Kenya National Library Service 5 Services 6 Current knls facilities 7 Former knls Network Libraries 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents National Library Service of Kenya 5 languages فارسی Gĩkũyũ مصرى Polski Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Corporate body of the Kenyan government Reading area Maktaba Kuu Building Kenya National Library Service (KNLS) [ 1 ] Location Nairobi Type National and Public Libraries Established 1965 Reference to legal mandate Laws of Kenya Cap 225 of April 1965 Branches 64 Collection Items collected Books, periodicals, encyclopedias, newspapers, journals, magazines, Braille materials, audio books, audio navigators for the blind, charts, maps and e-resources Size 1.4M books Criteria for collection Preservation of the National Imprint Legal deposit Yes Access and use Access requirements Access through entry fee or registered membership for adults. Children have free access.

Population served 16M Members Est 75,000 Other information Director Dr. Charles Nzivo Employees Est 650 Website www .knls .ac .ke The Kenya National Library Service (KNLS) is a Government State Corporation, established by the KNLS Board Act Cap 225 of the Laws of Kenya in 1965 – revised [Act No. 12 of 1984] .  KNLS’ headquarters is at Maktaba Kuu Building located in Upper Hill Nairobi and has two other facilities at Buruburu in the Eastland Areas of Nairobi, and Nakuru in Nakuru County. KNLS also manages the virtual library https://vtabu.knls.ac.ke/ to allow the public wide access to information resources and sources.

[ 2 ] Currently, the Kenya National Library Service is managed by the government under the Ministry of Sports, Culture & Heritage , State Department for Culture  and Heritage.

National Library Services in Kenya [ edit ] KNLS library National library services in Kenya are offered by Kenya National Library Service [ 3 ] through the National Library Division (NLD) . It serves as the repository for legal deposits in accordance with the Books and Newspapers Act Chapter (CAP) 111 of the laws of Kenya which facilitates the preservation of books, magazines, and other publications produced in the country.

[ 4 ] According to books and newspaper Act (CAP 111) statute law, Miscellaneous Amendment No. 22 of 1989, the publishers of every book printed and published in Kenya "shall before or within fourteen days after publication of the book, at his own expense deliver to the Registrar such number of copies thereof, not exceeding three in number. And in order to facilitate the publication of the national bibliography of Kenya under 4 (k) of the Kenya National Library Service Board Act, before or within fourteen days, deliver to the Director, Kenya National Library Service, two copies.

[ 4 ] The National Library Division of the Library Service is charged with annually publishing the Kenya National Bibliography which contains a list of bibliographic resources, print or audio-visual acquired as legal deposit. The bibliography was first proposed in 1975.

[ 5 ] Kenya National Bibliography is published annually by the National Library and contains list of bibliographic resources, print or audio-visual acquired as legal deposit. The Legal Deposit Act mandates publishers, to deposit two copies to the Director National library and three copies to the registrar of books and newspapers. All these materials are then published in the Kenya National Bibliography (KNB). The organization maintains a database of Kenya's intellectual output with the aim of achieving effective National Bibliographic Control in line with the principle of Universal Bibliographic Control . Kenya National Bibliography serves as a selection tool for scholars, lecturers, students', librarians among others. National Libraries over the ages have been potent instrument for creation, acquisition and dissemination of local content thereby preserving and promoting transmission of cultural practices and values from one generation to another. They are reservoir of recorded knowledge of a community, which is being preserved for posterity.

[ 4 ] The bibliography was last published in 2018.

[ 6 ] The National Library Division is also the sole issuer of International Standard Book Numbers (ISBN) and International Standard Music Numbers (ISMN) for print and music. knls subscribes to thousands of e-journals , e-books and other e-resource sites and has a stock of specialized collection of government publications dating back to 1980. In addition it also acts as a data information centre for the World Bank .

History [ edit ] Public libraries in Kenya have existed since the beginning of the 18th century. These however, were mainly subscription libraries that relied heavily on endowments, members' subscriptions and limited grants from both local and central government. The libraries were exclusively for Europeans and Asians.

The first public library, Seif Bin Salim Public Library and Free Reading Area, in Mombasa , [ 7 ] was established in 1903. It was financed by Seif Bin Salim, the son of the then " Liwali " (Arab Governor) of Mombasa, Salim bin Khalfan.

[ 8 ] [ circular reference ] [ 9 ] The McMillan Memorial Library in Nairobi was the second public library. It was built in 1931 in memory of Lord William Northrop Mcmillan who was among the first settlers in Kenya. The library was built through funding from the Carnegie Corporation of New York through the efforts of Macmillan's widow, Lucie. Initially, the library was meant for Europeans and Asians. The third public library was the Desai Memorial Library which was built in 1942. It only offered services exclusively to Asians until the 1960s.

In the late 1950s and 1960s, the British Council and the American Cultural Centre provided limited public library services across racial lines. These libraries did not cater for the information needs of the Africans until after independence. Following the recommendations of the East African Library Association and the report of Sidney Hockey, a British Council Library consultant in 1948, Elspeth Huxley who was an author, journalist, broadcaster, environmentalist and government advisor of the colonial government in Kenya.

[ clarification needed ] In 1960, a report recommending a centralized state-supported public library system for Kenya was made. That same year, The Macmillan Memorial Library was handed over to the Nairobi City Council , which opened it to everyone.   During this same period, the Desai Library was also opened to the general public.

In 1965, an act establishing Kenya National Library Service was passed.

Provision of information for development through the national and public library network enables people to fight poverty deprivation and illiteracy and thus supports reading and recovery programs by the government. Rural and urban poor communities are better able to tackle their problems and introduce social change if they have access to relevant information that meets their needs and interests. In addition, access to information about the country enables citizens to participate effectively in the art of governance.

Through various reading campaigns, knls provides opportunities for communities to enhance their reading and information seeking habits, and therefore sustain literacy. The 2006 Kenya National Adult Literacy Survey estimated the national literacy rate at 61.5% indicating that only 38.5% Kenyan adults were illiterate. The survey also revealed that only 29.6% of the adult population had acquired the desired mastery level of literacy. This meant that the majority of those termed as literate (61.5%) were at risk of losing their literacy skills or could not effectively perform within the context of knowledge economies.

However, a country with effective library and information services will achieve continuity in learning and reading beyond the formal school program. Such systems cannot be explained any better than ensuring that library services are accessible to as many Kenyans as possible throughout the country. Public libraries go beyond formal education and they are at the heart of personal and community development. knls promotes reading by providing access to relevant reading materials to all communities. Libraries play a major role in stimulating public interest in books and in promoting reading for knowledge, information and enjoyment – thus knls is indeed a "people's university." [ 10 ] Transfer to the Counties [ edit ] The amalgamation of the Constitution of Kenya 2010, presented a significant opportunity to clearly distinguish between the roles of the National Library of Kenya from those of the Public Library System. The public libraries were listed as a devolved function in Schedule 4 of the Constitution, and thus, the 61 (former KNLS) branch libraries were transferred to the county Governments with effect from 1st July 2023.

[ 11 ] Core functions of Kenya National Library Service [ edit ] Develop a national policy, legislation, and set Norms and standards for the library sector.

Capacity building and technical assistance to the county governments.

Carry out and promote research in the development of libraries and related services Promote literacy in the country.

Domesticate international standards.

Publish Kenya National Bibliography (KNB) and Kenya Periodical Directory (KPD) Establish the national WebCat comprising catalogs for all libraries Provide  a national library reference and referral service Services [ edit ] The library offers the following services; Mobile library services [ 12 ] Advisory on library services Research & Consultancy Free access to computers and Internet connectivity Health information Services to visually impaired persons User education Digitization services Board games for users above 14 years old Data center services [ 13 ] Virtual Library services The library also offers eBooks that can be accessed online Current knls facilities [ edit ] Maktaba Kuu, Upper Hill Buruburu Nakuru Former knls Network Libraries [ edit ] No.

County No. of libraries Area situated 1 Baringo 3 Kabarnet , Meisori, Eldama Ravine 2 Bomet 1 Silibwet 3 Bungoma 1 Kimilili 5 Elgeyo/Marakwet 1 Lagam 6 Embu 1 Embu 7 Garissa 3 Garissa, Mbalambala , Masalani 9 Isiolo 1 Isiolo 11 Kakamega 2 Kakamega, Lusumu 12 Kericho 1 Kericho 13 Kiambu 1 Thika 14 Kilifi 3 Kilifi, Dzitsoni, Malindi 16 Kisii 1 Kisii 17 Kisumu 2 Kisumu, Koru ( Dr. Robert Ouko Memorial Library ) 18 Kitui 1 Mwingi 20 Laikipia 2 Nanyuki, Rumuruti 23 Makueni 3 Mutyambua, Kinyambu, Kithasyu 24 Mandera 1 Mandera 25 Marsabit 1 Moyale 26 Meru 4 Meru, Mikumbune, Timau, Gatimbi 27 Migori 1 Awendo 28 Mombasa 1 Mombasa 29 Murang'a 2 Murang'a, Kangema 30 Nairobi 1 Kibera 31 Nakuru 2 Naivasha, Gilgil 33 Narok 2 Narok, Lelechonik 35 Nyandarua 1 Ol Kalou 36 Nyeri 4 Nyeri, Munyu, Chinga, Karatina 38 Siaya 3 Nyilima, Rambula, Ukwala 39 Taita Taveta 3 Wundanyi , Voi, Werugha ( Mary Patch Turnbull Memorial Library ) 44 Uasin Gishu 1 Eldoret 46 Wajir 5 Wajir , Griftu, Habasweni , Tarbaj, Bute TOTAL 61 See also [ edit ] List of libraries in Kenya Book Aid International Royal Library of Alexandria References [ edit ] ^ "Kenya National Library Service" . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ "Who We Are | kenya national library service" .

www.knls.ac.ke . Archived from the original on 8 September 2024 . Retrieved 19 February 2025 .

^ "Kenya National Library Service (KNLS)" . UNESCO. 21 October 2017. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 4 February 2021 .

^ a b c "Kenya National Library Service" .

Kenya National Library Service . Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 1 March 2021 .

^ Anderson, Dorothy (January 1977).

"The Role of the National Bibliographic Centre" .

Library Trends .

25 (3).

Johns Hopkins University Press : 645– 663. Archived from the original on 10 May 2017 . Retrieved 10 September 2016 .

^ "National Library, Kenya National Bibliography" . Retrieved 9 September 2022 .

^ "Saif-Bin Salim Library (Mombasa), Kenya / Coast / Mombasa" .

wikimapia.org . 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2023 .

^ Sheikh Ali bin Salim is mentioned on the List of honorary British knights and dames#Religion ^ "Sir Ali Muslim Club | Since 1934" .

siraliclub.com .

^ "Kenya National Library Service" .

Kenya National Library Service . Retrieved 1 March 2021 .

^ "Who We Are | kenya national library service" .

www.knls.ac.ke .

Archived from the original on 8 September 2024 . Retrieved 19 February 2025 .

^ "Mobile Library Services" .

Kenya National Library Service . Retrieved 21 September 2022 .

^ "Uvumbuzi Center" .

Kenya National Library Service . Retrieved 21 September 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Official website EIFL in Kenya | EIFL Public Libraries Kenya National Library Service library, Nairobi, Kenya – Public library – Libdex.com http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/?articleID=2000089713&story_title=knls-library-to-take-narok-to-new-literacy-levels 157375909 Knls Branch Network on the Map Timothy Mahea | PDF v t e Kenya articles History Timeline Wanga Kingdom Indian Ocean slave trade East Africa Protectorate Uganda Railway Kenya Colony In World War II Ilemi Triangle Kenya African Union Mau Mau rebellion 1963 Constitution 1982 coup d'état attempt Goldenberg scandal 1992 Elections 2007–2008 crisis 2010 referendum 2013 Elections Geography Biosphere reserves Climate Ecoregions Environmental issues Great Rift Valley Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Volcanoes Wildlife World Heritage Sites Subdivisions Cities Counties Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Intersex LGBT rights Judiciary Law enforcement Military Parliament Building Political parties President list Deputy President Prime Minister (defunct) Economy Agriculture Central bank Coffee Energy Real Estate Shilling (currency) Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Child marriage Corruption Crime Demographics Education Health Human trafficking Languages Polygamy Prostitution Religion Squatting Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Anthem Cinema Coat of arms English Engsh Flag Names Literature Media Museums Music Public holidays Sports Sheng Swahili Video gaming Outline Index Category Portal v t e African national libraries Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Library_Service_of_Kenya&oldid=1305855394 " Categories : 1965 establishments in Kenya Government agencies established in 1965 National libraries Education in Kenya Government of Kenya Libraries established in 1965 Libraries in Kenya Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 Use British English from August 2013 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2015 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2018 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 13:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Library Service of Kenya 5 languages Add topic

