Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Mathematical contributions 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Jakob Steiner 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swiss mathematician (1796–1863) Jakob Steiner Born ( 1796-03-18 ) 18 March 1796 Utzenstorf , Canton of Bern , Old Swiss Confederacy Died 1 April 1863 (1863-04-01) (aged 67) Bern , Switzerland Known for Euclidean geometry Projective geometry Synthetic geometry Scientific career Fields Mathematics Jakob Steiner (18 March 1796 – 1 April 1863) was a Swiss mathematician who worked primarily in geometry .

Life [ edit ] Steiner was born in the village of Utzenstorf , Canton of Bern . At 18, he became a pupil of Heinrich Pestalozzi and afterwards studied at Heidelberg . Then, he went to Berlin, earning a livelihood there, as in Heidelberg, by tutoring. Here he became acquainted with A. L. Crelle , who, encouraged by his ability and by that of Niels Henrik Abel , then also staying at Berlin, founded his famous Journal (1826).

After Steiner's publication (1832) of his Systematische Entwickelungen he received, through Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi , who was then professor at Königsberg University , and earned an honorary degree there; and through the influence of Jacobi and of the brothers Alexander and Wilhelm von Humboldt a new chair of geometry was founded for him at Berlin (1834). This he occupied until his death in Bern on 1 April 1863.

He was described by Thomas Hirst as follows: "He is a middle-aged man, of pretty stout proportions, has a long intellectual face, with beard and moustache and a fine prominent forehead, hair dark rather inclining to turn grey. The first thing that strikes you on his face is a dash of care and anxiety, almost pain, as if arising from physical suffering—he has rheumatism. He never prepares his lectures beforehand. He thus often stumbles or fails to prove what he wishes at the moment, and at every such failure he is sure to make some characteristic remark." Mathematical contributions [ edit ] Steiner's mathematical work was mainly confined to geometry . This he treated synthetically, to the total exclusion of analysis, which he hated, [ 1 ] and he is said to have considered it a disgrace to synthetic geometry if equal or higher results were obtained by analytical geometry methods. In his own field he surpassed all his contemporaries. His investigations are distinguished by their great generality, by the fertility of his resources, and by the rigour in his proofs. He has been considered the greatest pure geometer since Apollonius of Perga .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Jakob Steiner" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In his Systematische Entwickelung der Abhängigkeit geometrischer Gestalten von einander he laid the foundation of modern synthetic geometry. In projective geometry even parallel lines have a point in common: a point at infinity . Thus two points determine a line and two lines determine a point. The symmetry of point and line is expressed as projective duality . Starting with perspectivities , the transformations of projective geometry are formed by composition , producing projectivities . Steiner identified sets preserved by projectivities such as a projective range and pencils . He is particularly remembered for his approach to a conic section by way of projectivity called the Steiner conic .

In a second little volume, Die geometrischen Constructionen ausgeführt mittels der geraden Linie und eines festen Kreises (1833), republished in 1895 by Ottingen, he shows, what had been already suggested by J. V. Poncelet , how all problems of the second order can be solved by aid of the straight edge alone without the use of compasses, as soon as one circle is given on the drawing-paper. He also wrote "Vorlesungen über synthetische Geometrie" , published posthumously at Leipzig by C. F. Geiser and H. Schroeter in 1867; a third edition by R. Sturm was published in 1887–1898.

Other geometric results by Steiner include development of a formula for the partitioning of space by planes (the maximal number of parts created by n planes), several theorems about the famous Steiner's chain of tangential circles, and a proof of the isoperimetric theorem (later a flaw was found in the proof, but was corrected by Weierstrass ).

The rest of Steiner's writings are found in numerous papers mostly published in Crelle's Journal , the first volume of which contains his first four papers. The most important are those relating to algebraic curves and surfaces, especially the short paper Allgemeine Eigenschaften algebraischer Curven . This contains only results, and there is no indication of the method by which they were obtained, so that, according to O. Hesse , they are, like Fermat 's theorems, riddles to the present and future generations. Eminent analysts succeeded in proving some of the theorems, but it was reserved to Luigi Cremona to prove them all, and that by a uniform synthetic method, in his book on algebraic curves.

Other important investigations relate to maxima and minima . Starting from simple elementary propositions, Steiner advances to the solution of problems which analytically require the calculus of variations , but which at the time altogether surpassed the powers of that calculus. Connected with this is the paper Vom Krümmungsschwerpuncte ebener Curven , which contains numerous properties of pedals and roulettes , especially of their areas.

Steiner also made a small but important contribution to combinatorics . In 1853, Steiner published a two-page article in Crelle's Journal on what nowadays is called Steiner systems , a basic kind of block design .

His oldest papers and manuscripts (1823–1826) were published by his admirer Fritz Bützberger on the request of the Bernese Society for Natural Scientists.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Arrangement of lines Malfatti circles Miquel and Steiner's quadrilateral theorem Minkowski–Steiner formula Mixed volume Power of a point theorem Steiner curve Steiner symmetrization Steiner system Steiner surface Steiner conic Steiner's conic problem Steiner's problem Steiner tree Steiner chain Poncelet–Steiner theorem Parallel axes rule Steiner–Lehmus theorem Steiner inellipse Steinerian Steiner point (computational geometry) Steiner point (triangle) Notes [ edit ] ^ "Steiner (print-only)" . History.mcs.st-and.ac.uk . Retrieved 20 September 2012 .

^ O'Connor & Robertson.

"Fritz Bützberger" .

MacTutor History of Mathematics . University of St. Andrews . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

References [ edit ] Viktor Blåsjö (2009) " Jakob Steiner's Systematische Entwickelung: The Culmination of Classical Geometry ", Mathematical Intelligencer 31(1): 21–9.

External links [ edit ] Steiner, J. (1796–1863) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Jakob Steiner" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Jacob Steiner's work on the Isoperimetric Problem Archived 26 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine at Convergence Archived 21 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine (by Jennifer Wiegert ) "Steiner, Jakob" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). 1911.

"Steiner, Jakob" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

Media related to Jakob Steiner at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jakob_Steiner&oldid=1276346565 " Categories : 1796 births 1863 deaths People from Emmental District 19th-century Swiss mathematicians Geometers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2025 Articles with hCards Articles needing additional references from December 2019 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 08:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jakob Steiner 35 languages Add topic

