Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Division 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles River Rats Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American rugby union club Rugby team Charles River Full name Charles River Rugby Football Club Union New England Rugby Football Union Nickname(s) The River Rats Founded 1973 ; 52 years ago ( 1973 ) Ground(s) Joe Moakley Park Boston President Owen McElhinney (Men's) Maria Sedjo (Women's) Coach(es) Ryan Hargraves (Men's) Maggie Conley (Women's) League(s) NERFU Senior Division II (Men) Senior Division II (Women) Team kit Official website www .charlesriverrugby .com Charles River Rugby Football Club , nicknamed The Rats , is an American rugby union club based in Boston which currently competes in New England Rugby Football Union . Charles River has also a women's section.

History [ edit ] In 1973, the Charles River Rugby Football Club, affectionately dubbed "The Rats", was founded by a group of ruggers from Tufts University and Boston Rugby Football Club . In striking green and orange jerseys that quickly became the club's trademark, the Rats achieved many early successes, including winning the Portland RFC Invitational and advancing to the Annual New England Tournament semi-finals. The Rats continued to attract new players and build on each year's accomplishments over the next decade, thus solidifying themselves as a fixture in the New England rugby community.

[ 1 ] In 1980, the Rats earned promotion to New England Division I thanks to a staggering defeat of the renowned Berlin Strollers. The early eighties were busy for the club, as the men concentrated on augmenting club membership via a merger with the Old North Bridge RFC of Concord, MA. Highlights of the eighties include continual success both in New England and in international tournament play. In 1985, Charles River placed 2nd in NERFU Division I, qualifying them for the national playoffs: the team defeated Binghamton RFC in the first round, then lost to Old Blue RFC of NYC (16-6), which ended up advancing to the national finals.  In the fall of 1986, the club defeated Boston RFC 12-9, eliminating them from the playoffs for the first time in 5 years.

The Club settled into a restructured Division II in 1992 and held the top seed in the Division. In 1992, the Club went on Tour to Ireland playing Suttonians RFC, Ballinrobe RFC, Dolphin RFC, and De La Salle Palmerston RFC. The team followed the Tour in 1992 with a Tour to Wales in 1995 playing Risca RFC, Trebanos RFC, and Bletchley RFC. The Team held the top seed in Division II for a number of years.

The club failed to post a winning season again until the fall of 2005 when the men's side, under coach Fergal Hehir, made it to the playoffs. They defeated Rockaway RFC in the first playoff game in the spring of 2006 and lost to Montauk RFC in the second game. Under Hehir's tenure, Charles River's men's side ran four winning seasons in a row. In 2008, Hehir stepped down and the following January, the club came under the direction of Anthony Adams former player with the Boston Irish Wolfhounds RFC .

After going winless in Adams' first league season (fall 2009), the Rat's men's side was almost relegated down to Division III, but managed to argue their case to stay in Division II.  They were put in the new Daly Conference of Division II. In 2010, another South African, Hylton Haynes, took over as Men's coach.

Currently, the Rat's men's side competes in Division II, being promoted back after a strong run to the Division III National Final Four in 2024. In 2015, the Rat's men's side advanced to the Division III NERFU Cup finals, eventually losing to the Springfield Rifles RFC. In the fall of 2017 they beat out Old Gold RFC to earn a spot in playoffs. They have competed successfully at the top of the table, making the playoffs in each of the past 7 seasons, starting in 2017. In 2022, after an undefeated regular season, the Rats made a run at a title, after capturing NERFU's championship and defeating Lehigh Valley RFC (PA) in the Atlantic Super Regional Round of 16. They came up just short in the Round of 8, losing to Union County RFC (NJ) 15-14 in the Atlantic Super Regional Championship. Currently, in 2024, Charles River's Men's team has made history once again, with a run culminating in a National Championship Final 4 appearance, set for May 17–19, 2024. Charles River capped a 7-1 regular season with a hard fought 24-22 victory over a strong Boston Irish Wolfhounds 2nd XV, followed by a 34-12 win over a blossoming rival in Lehigh Valley RFC (PA) in the Round of 16, and a 30-24 victory against a strong Old Blue RFC (NY) side in the Atlantic Super Regional Championship. This marks the furthest that any Charles River team has ever made it.

2005 also marked the first season of the Lady Rats, a women's team to complement the men's team. The women had a successful winning first season, fielding a competitive side in all of their matches. In 2007, they went undefeated in Division III and were promoted to Division II. In the NERFU realignment in 2009, they were placed in Division III. In May 2011, they won the Division III championship. Since then, and multiple NERFU realignments, Charles River Women's RFC is currently competing in DII. In 2017 they made the playoffs for the second time in their history, and fell in the second round.

In 2023, the club celebrated its 50th anniversary. The Rats men's side has been running about 50 active players per season and the women's side has been running about 40 players.

In 2024, The Rats successfully made it to the National Final Fours before falling to Colusa County in a hard-fought close encounter in Austin, Texas.

[ 2 ] Division [ edit ] The Charles River Lady Rats are a part of the New England Rugby Football Union , Senior Women's Division II. In this division, they compete with: Burlington WRFC Hartford Wild Roses Providence WRFC Worcester WRFC Portland, Maine (PWRFC) North Shore Monsoons WRFC Upper Valley WRFC The Charles River Rats are a part of the New England Rugby Football Union , Senior Men's Division II in the Northern Conference. In this division, they compete with: Worcester RFC Mystic River RFC 2nd XV Newport RFC Boston RFC Boston Irish Wolfhounds 1st XV Hartford RFC Portland RFC During their history, they have merged with the following clubs while retaining the name Charles River: Old North Bridge RFC (1981)(based in Concord, MA ) Hanscom Hawks RFC (1987) (based on Hanscom AFB ) Dracut RFC (1995) References [ edit ] ^ About Us on CRR website ^ Jennings, Don (May 7, 2024).

"2024 USA Club XVs Rugby National Championships – Schedule, Viewing Options, and Results – May 17–19" .

Scrumhalf Connection . Retrieved May 7, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Sports teams based in Massachusetts Australian football USAFL Boston Demons Baseball MLB Boston Red Sox IL Worcester Red Sox FL Brockton Rox CCBL Bourne Braves Brewster Whitecaps Chatham Anglers Cotuit Kettleers Falmouth Commodores Harwich Mariners Hyannis Harbor Hawks Orleans Firebirds Wareham Gatemen Yarmouth–Dennis Red Sox FCBL Pittsfield Suns Westfield Starfires Worcester Bravehearts NECBL Martha's Vineyard Sharks North Adams SteepleCats North Shore Navigators Valley Blue Sox Basketball NBA Boston Celtics BIG3 Boston Ball Hogs Esports CDL Boston Breach OWL Boston Uprising Football NFL New England Patriots IFL Massachusetts Pirates WFA Boston Renegades Hockey NHL Boston Bruins PWHL Boston Fleet AHL Springfield Thunderbirds ECHL Worcester Railers NAHL Northeast Generals Lacrosse WPLL New England Command UWLX Boston Storm PLL Boston Cannons WLL Boston Guard Roller derby WFTDA Bay State Brawlers Roller Derby Boston Roller Derby MRDA Pioneer Valley Roller Derby Rugby league NARL Boston Bears Rugby union MLR New England Free Jacks NERFU Boston RFC Boston Ironsides RFC Boston Irish Wolfhounds Boston Maccabi Rugby Charles River Rats Mystic River Old Gold Rugby South Shore Anchors Worcester RFC WER Boston Banshees Soccer MLS New England Revolution NWSL Boston Legacy FC (2026) MLSNP New England Revolution II USL2 Black Rock FC Boston Bolts Boston City FC Western Mass Pioneers NPSL Valeo FC UWS New England Mutiny Ultimate AUDL Boston Glory College athletics NCAA Division I Bentley Falcons Boston College Eagles Boston University Terriers Harvard Crimson Holy Cross Crusaders Merrimack Warriors Northeastern Huskies Stonehill Skyhawks UMass Minutemen and Minutewomen UMass Lowell River Hawks NCAA Division II American International Yellow Jackets Assumption Greyhounds Bentley Falcons NCAA Division III Amherst Mammoths Anna Maria Amcats Babson Beavers Brandeis Judges Bridgewater State Bears Clark Cougars Curry Colonels Dean Bulldogs Eastern Nazarene Lions Elms Blazers Emerson Lions Emmanuel Saints Endicott Gulls Fitchburg State Falcons Framingham State Rams Gordon Fighting Scots Lasell Lasers Lesley Lynx Mount Holyoke Lyons MCLA Trailblazers Massachusetts Maritime Buccaneers MIT Engineers Nichols Bison Regis Pride Salem State Vikings Simmons Sharks Smith Pioneers Springfield Pride Suffolk Rams Tufts Jumbos UMass Boston Beacons UMass Dartmouth Corsairs Wellesley Blue Wentworth Leopards Western New England Golden Bears Westfield State Owls Wheaton Lyons Williams Ephs WPI Engineers Worcester State Lancers NAIA Fisher Falcons USCAA Bay Path Wildcats Hampshire Black Sheep NJCAA Division II Massasoit Warriors NJCAA Division III Benjamin Franklin Shockers Bristol Bayhawks Bunker Hill Bulldogs Holyoke Cougars Massachusetts Bay Buccaneers Northern Essex Knights Quinsigamond Chiefs Roxbury Tigers Springfield Technical Rams Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_River_Rats&oldid=1280552372 " Categories : 1973 establishments in Massachusetts Rugby clubs established in 1973 Rugby union teams in Boston South Boston Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Short description matches Wikidata Pages using infobox rugby team with unknown parameters This page was last edited on 15 March 2025, at 06:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles River Rats Add languages Add topic

