Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Triumph 2.2 Anti-abortion activity 3 Personal life 4 Illnesses and final years 5 Death 6 Works 7 References 8 Sources Toggle the table of contents L. Brent Bozell Jr.

Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American activist and writer (1926–1997) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "L. Brent Bozell Jr." – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) L. Brent Bozell Jr.

Bozell in 1954 Born Leo Brent Bozell Jr.

( 1926-01-15 ) January 15, 1926 Omaha, Nebraska , U.S.

Died April 15, 1997 (1997-04-15) (aged 71) Bethesda, Maryland , U.S.

Occupation Author, commentator , activist Education Yale University ( BA , LLB ) Subject American conservatism , anti-communism , judicial activism , Catholic social teaching Spouse Patricia Buckley Bozell Children 10, including Brent Leo Brent Bozell Jr.

( / b oʊ ˈ z ɛ l / ; January 15, 1926 – April 15, 1997) was an American conservative activist and Catholic writer, and former United States Merchant Mariner . He was a conservative Catholic, and a strong supporter of the anti-abortion movement . In 1966, he co-founded the Catholic magazine Triumph , which published for a decade until its dissolution in 1976.

Early life and education [ edit ] Bozell was born in Omaha, Nebraska , to Lois ( née Robbins ) and Leo B. Bozell , the co-founder of Bozell Worldwide .

[ 1 ] He attended Creighton Preparatory School in Omaha.

Bozell was the state American Legion Oratorical Contest Champion of Nebraska in 1943 and 1944, winning the national title in 1944. He served in the U.S. Merchant Marine in the Pacific during World War II .

[ 2 ] Bozell resolved to convert to Catholicism in 1946. But after his father's death that same year, he deferred his decision until 1947 so as not to upset his family.

[ 3 ] Bozell attended Yale University , where he became best friends with William F. Buckley Jr.

, who was his teammate in the Yale debating society. In the book Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater and the Unmaking of the American Consensus , Buckley described Bozell as "a young, energetic red-haired Yalie from Omaha".

[ 4 ] At Yale, Bozell also was president of the Yale Political Union and president of Yale's World Federalist Movement .

Career [ edit ] Bozell (left) and William F. Buckley Jr.

promote their book McCarthy and His Enemies in 1954 Bozell was a consistent supporter of Senator Joseph McCarthy , teaming up with fellow National Review associate William F. Buckley Jr.

in 1954 to write a ringing defense of him in McCarthy and His Enemies.

Bozell and Buckley defined McCarthyism , the political movement associated with McCarthy, as “a movement around which men of good will and stern morality can close ranks.” Bozell joined McCarthy's staff, shortly after Roy Cohn left, and wrote McCarthy's defense speech before the U.S. Senate committee that would censure him, as well as a series of policy speeches through at least 1956.

[ 5 ] In 1958, Bozell ran for the Maryland House of Delegates but lost.

[ citation needed ] After this defeat he proposed the formation of a new political party at one of the editors' evening meetings in New York ; the idea was summarily rejected by the more fusionist editors Buckley and James Burnham .

[ 6 ] He later worked as a speechwriter for Senator Barry Goldwater , for whom he ghostwrote the 1960 book The Conscience of a Conservative .

[ 7 ] He was a founding member of Young Americans for Freedom .

[ 8 ] In 1960, he took his family to Spain for the first time, making him absent from the Palm Beach decision of Buckley, Goldwater, Russell Kirk , and William Baroody Sr.

to freeze out the John Birch Society from the conservative movement. Kirk inferred that Bozell would not have had any reason to be opposed to the decision, [ 9 ] but, in fact, he, along with Frank Meyer and William Rusher , protested the exclusion of the Society from the conservative movement.

[ 10 ] Triumph [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Main article: Triumph (magazine) In 1965, he moved his family to Spain purportedly because "you breathed the Catholic thing there" [ 11 ] and, along with Frederick Wilhelmsen and William Marshner among others, founded the Catholic magazine Triumph in 1966 which Bozell intended to be a bulwark of Catholic orthodoxy and a sort of National Review for Catholics. The magazine featured contributions from Russell Kirk (a Catholic convert), Christopher Dawson , Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn , John Lukacs , Thomas Molnar , Jeffrey Hart , Sir Arnold Lunn , Charles Journet , Rousas John Rushdoony , a Calvinist , and initially received an enthusiastic endorsement by Buckley in the pages of National Review .

However, the relationship between Bozell and his brother-in-law had already begun to sour; in March 1966, when Buckley wrote a column warning that Catholics should not try to seek legislation that would impose on others their belief that abortion is murder, Bozell wrote a letter to the editors of National Review protesting that the column "reeks of relativism...Mr. Buckley writes in this instance as though he had never heard of the natural law ." Buckley was stung by the letter and had composed a bitter reply, but decided against sending it. In 1966, Bozell published The Warren Revolution , a scholarly critique of the Supreme Court of the United States under Chief Justice Earl Warren . Despite his relocation to Spain, Bozell remained conscious of U.S. politics; he opposed the Nixon administration , writing in Triumph that, in supporting Nixon's candidacy in 1968 , the conservative movement had "ceased to be an important political force in America." Buckley later changed his mind and agreed with Bozell on this subject.

[ 12 ] He later repudiated his support for the American experiment itself in his own book The Warren Revolution . Buckley summarized Bozell's new position as, "[Bozell's] thesis now is that the republic of the Founding Fathers was doomed because of their failure to adequately enthrall the city of man to the City of God." Bozell himself felt estranged from the United States in general and in particular the conservative movement in which he was once a rising star, denouncing conservatism as "an inadequate substitute for Christian politics." [ 13 ] Especially following the Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision, Bozell began to see the United States as a force of evil greater in magnitude to the Soviet Union and denounced both democratic capitalism and communism .

Triumph idealized Francoist Spain , criticized the events leading up to the Vietnam War , including the U.S.-backed assassination of South Vietnam 's Catholic president, Ngo Dinh Diem , and the conduct of the conflict thereafter as irreconcilable with Just War Theory . He opposed chemical warfare and nuclear deterrence , which he had once supported, and identified his economic views with those of distributism .

[ 14 ] Friends of Bozell blamed his increasing devotion to Catholicism, his dissolving relationship with Buckley, who was reportedly traumatized by the loss of his closest friend, and his evolving political views on  mental deterioration.

Neal B. Freeman said, "Brent simply started to fade and you could see it happening, but you couldn't do anything about it." John Judis wrote in William Buckley Jr.: Patron Saint of the Conservatives that, "the breakup of their relationship probably could not have occurred ten years prior or ten years hence. It was very much a product of the tumultuous sixties, which exhilarated Buckley and which lifted him to new heights of celebrity, but in which more troubled, less stable souls like Bozell capsized." After founding Triumph , Bozell also founded the Society of the Christian Commonwealth whose educational arm, the Christian Commonwealth Institute, headed by Warren Carroll , conducted annual classes, lectures, and seminars at the El Escorial in Spain. The entirety of the original faculty of and many of the donors to Christendom College had attended the program in Spain and were subscribers to Triumph . Carroll later remarked in his obituary for Bozell, "In a very fundamental sense, Christendom College was a Triumph enterprise." [ 15 ] Bozell was a staunch supporter of Pope Paul VI and strongly defended his condemnation of birth control in the encyclical Humanae Vitae but disagreed with the pope's decisions regarding the liturgy .

[ 15 ] He was a founding member of and served as a special ambassador for Catholics United for the Faith.

[ 16 ] Since its founding, Triumph teetered on the verge of collapse and Bozell was planning on shutting the magazine down until Patricia Bozell attended a forum at the Catholic University of America featuring radical feminist Ti-Grace Atkinson in March 1971. When Atkinson said the Virgin Mary was more "used" than if she had participated in a sexual conception, Patricia attempted to slap her and her hand hit the microphone and she was escorted out. When Bozell heard what his wife had done, he stood up and bellowed, "To Hell with Catholic University!" [ 15 ] The positive reader feedback convinced him to keep the magazine alive. In 1976, after the death of Francisco Franco and the beginning of the Spanish transition to democracy , Triumph ceased publication.

In 1985, Bozell founded Misión Guadalupe, a program devoted to the assistance and evangelization of Hispanic immigrants.

[ 17 ] Anti-abortion activity [ edit ] In June 1970, three years before the Roe v. Wade decision and when abortion was illegal in most of United States outside California, Washington, D.C., and New York, Brent and Patricia Bozell led the first "Operation Rescue" mission to try by direct action to negotiate with administrators at George Washington University Hospital Clinic in Washington, D.C.

, where abortion was permitted for the mental well-being of the mother.

Bozell asked clinic administrators to stop the abortions and, if they would not do so, to appoint a Catholic nurse to administer Baptism and prepare the remains for Catholic burial after each abortion.

[ 18 ] Bozell and about 230 others met at a local church for a "Funeral Mass for the Holy Innocents " celebrated by four priests. The rally afterwards included a Pro Life student group from the University of Dallas , Los Hijos de la Tormenta ("The Sons of Thunder"), who were dressed in khaki and red berets (red berets being worn by the Carlist Basques , whom Bozell admired), [ 19 ] wore rosaries , and carried papal flags . One speaker declared: "America ... you are daggering to death your unborn of tomorrow. The very cleanliness of your sterilized murder gives off the stench of death." After the rally, Bozell, donning a red beret himself, approached the clinic with seven others.

[ 19 ] They were spotted by a security guard who locked the door to prevent their entry. One of the "Sons of Thunder" raced to one of the buildings unlocked side-doors and was able to jam it open with a crucifix.

[ 19 ] By means of the jammed door, Bozell and the rest of the group entered the building and began shattering windows while shouting "Viva Cristo Rey!" (a Catholic battle cry used during the Cristero War ).

[ 19 ] The Washington police were called and had to use billy clubs to subdue Bozell's group and arrest them.

[ 19 ] Appearing in court in October, 1970 Bozell declared "America is going to have to reckon with its Christians, like it or not." [ 19 ] Bozell and the other members of his group received suspended sentences.

[ 18 ] Bozell later said, "If disorder is necessary to stop this murdering of babies, I'm in favor of disorder." [ 20 ] Buckley denounced Bozell's actions, declaring in National Review that "the Sons of Thunder have moved precious few of the unconvinced over to their side." Though Triumph closed two years later, its staff and Bozell remained active, including the organization of the first March for Life .

The cover of Triumph's March 1973 issue after the Roe v. Wade decision was solid black except for a small logo, a white cross, and the words "For the children".

[ 15 ] Personal life [ edit ] Bozell married Patricia Lee Buckley , sister of William F. Buckley , and they had ten children, including L. Brent Bozell III , a conservative activist and founder and president of Media Research Center , a conservative media watchdog group and publisher. Another son, Michael Bozell, is a Benedictine monk in Solesmes Abbey . The Bozell family grew to 23 grandchildren and a great-grandchild by the time he died.

[ 21 ] His godson was novelist Tristan Egolf .

[ citation needed ] Illnesses and final years [ edit ] Bozell suffered from bipolar disorder , and wrote publicly about his experiences with the disease, the suffering it created, and his recovery in the introduction to Mustard Seeds , a collection mostly of his post- National Review writings, including many from Triumph , published in 1986. The book included "Poland's Cross—And America's," Bozell's first National Review essay in almost two decades. It also included the National Review essay, for which he may be remembered best, "Freedom or Virtue," which touched off a robust debate between himself and Meyer, mostly around whether freedom or virtue should be the paramount consideration for American conservatives.

Bozell faithfully visited inmates at Lorton Correctional Complex in Northern Virginia every week for years until his death.

[ 21 ] Death [ edit ] Bozell died of pneumonia in a nursing home in Bethesda, Maryland , on April 15, 1997, at the age of 71 [ 22 ] after years of numerous and crippling health problems. His son, L. Brent Bozell III , spoke of those struggles when eulogizing him: Dozens of times over...25 years the attacks would come, and with each bout, yet another blow, yet another public humiliation. There were arrests and forced hospitalizations, escapes and re-arrests and recommitments. There was the never-ending parade of lawyers, police, doctors, and, yes, from time to time the State Department was on the line to brief us on yet another prospective international upheaval caused by this very unpredictable man.
Manic depression by itself is enough to break the spirit of any man, but Pop was no ordinary man. He suffered from peripheral neuropathy , sleep apnea , osteoporosis , degenerative disc disease , asthma , and Alzheimer's . One by one they came, and when it seemed that no part of his body had been left untouched yet a new illness was diagnosed. We wondered how he could endure so much, accept this torture with such nobility, with never one word of complaint.

[ 23 ] Works [ edit ] The Best of Triumph.

, contributor, Lawrence, E. Michael, ed.  Front Royal, VA: Christendom Press ISBN 0-931888-72-7 .

McCarthy and His Enemies , (co-author with William F. Buckley Jr.

) Chicago: Regnery, 1954. Reissued as ISBN 0-89526-472-2 .

The Warren Revolution , (New York: Arlington House, 1966.) Mustard Seeds: A Conservative Becomes a Catholic , Front Royal, VA: Christendom Press ISBN 0-931888-73-5 .

References [ edit ] ^ "The Smith Alumnae Quarterly" . April 27, 2018 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 – via Google Books.

^ Edwards, Lee (June 9, 1997).

"A modern Don Quixote fought the good fight" .

Insight on the News . Archived from the original on May 31, 2011.

^ Tanenhaus, Sam (June 3, 2025).

Buckley: The Life and the Revolution That Changed America . New York: Random House.

ISBN 978-0375502347 .

Chapter 7 ^ "The Manuscripts and Archives Digital Images Database (MADID)" .

images.library.yale.edu . Archived from the original on March 3, 2016 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 .

^ Rovere, Richard H.

(1950).

Senator Joe McCarthy .

Berkeley, California : University of California Press. pp. 22, 225, and 241.

^ Judis, John B. (January 29, 2001).

William F. Buckley, Jr.: Patron Saint of the Conservatives . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 9780743217972 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 – via Google Books.

^ Frohnen, Bruce (2006).

American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia . Wilmington: Intercollegiate Studies Institute. pp.

179– 180.

ISBN 1-932236-43-0 .

^ "Young Americans for Fascism ... err Freedom and William F. Buckley, Jr" . Archived from the original on January 21, 2013 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 .

^ "Goldwater, the John Birch Society, and Me" .

www.commentarymagazine.com . Archived from the original on May 18, 2008.

^ Edwards, Lee.

"Standing Athwart History: The Political Thought of William F. Buckley Jr" .

The Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on May 8, 2010 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 .

^ "Catholic Intellectuals and Conservative Politics in America, 1950-85. - Free Online Library" . Archived from the original on October 20, 2012 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 .

^ "William F. Buckley Jr. (1925-2008) - National Review" .

National Review . February 27, 2008 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 .

^ Bridges, Linda; Coyne Jr., John R. (April 13, 2007).

Strictly Right: William F. Buckley Jr. and the American Conservative Movement . John Wiley & Sons. p.

122 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 – via Internet Archive.

carlism buckley.

^ Lora, Ronald; Longton, William Henry (April 27, 1999).

The Conservative Press in Twentieth-century America . Greenwood Publishing Group.

ISBN 9780313213908 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 – via Google Books.

^ a b c d "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 20, 2011 . Retrieved May 23, 2010 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Weaver, Mary Jo; Appleby, R. Scott (April 27, 1995).

Being Right: Conservative Catholics in America . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 0253329221 . Retrieved April 27, 2018 – via Google Books.

^ Bozell, Brent L. (June 12, 1991).

Mustard Seeds . University Press Of America.

ISBN 0937495069 .

^ a b L. Brent Bozell Jr.

The Confessional Tribe . Donald McClane, Triumph magazine July Issue 1970.

^ a b c d e f Michael Warren Davis (January 21, 2018).

"The March for Life is what a major political force looks like" .

^ "The Free Lance-Star - Google News Archive Search" .

news.google.com . Retrieved April 27, 2018 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b Edwards, Lee (June 9, 1997).

"A modern Don Quixote fought the good fight" .

Insight on the News .

^ Kestenbaum, Lawrence.

"The Political Graveyard: Index to Politicians: Boyles to Bradburn" .

politicalgraveyard.com . Retrieved April 27, 2018 .

^ Henry, Lawrence (March 14, 2008).

"The Fountain of Youth" .

The American Spectator . Archived from the original on July 28, 2011 . Retrieved February 11, 2011 .

Sources [ edit ] Bridges, Linda; Coyne, John R. Jr., Strictly Right: William F. Buckley Jr. and the American Conservative Movement Buckley, William F. Jr.

Buckley, William F. Jr., 1997.

"L. Brent Bozell, RIP," National Review , May 19.

Critchlow, Donald T., The Conservative Ascendancy: How the GOP Right Made Political History Critchlow, Donald T., Intended Consequences: Birth Control, Abortion, and the Federal Government in Modern America Hudson, Deal , Onward, Christian Soldiers Perlstein, Rick , Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater and the Unmaking of the American Consensus Stout, David, 1997.

L. Brent Bozell, 71, a Champion of Conservatism .

The New York Times : April 19.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=L._Brent_Bozell_Jr.&oldid=1305916815 " Categories : 1926 births 1997 deaths 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century Roman Catholics Activists from Omaha, Nebraska American anti-abortion activists American anti-communists American expatriates in Spain American male non-fiction writers American Roman Catholic writers Buckley family Christendom College Converts to Roman Catholicism Distributism Maryland Republicans McCarthyism National Review people People with bipolar disorder Roman Catholic activists United States Merchant Mariners of World War II Writers from Omaha, Nebraska Yale University alumni Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: archived copy as title All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2012 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from January 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 21:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents L. Brent Bozell Jr.

Add languages Add topic

