Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 2.1 Cabaret Voltaire 2.2 Futurism 2.3 Bauhaus 2.4 Action painting 2.5 Nouveau réalisme 2.6 Gutai 2.7 Land art and performance 3 1960s Toggle 1960s subsection 3.1 Viennese actionism 3.2 New York and avant-garde performance 3.3 The Living Theatre 3.4 Fluxus 3.5 Process art 3.6 Happening 3.7 Main artists 4 1970s Toggle 1970s subsection 4.1 Video performance 4.2 Endurance art 4.3 Performance in a political context 4.4 The Other 4.5 Main artists 5 1980s Toggle 1980s subsection 5.1 The technique of performance art 5.2 Critique and investigation of performance art 5.3 Performance art from a political context 5.4 Performance poetry 5.5 Feminist performance art 5.6 Expansion to Latin America 6 1990s Toggle 1990s subsection 6.1 Performance with political context 6.2 Professionalization of performance art 6.3 Performance in China 7 Since the 2000s Toggle Since the 2000s subsection 7.1 New-media performance 7.2 Radical performance 7.2.1 Pussy Riot 7.2.2 Others 7.3 Institutionalization of performance art / performance collecting processes 7.4 Collective revindication performance art 8 See also 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Performance art 55 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская (тарашкевіца) བོད་ཡིག Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Удмурт Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artwork created through actions of an artist or other participants "Live art" redirects here. For the album, see Live Art .

Not to be confused with Performing arts .

Conceptual work by Yves Klein at Rue Gentil-Bernard, Fontenay-aux-Roses, October 1960.

Le Saut dans le Vide ( Leap into the Void ) Performance art is an artwork or art exhibition created through actions executed by the artist or other participants. It may be witnessed live or through documentation, spontaneously developed or written, and is traditionally presented to a public in a fine art context in an interdisciplinary mode.

[ 1 ] Also known as artistic action , it has been developed through the years as a genre of its own in which art is presented live. It had an important and fundamental role in 20th century avant-garde art .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It involves five basic elements: time, space, body, presence of the artist, and the relation between the artist and the public. The actions, generally developed in art galleries and museums, can take place in any kind of setting or space, and during any time period.

[ 4 ] Its goal is to generate a reaction, sometimes with the support of improvisation and a sense of aesthetics. The themes are commonly linked to life experiences of the artist themselves, the need for denunciation or social criticism and with a spirit of transformation.

[ 5 ] The term "performance art" and "performance" became widely used in the 1970s, even though the history of performance in visual arts dates back to futurist productions and cabarets from the 1910s.

[ 6 ] [ 1 ] Art critic and performance artist John Perreault credits Marjorie Strider with the invention of the term in 1969.

[ 7 ] The main pioneers of performance art include Carolee Schneemann , [ 8 ] Marina Abramović , [ 9 ] Ana Mendieta , [ 10 ] Chris Burden , [ 11 ] Hermann Nitsch , Joseph Beuys , Nam June Paik , Tehching Hsieh , Yves Klein and Vito Acconci .

[ 12 ] Some of the main exponents more recently are Tania Bruguera , [ 13 ] Abel Azcona , [ 14 ] Regina José Galindo , [ 15 ] Marta Minujín , [ 16 ] Melati Suryodarmo and Petr Pavlensky . The discipline is linked to the happenings and "events" of the Fluxus movement, Viennese Actionism , body art and conceptual art .

[ 17 ] Definition [ edit ] Helen Moller [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] dance performance. Photo by Arnold Genthe , early 20th century.

Georgia O'Keeffe , photographed during a performative process, 1919 The definition and historical and pedagogical contextualization of performance art is controversial. One of the handicaps comes from the term itself, which is polysemic, and one of its meanings relates to the scenic arts. This meaning of "performance" in the scenic-arts context differs radically from the concept of "performance art", since performance art emerged with a critical and antagonistic position towards scenic arts. Performance art only adjoins the scenic arts in certain aspects such as the audience and the present body, and still not every performance-art piece contains these elements.

[ 22 ] The meaning of the term "performance art" in the narrower sense is related to postmodernist traditions in Western culture. From about the mid-1960s into the 1970s, often derived from concepts of visual art, with respect to Antonin Artaud , Dada , the Situationists , Fluxus , installation art , and conceptual art , performance art tended to be defined as an antithesis to theatre, challenging orthodox art-forms and cultural norms. The ideal was an ephemeral and authentic experience for performer and audience in an event that could not be repeated, captured or purchased.

[ 23 ] The widely discussed distinction between how visual art and performing art concepts are applied can influence the interpretation of a performance art presentation..

[ 22 ] "Performance art" is a term usually reserved to refer to a conceptual art that conveys a content-based meaning in a more drama-related sense, rather than being simple performance for its own sake for entertainment purposes. It largely refers to a performance presented to an audience, but which does not seek to present a conventional theatrical play or a formal linear narrative, or which alternately does not seek to depict a set of fictitious characters in formal scripted interactions. It therefore can include action or spoken word as a communication between the artist and audience, or even ignore expectations of an audience, rather than following a script written beforehand.

Some types of performance art nevertheless can be close to performing arts . Such performance may use a script or create a fictitious dramatic setting, but still constitute performance art in that it does not seek to follow the usual dramatic norm of creating a fictitious setting with a linear script which follows conventional real-world dynamics; rather, it would intentionally seek to satirize or to transcend the usual real-world dynamics which are used in conventional theatrical plays.

Performance artists often challenge the audience to think in new and unconventional ways, break conventions of traditional arts, and break down conventional ideas about "what art is". As long as the performer does not become a player who repeats a role, performance art can include satirical elements; use robots and machines as performers, as in pieces of the Survival Research Laboratories ; involve ritualised elements (e.g.

Shaun Caton ); or borrow elements of any performing arts such as dance, music, and circus . Performance art can also involve intersection with architecture, and may intertwine with religious practice [ 24 ] [ 25 ] and with theology .

[ 26 ] Some artists, e.g. the Viennese Actionists and neo-Dadaists , prefer to use the terms "live art", "action art", "actions", "intervention" (see art intervention ) or "manoeuvre" to describe their performing activities. As genres of performance art appear body art , fluxus-performance, happening , action poetry , and intermedia .

Origins [ edit ] Revived Cabaret Voltaire on the Spiegelgasse street 1 in Zürich , 2011 Performance art is a form of expression that was born as an alternative artistic manifestation. The discipline emerged in 1916 parallel to dadaism, under the umbrella of conceptual art. The movement was led by Tristan Tzara , one of the pioneers of Dada . Western culture theorists have set the origins of performance art in the beginnings of the 20th century, along with constructivism , Futurism and Dadaism. Dada was an important inspiration because of their poetry actions, which drifted apart from conventionalisms, and futurist artists, specially some members of Russian futurism , could also be identified as part of the starting process of performance art.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Original plaque of the Cabaret Voltaire in Zürich Original poster of the first function of the Cabaret Voltaire, by Marcel Słodki (1916) Cabaret Voltaire [ edit ] Main article: Cabaret Voltaire (Zürich) The Cabaret Voltaire was founded in Zürich , Switzerland by the couple Hugo Ball and Emmy Hennings for artistic and political purposes, and was a place where new tendencies were explored. Located on the upper floor of a theater, whose exhibitions they mocked in their shows, the works interpreted in the cabaret were avant garde and experimental. It is thought that the Dada movement was founded in the ten-meter-square locale.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Moreover, Surrealists, whose movement descended directly from Dadaism, used to meet in the Cabaret. On its brief existence—barely six months, closing the summer of 1916—the Dadaist Manifesto was read and it held the first Dada actions, performances, and hybrid poetry, plastic art, music and repetitive action presentations. Founders such as Richard Huelsenbeck , Marcel Janco , Tristan Tzara , Sophie Taeuber-Arp and Jean Arp participated in provocative and scandalous events that were fundamental and the basis of the foundation for the anarchist movement called Dada.

[ 31 ] Grand opening of the first Dada exhibition: International Dada Fair, Berlin, June 5, 1920. From left to right: Raoul Hausmann , Hannah Höch (sitting), Otto Burchard, Johannes Baader , Wieland Herzfelde , Margarete Herzfelde, Dr. Oz (Otto Schmalhausen), George Grosz and John Heartfield .

[ 32 ] Dadaism was born with the intention of destroying any system or established norm in the art world.

[ 33 ] It is an anti-art movement, anti-literary and anti-poetry, that questioned the existence of art, literature and poetry itself. Not only was it a way of creating, but of living; it created a whole new ideology.

[ 34 ] It was against eternal beauty, the eternity of principles, the laws of logic, the immobility of thought and clearly against anything universal. It promoted change, spontaneity, immediacy, contradiction, randomness and the defense of chaos against the order and imperfection against perfection, ideas similar to those of performance art. They stood for provocation, anti-art protest and scandal, through ways of expression many times satirical and ironic. The absurd or lack of value and the chaos protagonized [ clarification needed ] their breaking actions with traditional artistic form.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Cabaret Voltaire closed in 1916, but was revived in the 21st century.

Left to right, futurists Benedikt Lifshits, Nikolái Burluik, Vladímir Mayakovski, David Burliuk and Alekséi Kruchónyj. Between 1912 and 1913.

Bauhaus Dessau building, 2005 Futurism [ edit ] Main article: Futurism Futurism was an artistic avant garde movement that appeared in 1909. It first started as a literary movement, even though most of the participants were painters. In the beginning it also included sculpture, photography, music and cinema. The First World War put an end to the movement, even though in Italy it went on until the 1930s. One of the countries where it had the most impact was Russia.

[ 37 ] In 1912 manifestos such as the Futurist Sculpture Manifesto and the Futurist Architecture arose, and in 1913 the Manifesto of Futurist Lust by Valentine de Saint-Point , dancer, writer and French artist. The futurists spread their theories through encounters, meetings and conferences in public spaces, that got close to the idea of a political concentration, with poetry and music-halls, which anticipated performance art.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Bauhaus [ edit ] Main article: Bauhaus The Bauhaus , an art school founded in Weimar in 1919, included an experimental performing arts workshops with the goal of exploring the relationship between the body, space, sound and light. The Black Mountain College , founded in the United States by instructors of the original Bauhaus who were exiled by the Nazi Party, continued incorporating experimental performing arts in the scenic arts training twenty years before the events related to the history of performance in the 1960s.

[ 40 ] The name Bauhaus derives from the German words Bau, construction and Haus, house ; ironically, despite its name and the fact that his founder was an architect, the Bauhaus did not have an architecture department the first years of its existence.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Action painting [ edit ] Main article: Action Painting In the 1940s and 1950s, the action painting technique or movement gave artists the possibility of interpreting the canvas as an area to act in, rendering the paintings as traces of the artist's performance in the studio [ 43 ] According to art critic Harold Rosenberg , it was one of the initiating processes of performance art, along with abstract expressionism.

Jackson Pollock is the action painter par excellence, who carried out many of his actions live.

[ 44 ] In Europe Yves Klein did his Anthropométries using (female) bodies to paint canvasses as a public action.  Names to be highlighted are Willem de Kooning and Franz Kline , whose work include abstract and action painting.

[ 43 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Nouveau réalisme [ edit ] Main article: Nouveau réalisme Nouveau réalisme is another one of the artistic movements cited in the beginnings of performance art. It was a painting movement founded in 1960 by art critic Pierre Restany and painter Yves Klein , during the first collective exhibition in the Apollinaire Gallery in Milan. Nouveau réalisme was, along with Fluxus and other groups, one of the many avant garde tendencies of the 1960s.

Pierre Restany created various performance art assemblies in the Tate Modern , amongst other spaces.

[ 47 ] Yves Klein is one of the main exponents of the movement. He was a clear pioneer of performance art, with his conceptual pieces like Zone de Sensibilité Picturale Immatérielle (1959–62), Anthropométries (1960), and the photomontage Saut dans le vide .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] All his works have a connection with performance art, as they are created as a live action, like his best-known artworks of paintings created with the bodies of women. The members of the group saw the world as an image, from which they took parts and incorporated them into their work; they sought to bring life and art closer together.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Gutai [ edit ] Main article: Gutai One of the other movements that anticipated performance art was the Japanese movement Gutai , who made action art or happening . It emerged in 1955 in the region of Kansai ( Kyōto , Ōsaka , Kōbe ). The main participants were Jirō Yoshihara , Sadamasa Motonaga, Shozo Shimamoto, Saburō Murakami, Katsuō Shiraga, Seichi Sato, Akira Ganayama and Atsuko Tanaka.

[ 53 ] The Gutai group arose after World War II. They rejected capitalist consumerism, carrying out ironic actions with latent aggressiveness (object breaking, actions with smoke). They influenced groups such as Fluxus and artists like Joseph Beuys and Wolf Vostell .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Land art and performance [ edit ] Main article: Land art In the late 1960s, diverse land art artists such as Robert Smithson or Dennis Oppenheim created environmental pieces that preceded performance art in the 1970s. Works by conceptual artists from the early 1980s, such as Sol LeWitt , who made mural drawing into a performance act, were influenced by Yves Klein and other land art artists.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Land art is a contemporary art movement in which the landscape and the artwork are deeply bound. It uses nature as a material (wood, soil, rocks, sand, wind, fire, water, etc.) to intervene on itself. The artwork is generated with the place itself as a starting point. The result is sometimes a junction between sculpture and architecture, and sometimes a junction between sculpture and landscaping that is increasingly taking a more determinant role in contemporary public spaces. When incorporating the artist's body in the creative process, it acquires similarities with the beginnings of performance art.

Portrait of Valentine de Saint-Point in the space of creation Intervened cover by Russian Futurist Olga Rozanova (1912) Portrait of Willem de Kooning , action painting painter in his studio Installation by Gutai Group, in the 2009 Venice Biennial Installation by Dennis Oppenheim in Hesse, Germany Land art work by Robert Smithson Portrait of Pierre Restany in one of his openings Freeing of 1001 blue balloons, "sculpture aérostatique" by Yves Klein 1960s [ edit ] Exploding Plastic Inevitable by Ann Arbor In the 1960s, with the purpose of evolving the generalized idea of art and with similar principles of those originary from Cabaret Voltaire or Futurism , a variety of new works, concepts and a growing number of artists led to new kinds of performance art. Movements clearly differentiated from Viennese Actionism , avant garde performance art in New York City, process art , the evolution of The Living Theatre or happening , but most of all the consolidation of the pioneers of performance art.

[ 59 ] Pioneers of Viennese Actionism during an exhibition in the Hermann Nitsch foundation Viennese actionism [ edit ] Main article: Viennese Actionism The term Viennese Actionism ( Wiener Aktionismus ) comprehends a brief and controversial art movement of the 20th century, which is remembered for the violence, grotesque and visual of their artworks.

[ 60 ] It is located in the Austrian vanguard of the 1960s, and it had the goal of bringing art to the ground of performance art, and is linked to Fluxus and Body Art. Amongst their main exponents are Günter Brus , Otto Muehl and Hermann Nitsch , who developed most of their actionist activities between 1960 and 1971. Hermann, pioneer of performance art, presented in 1962 his Theatre of Orgies and Mysteries (Orgien und Mysterien Theater).

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Marina Abramović participated as a performer in one of his performances in 1975.

New York and avant-garde performance [ edit ] Photography exhibition in The Velvet Underground and Andy Warhol Factory In the early 1960s, New York City harbored many movements, events and interests regarding performance art. Amongst others, Andy Warhol began creating films and videos, [ 64 ] and mid decade he sponsored The Velvet Underground and staged events and performative actions in New York, such as the Exploding Plastic Inevitable (1966), that included live rock music, explosive lights and films.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Among New York’s avant-garde performance artists, Joey Skaggs emerged in the 1960s with provocative public interventions that satirized institutional power and media spectacle. His early works include The Crucifixion (1966–1969), a life-size sculpture of a decaying Christ exhibited in public parks to protest religious hypocrisy, and the Hippie Bus Tour to Queens (1968), in which East Village artists parodied voyeuristic tour buses by visiting suburban neighborhoods.

[ 69 ] The Living Theatre [ edit ] Main article: The Living Theatre The Living Theatre presenting their work The Brig in Myfest 2008 in Berlin-Kreuzberg Indirectly influential for art-world performance, particularly in the United States, were new forms of theatre, embodied by the San Francisco Mime Troupe and the Living Theatre and showcased in Off-Off Broadway theaters in SoHO and at La MaMa in New York City. The Living Theatre is a theater company created in 1947 in New York. It is the oldest experimental theatre in the United States.

[ 70 ] Throughout its history it has been led by its founders: actress Judith Malina , who had studied theatre with Erwin Piscator , with whom she studied Bertolt Brecht 's and Meyerhold 's theory; and painter and poet Julian Beck . After Beck's death in 1985, company member Hanon Reznikov became co-director along with Malina.

Because it is one of the oldest random theatre or live theatre groups nowadays, it is looked upon by the rest.

[ clarification needed ] They understood theatre as a way of life, and the actors lived in a community under libertary [ clarification needed ] principles. It was a theatre campaign dedicated to transformation of the power organization of an authoritarian society and hierarchical structure. The Living Theatre chiefly toured in Europe between 1963 and 1968, and in the U.S. in 1968. A work of this period, Paradise Now , was notorious for its audience participation and a scene in which actors recited a list of social taboos that included nudity, while disrobing.

[ 71 ] Fluxus manifesto Fluxus [ edit ] Main article: Fluxus Portrait of John Cage , 1988 Fluxus , a Latin word that means flow , is a visual arts movement related to music, literature, and dance. Its most active moment was in the 1960s and 1970s. They proclaimed themselves against the traditional artistic object as a commodity and declared themselves a sociological art movement. Fluxus was informally organized in 1962 by George Maciunas (1931–1978). This movement had representation in Europe, the United States and Japan.

[ 72 ] The Fluxus movement, mostly developed in North America and Europe under the stimulus of John Cage , did not see the avant-garde as a linguistic renovation, but it sought to make a different use of the main art channels that separate themselves from specific language; it tries to be interdisciplinary and to adopt mediums and materials from different fields. Language is not the goal, but the mean for a renovation of art, seen as a global art.

[ 73 ] As well as Dada , Fluxus escaped any attempt for a definition or categorization. As one of the movement's founders, Dick Higgins , stated: Fluxus started with the work, and then came together, applying the name Fluxus to work which already existed. It was as if it started in the middle of the situation, rather than at the beginning.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Robert Filliou places Fluxus opposite to conceptual art for its direct, immediate and urgent reference to everyday life, and turns around Duchamp's proposal, who starting from Ready-made , introduced the daily into art, whereas Fluxus dissolved art into the daily, many times with small actions or performances.

[ 76 ] John Cage was an American composer, music theorist , artist, and philosopher. A pioneer of indeterminacy in music , electroacoustic music , and non-standard use of musical instruments , Cage was one of the leading figures of the post-war avant-garde . Critics have lauded him as one of the most influential composers of the 20th century.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] He was also instrumental in the development of modern dance , mostly through his association with choreographer Merce Cunningham , who was also Cage's romantic partner for most of their lives.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Cage's friend Sari Dienes can be seen as an important link between the Abstract Expressionists , Neo- Dada artists like Robert Rauschenberg and Ray Johnson , and Fluxus. Dienes inspired all these artists to blur the lines between life, Zen, performative art-making techniques and "events," in both pre-meditated and spontaneous ways.

[ 83 ] Process art [ edit ] Main article: Process Art Process art is an artistic movement where the end product of art and craft , the objet d’art ( work of art / found object ), is not the principal focus; the process of its making is one of the most relevant aspects if not the most important one: the gathering, sorting, collating, associating, patterning, and moreover the initiation of actions and proceedings. Process artists saw art as pure human expression. Process art defends the idea that the process of creating the work of art can be an art piece itself. Artist Robert Morris predicated "anti-form", process and time over an objectual finished product.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Joseph Beuys in a Documenta Kassel event Happening [ edit ] Main article: Happening Wardrip-Fruin and Montfort in The New Media Reader , "The term 'Happening' has been used to describe many performances and events, organized by Allan Kaprow and others during the 1950s and 1960s, including a number of theatrical productions that were traditionally scripted and invited only limited audience interaction." [ 87 ] A happening allows the artist to experiment with the movement of the body, recorded sounds, written and talked texts, and even smells. One of Kaprow's first works was Happenings in the New York Scene , written in 1961.

[ 88 ] Allan Kaprow's happenings turned the public into interpreters. Often the spectators became an active part of the act without realizing it. Other actors who created happenings were Jim Dine , Al Hansen , Claes Oldenburg , Robert Whitman and Wolf Vostell : Theater is in the Street (Paris, 1958).

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Main artists [ edit ] Portrait of Joseph Beuys and Andy Warhol in Naples The works by performance artists after 1968 showed many times influences from the political and cultural situation that year.

Barbara T. Smith with Ritual Meal (1969) was at the vanguard of body and scenic feminist art in the seventies, which included, amongst others, Carolee Schneemann and Joan Jonas . These, along with Yoko Ono , Joseph Beuys , Nam June Paik , Wolf Vostell , Allan Kaprow , Vito Acconci , Chris Burden and Dennis Oppenheim were pioneers in the relationship between body art and performance art, as well as the Zaj collective in Spain with Esther Ferrer and Juan Hidalgo .

Carolee Schneemann , performing her piece Interior Scroll.

Yves Klein in France, and Carolee Schneemann , Yayoi Kusama , Charlotte Moorman , and Yoko Ono in New York City were pioneers of performance based works of art, that often entailed nudity.

Barbara Smith is an artist and United States activist. She is one of the main African-American exponents of feminism and LGBT activism in the United States. In the beginning of the 1970s she worked as a teacher, writer and defender of the black feminism current.

[ 91 ] She has taught at numerous colleges and universities in the last five years. Smith's essays, reviews, articles, short stories and literary criticism have appeared in a range of publications, including The New York Times , The Guardian , The Village Voice and The Nation .

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] Carolee Schneemann [ 95 ] was an American visual experimental artist , known for her multi-media works on the body, narrative, sexuality and gender .

[ 96 ] She created pieces such as Meat Joy (1964) and Interior Scroll (1975).

[ 97 ] Schneemann considered her body a surface for work.

[ 98 ] She described herself as a "painter who has left the canvas to activate the real space and the lived time." [ 99 ] [ failed verification ] Joan Jonas (born July 13, 1936) is an American visual artist and a pioneer of video and performance art, who is one of the most important female artists to emerge in the late 1960s and early 1970s.

[ 100 ] Jonas' projects and experiments provided the foundation on which much video performance art would be based.  Her influences also extended to conceptual art , theatre, performance art and other visual media. She lives and works in New York and Nova Scotia, Canada.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Immersed in New York's downtown art scene of the 1960s, Jonas studied with the choreographer Trisha Brown for two years.

[ 103 ] Jonas also worked with choreographers Yvonne Rainer and Steve Paxton.

[ 104 ] Yoko Ono was part of the avant-garde movement of the 1960s. She was part of the Fluxus movement.

[ 105 ] She is known for her performance art pieces in the late 1960s, works such as Cut Piece , where visitors could intervene in her body until she was left naked.

[ 106 ] One of her best known pieces is Wall piece for orchestra (1962).

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] Joseph Beuys was a German Fluxus, happening , performance artist, painter, sculptor, medallist and installation artist . In 1962 his actions alongside the Fluxus neodadaist movement started, group in which he ended up becoming the most important member. His most relevant achievement was his socialization of art, making it more accessible for every kind of public.

[ 109 ] In How to Explain Pictures to a Dead Hare (1965) he covered his face with honey and gold leaf and explained his work to a dead hare that lay in his arms. In this work he linked spacial and sculptural, linguistic and sonorous factors to the artist's figure, to his bodily gesture, to the conscience of a communicator whose receptor is an animal.

[ 110 ] Beuys acted as a shaman with healing and saving powers toward the society that he considered dead.

[ 111 ] In 1974 he carried out the performance I Like America and America Likes Me where Beuys, a coyote and materials such as paper, felt and thatch constituted the vehicle for its creation. He lived with the coyote for three days. He piled United States newspapers, a symbol of capitalism.

[ 112 ] With time, the tolerance between Beuys and the coyote grew and he ended up hugging the animal. Beuys repeats many elements used in other works.

[ 113 ] Objects that differ form Duchamp's ready-mades, not for their poor [ clarification needed ] and ephemerality, but because they are part of Beuys's own life, who placed them after living with them and leaving his mark on them. Many have an autobiographical meaning, like the honey or the grease used by the tartars who saved [ clarification needed ] in World War Two. In 1970 he made his Felt Suit . Also in 1970, Beuys taught sculpture in the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf.

[ 114 ] In 1979, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum of New York City exhibited a retrospective of his work from the 1940s to 1970.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] Portrait of Barbara Smith Conference by Yoko Ono in the Viena Biennial, 2012 Portrait of Yoko Ono Video art piece from the Brooklyn Museum with an interview with Carolee Schneemann Joan Jonas during a performance documented on video and installed, 1972 Portrait of artist Joan Jonas Portrait of Joseph Beuys in a conference-performance, 1978 Joseph Beuys in a video art piece Nam June Paik was a South Korean performance artist, composer and video artist from the second half of the 20th century. He studied music and art history in the University of Tokyo. Later, in 1956, he traveled to Germany, where he studied Music Theory in Munich, then continued in Cologne in the Freiburg conservatory. While studying in Germany, Paik met the composers Karlheinz Stockhausen and John Cage and the conceptual artists Sharon Grace as well as George Maciunas , Joseph Beuys and Wolf Vostell and was from 1962 on, a member of the experimental art movement Fluxus .

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Nam June Paik then began participating in the Neo-Dada art movement, known as Fluxus , which was inspired by the composer John Cage and his use of everyday sounds and noises in his music.

[ 120 ] He was mates with Yoko Ono as a member of Fluxus .

[ 121 ] Wolf Vostell was a German artist, one of the most representative of the second half of the 20th century, who worked with various mediums and techniques such as painting, sculpture, installation , decollage , video art , happening and fluxus .

[ 122 ] Vito Acconci [ 123 ] [ 124 ] was an influential American performance, video and installation artist , whose diverse practice eventually included sculpture, architectural design, and landscape design. His foundational performance and video art [ 125 ] was characterized by "existential unease," exhibitionism, discomfort, transgression and provocation, as well as wit and audacity, [ 124 ] and often involved crossing boundaries such as public–private, consensual–nonconsensual, and real world–art world.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] His work is considered to have influenced artists including Laurie Anderson , Karen Finley , Bruce Nauman , and Tracey Emin , among others.

[ 126 ] Acconci was initially interested in radical poetry, but by the late 1960s, he began creating Situationist -influenced performances in the street or for small audiences that explored the body and public space. Two of his most famous pieces were Following Piece (1969), in which he selected random passersby on New York City streets and followed them for as long as he was able, and Seedbed (1972), in which he claimed that he masturbated while under a temporary floor at the Sonnabend Gallery , as visitors walked above and heard him speaking.

[ 128 ] Chris Burden was an American artist working in performance , sculpture and installation art . Burden became known in the 1970s for his performance art works, including Shoot (1971), in which he arranged for a friend to shoot him in the arm with a small-caliber rifle. A prolific artist, Burden created many well-known installations, public artworks and sculptures before his death in 2015.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] Burden began to work in performance art in the early 1970s. He made a series of controversial performances in which the idea of personal danger as artistic expression was central. His first significant performance work, Five Day Locker Piece (1971), was created for his master's thesis at the University of California, Irvine, [ 129 ] and involved his being locked in a locker for five days.

[ 132 ] Dennis Oppenheim was an American conceptual artist , performance artist, earth artist , sculptor and photographer. Dennis Oppenheim's early artistic practice is an epistemological questioning about the nature of art, the making of art and the definition of art: a meta-art which arose when strategies of the Minimalists were expanded to focus on site and context. As well as an aesthetic agenda, the work progressed from perceptions of the physical properties of the gallery to the social and political context, largely taking the form of permanent public sculpture in the last two decades of a highly prolific career, whose diversity could exasperate his critics.

[ 133 ] Yayoi Kusama is a Japanese artist who, throughout her career, has worked with a great variety of media including:sculpture, installation, painting, performance, film, fashion, poetry, fiction, and other arts; the majority of them exhibited her interest in psychedelia, repetition and patterns. Kusama is a pioneer of the pop art, minimalism and feminist art movements and influenced her coetaneous, Andy Warhol and Claes Oldenburg .

[ 134 ] She has been acknowledged as one of the most important living artists to come out of Japan and a very relevant voice in avant garde art.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] Video-installation-performance by Nam June Paik in 2008 Video-installation-performance by Nam June Paik in Düsseldorf Portrait of Wolf Vostell in 1980 Portrait of Allan Kaprow in 1973 Vito Acconci during a video-performance in 1973 Installation by Vito Acconci in the Luigi Pecci Contemporary Art Centre Installation by Dennis Oppenheim in the Vancouver Sculpture Biennial 1970s [ edit ] Installation by Bruce Nauman with various video performances Gilbert and George in London, 2007 In the 1970s, artists that had derived to works related to performance art evolved and consolidated themselves as artists with performance art as their main discipline, deriving into installations created through performance, video performance, or collective actions, or in the context of a socio-historical and political context.

Video performance [ edit ] In the early 1970s the use of video format by performance artists was consolidated. Some exhibitions by Joan Jonas and Vito Acconci were made entirely of video, activated by previous performative processes. In this decade, various books that talked about the use of the means of communication, video and cinema by performance artists, like Expanded Cinema , by Gene Youngblood, were published. One of the main artists who used video and performance, with notorious audiovisual installations, is the South Korean artist Nam June Paik , who in the early 1960s had already been in the Fluxus movement until becoming a media artist and evolving into the audiovisual installations he is known for.

Carolee Schneemann 's and Robert Whitman's 1960s work regarding their video-performances must be taken into consideration as well. Both were pioneers of performance art, turning it into an independent art form in the early seventies.

[ 137 ] Joan Jonas started to include video in her experimental performances in 1972, while Bruce Nauman scenified [ clarification needed ] his acts to be directly recorded on video.

[ 138 ] Nauman is an American multimedia artist, whose sculptures, videos, graphic work and performances have helped diversify and develop culture from the 1960s on. His unsettling artworks emphasized the conceptual nature of art and the creation process.

[ 139 ] His priority is the idea and the creative process over the result. His art uses an incredible array of materials and especially his own body.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] Gilbert and George are Italian artist Gilbert Proesch and English artist George Passmore, who have developed their work inside conceptual art, performance and body art. They were best known for their live-sculpture acts.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] One of their first makings was The Singing Sculpture , where the artists sang and danced "Underneath the Arches", a song from the 1930s. Since then they have forged a solid reputation as live-sculptures, making themselves works of art, exhibited in front of spectators through diverse time intervals. They usually appear dressed in suits and ties, adopting diverse postures that they maintain without moving, though sometimes they also move and read a text, and occasionally they appear in assemblies or artistic installations.

[ 144 ] Apart from their sculptures, Gilbert and George have also made pictorial works, collages and photomontages, where they pictured themselves next to diverse objects from their immediate surroundings, with references to urban culture and a strong content; they addressed topics such as sex, race, death and HIV, religion or politics, [ 145 ] critiquing many times the British government and the established power. The group's most prolific and ambitious work was Jack Freak Pictures , where they had a constant presence of the colors red, white and blue in the Union Jack. Gilbert and George have exhibited their work in museums and galleries around the world, like the Stedelijk van Abbemuseum of Eindhoven (1980), the Hayward Gallery in London (1987), and the Tate Modern (2007). They have participated in the Venice Biennale. In 1986 they won the Turner Prize.

[ 146 ] Endurance art [ edit ] Main article: Endurance art Endurance performance art deepens the themes of trance, pain, solitude, deprivation of freedom, isolation or exhaustion.

[ 147 ] Some of the works, based on the passing of long periods of time are also known as long-durational performances.

[ 148 ] One of the pioneering artists was Chris Burden in California since the 1970s.

[ 149 ] In one of his best known works, Five days in a locker (1971) he stayed for five days inside a school locker, in Shoot (1971) he was shot with a firearm, and inhabited for twenty two days a bed inside an art gallery in Bed Piece (1972).

[ 150 ] Another example of endurance artist is Tehching Hsieh. During a performance created in 1980–1981 ( Time Clock Piece ), where Hsieh took a photo of himself next to time clock installed in his studio every hour for an entire year. Hsieh is also known for his performances about deprivation of freedom; he spent an entire year confined.

[ 151 ] In The House With the Ocean View (2003), Marina Abramović lived silently for twelve days without food.

[ 152 ] The Nine Confinements or The Deprivation of Liberty is a conceptual endurance artwork of critical content carried out in the years 2013 and 2016. All of them have in common the illegitimate deprivation of freedom.

Performance in a political context [ edit ] In the mid-1970s, behind the Iron Curtain, in major Eastern Europe cities such as Budapest , Kraków , Belgrade, Zagreb , Novi Sad and others, scenic arts of a more experimental content flourished. Against political and social control, different artists who made performance of political content arose.

Orshi Drozdik 's performance series, titled Individual Mythology 1975–77 and the NudeModel 1976–77. All her actions were critical of the patriarchal discourse in art and the forced emancipation programme and constructed by the equally patriarchal state.

[ 153 ] Drozdik showed a pioneer and feminist point of view on both, becoming one of the precursors of this type of critical art in Eastern Europe.

[ 154 ] In the 1970s, performance art, due to its fugacity, [ clarification needed ] had a solid presence in the Eastern European avant-garde, specially in Poland and Yugoslavia, where dozens of artists who explored the body conceptually and critically emerged.

Cell where Tehching Hsieh carried out his endurance art work; the piece is now in the Modern Art Museum of New York collection The Other [ edit ] Ulay and Marina Abramović , The Other collective in one of their works In the mid-1976s, Ulay and Marina Abramović founded the collective The Other in the city of Amsterdam . When Abramović and Ulay [ 155 ] started their collaboration. The main concepts they explored were the ego and artistic identity. This was the start of a decade of collaborative work.

[ 156 ] Both artists were interested in the tradition of their cultural heritage and the individual's desire for rituals.

[ 157 ] In consecuense, [ clarification needed ] they formed a collective named The Other . They dressed and behaved as one, and created a relation of absolute confidence. They created a series of works in which their bodies created additional spaces for the audience's interaction. In Relation in Space they ran around the room, two bodies like two planets, meshing masculine and feminine energies into a third component they called "that self".

[ 158 ] Relation in Movement (1976) had the couple driving their car inside the museum, doing 365 spins. A black liquid dripped out of the car, forming a sculpture, and each round represented a year.

[ 159 ] After this, they created Breathing In/Breathing Out , where both of them united their lips and inspired the air expired by the other one until they used up all oxygen. Exactly 17 minutes after the start of the performance, both of them fell unconscious, due to their lungs filling with carbon dioxide. This piece explored the idea of the ability of a person to absorb the life out of another one, changing them and destroying them. In 1988, after some years of a tense relationship, Abramović and Ulay decided to make a spiritual travel that would put an end to the collective. They walked along the Great Wall of China, starting on opposite ends and finding each other halfway. Abramović conceived this walk on a dream, and it gave her what she saw as an appropriate and romantic ending to the relationship full of mysticism, energy and attraction.

[ 160 ] Ulay started on the Gobi desert and Abramovic in the Yellow sea. Each one of them walked 2500 kilometres, found each other in the middle and said goodbye.

Main artists [ edit ] In 1973, Laurie Anderson interpreted Duets on Ice in the streets of New York.

Marina Abramović , in the performance Rhythm 10 , included conceptually the violation of a body.

[ 161 ] Thirty years later, the topic of rape, shame and sex exploitation would be reimagined in the works of contemporary artists such as Clifford Owens , [ 162 ] Gillian Walsh , Pat Oleszko and Rebecca Patek, amongst others.

[ 163 ] New artists with radical acts consolidated themselves as the main precursors of performance, like Chris Burden , with the 1971 work Shoot , where an assistant shot him in the arm from a five-meter distance, and Vito Acconci the same year with Seedbed . The work Eye Body (1963) by Carolee Schneemann en 1963, had already been considered a prototype of performance art. In 1975, Schneemann recurred to innovative solo acts such as Interior Scroll , that showed the feminine body as an artistic media.

One of the main artists was Gina Pane , [ 164 ] French artist of Italian origins. She studied at the École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts in París from 1960 until 1965 [ 165 ] and was a member of the performance art movement in the 1970 in France, called  "Art Corporel".

[ 166 ] Parallel to her art, Pane taught in the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Mans from 1975 until 1990 and directed an atelier dedicated to performance art in the Pompidou Centre from 1978 to 1979.

[ 166 ] One of her best known works is The Conditioning (1973), in which she was lied into a metal bed spring over an area of lit candles.

The Conditioning was created as an homage to Marina Abramović , part of her Seven Easy Pieces (2005) in the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York City in 2005. Great part of her works are protagonized by self-inflicted pain, separating her from most of other woman artists in the 1970s. Through the violence of cutting her skin with razors or extinguishing fires with her bare hands and feet, Pane has the intention of inciting a real experience in the visitor, who would feel moved for its discomfort.

[ 164 ] The impactful nature of these first performance art pieces or actions, as she preferred to call them, many times eclipsed her prolific photographic and sculptural work. Nonetheless, the body was the main concern in Panes's work, either literally or conceptually.

Portrait of Ulay in 1972 Abramovic and Ulay 's Furgone Exhibition of Marina Abramović's first works in Stockholm Installation by Bruce Nauman in Germany Video installation by Nam June Paik Gilbert and George in a presentation Orshi Drozdik in one of her exhibitions 1980s [ edit ] The technique of performance art [ edit ] Until the 1980s, performance art has demystified virtuosism, [ clarification needed ] this being one of its key characteristics. Nonetheless, from the 1980s on it started to adopt some technical brilliancy.

[ 167 ] In reference to the work Presence and Resistance [ 168 ] by Philip Auslander, the dance critic Sally Banes writes, "... by the end of the 1980s, performance art had become so widely known that it no longer needed to be defined; mass culture, especially television, had come to supply both structure and subject matter for much performance art; and several performance artists, including Laurie Anderson, Spalding Gray, Eric Bogosian, Willem Dafoe, and Ann Magnuson, had indeed become crossover artists in mainstream entertainment." [ 169 ] In this decade the parameters and technicalities built to purify and perfect performance art were defined.

Critic and performance expert RoseLee Goldberg during a symposium in Moscow Tehching Hsieh exhibition in the Modern Art Museum of New York , where the artist made a daily self-portrait Critique and investigation of performance art [ edit ] Despite the fact that many performances are held within the circle of a small art-world group, Roselee Goldberg notes in Performance Art: From Futurism to the Present that "performance has been a way of appealing directly to a large public, as well as shocking audiences into reassessing their own notions of art and its relation to culture. Conversely, public interest in the medium, especially in the 1980s, stems from an apparent desire of that public to gain access to the art world, to be a spectator of its ritual and its distinct community, and to be surprised by the unexpected, always unorthodox presentations that the artists devise." In this decade, publications and compilations about performance art and its best known artists emerged.

Performance art from a political context [ edit ] In the 1980s, the political context played an important role in the artistic development and especially in performance, as almost every one of the works created with a critical and political discourse were in this discipline. Until the decline of the European Eastern bloc during the late 1980s, performance art had actively been rejected by most communist governments. With the exception of Poland and Yugoslavia, performance art was more or less banned in countries where any independent public event was feared. In the GDR, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Latvia it happened in apartments, at seemingly spontaneous gatherings in artist studios, in church-controlled settings, or was covered as another activity, like a photo-shoot. Isolated from the western conceptual context, in different settings it could be like a playful protest or a bitter comment, using subversive metaphors to express dissent with the political situation.

[ 170 ] Amongst the most remarkable performance art works of political content in this time were those of Tehching Hsieh between July 1983 and July 1984, Art/Life: One Year Performance (Rope Piece).

[ 171 ] Performance poetry [ edit ] In 1982 the terms "poetry" and "performance" were first used together.

Performance poetry appeared to distinguish text-based vocal performances from performance art, especially the work of escenic [ clarification needed ] and musical performance artists, such as Laurie Anderson, who worked with music at that time. Performance poets relied more on the rhetorical and philosophical expression in their poetics than performance artists, who arose from the visual art genres of painting and sculpture. Many artists since John Cage fuse performance with a poetical base.

Feminist performance art [ edit ] Main article: Feminist Performance Art Portrait of Lynda Benglis , 1974 Portrait of Pina Bausch , 1985 Since 1973 the Feminist Studio Workshop in the Woman's Building of Los Ángeles had an impact in the wave of feminist acts, but until 1980 they did not completely fuse. The conjunction between feminism and performance art progressed through the last decade. In the first two decades of performance art development, works that had not been conceived as feminist are seen as such now.

[ clarification needed ] Still, not until 1980 did artists self-define themselves as feminists. Artist groups in which women influenced by the 1968 student movement as well as the feminist movement stood out.

[ 172 ] This connection has been treated in contemporary art history research. Some of the women whose innovative input in representations and shows was the most relevant were Pina Bausch and the Guerrilla Girls who emerged in 1985 in New York City, [ 173 ] anonymous feminist and anti-racist art collective.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] They chose that name because they used guerrilla tactics in their activism [ 174 ] to denounce discrimination against women in art through political and performance art.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] [ 180 ] [ 181 ] Their first performance was placing posters and making public appearances in museums and galleries in New York, to critique the fact that some groups of people were discriminated against for their gender or race.

[ 182 ] All of this was done anonymously; in all of these appearances they covered their faces with gorilla masks (this was due to the similar pronunciation of the words "gorilla" and "guerrilla"). They used as nicknames the names of female artists who had died.

[ 183 ] From the 1970s until the 1980s, amongst the works that challenged the system and their usual strategies of representation, the main ones feature women's bodies, such as Ana Mendieta 's works in New York City where her body is outraged and abused, or the artistic representations by Louise Bourgeois with a rather minimalist discourse that emerge in the late seventies and eighties. Special mention to the works created with feminine and feminist corporeity [ clarification needed ] such as Lynda Benglis and her phallic performative actions, who reconstructed the feminine image to turn it into more than a fetish. Through feminist performance art the body becomes a space for developing these new discourses and meanings. Artist Eleanor Antin , creator in the 1970s and 1980s, worked on the topics of gender, race and class.

Cindy Sherman , in her first works in the seventies and already in her artistic maturity in the eighties, continues her critical line of overturning the imposed self, through her use of the body as an object of privilege.

Exhibition by Cindy Sherman in the United States Cindy Sherman is an American photographer and artist. She is one of the most representative post-war artists and exhibited more than the work of three decades of her work in the MoMA . Even though she appears in most of her performative photographies, she does not consider them self-portraits. Sherman uses herself as a vehicle to represent a great array of topics of the contemporary world, such as the part women play in our society and the way they are represented in the media as well as the nature of art creation. In 2020 she was awarded with the Wolf prize in arts .

[ 184 ] Judy Chicago is an artist and pioneer of feminist art and performance art in the United States. Chicago is known for her big collaborative art installation pieces on images of birth and creation, that examine women's part in history and culture. In the 1970s, Chicago has founded the first feminist art programme in the United States. Chicago's work incorporates a variety of artistic skills such as sewing, in contrast with skills that required a lot of workforce, like welding and pyrotechnics. Chicago's best known work is The Dinner Party , that was permanently installed in the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art in the Brooklyn Museum .

The Dinner Party celebrated the achievements of women throughout history and is widely considered as the first epic feminist artwork. Other remarkable projects include International Honor Quilt , The Birth Project, [ 185 ] Powerplay, [ 186 ] and The Holocaust Project.

[ 187 ] The Canadian lesbian art collective Kiss & Tell , consisting of Persimmon Blackbridge (b.1951), Lizard Jones (b.1961), and Susan Stewart (b.1952), embodies queer feminism throughout their creative practice, which included an array of performance work.

[ 188 ] Their performances included monologues, confessionals, and humorous anecdotes, presented through a mix of storytelling, photography, video, and music to provoke and connect with audiences. Kiss & Tell were inspired by performance artists including Emmy Hennings , Carolee Schneemann , Martha Rosler , and the Guerilla Girls .

[ 188 ] Students in a Martha Rosler exhibition The Guerrilla Girls in an opening in London Works of the 'Guerrilla Girls' in an exhibition in the Museum of Modern Art , Manhattan , New York Guerrilla Girls exhibition Installation by Louise Bourgeois in a Brazilian museum Portrait of Judy Chicago Expansion to Latin America [ edit ] In this decade performance art spread until reaching Latin America through the workshops and programmes that universities and academic institutions offered. It mainly developed in Mexico, Colombia -with artists such as Maria Teresa Hincapié —, in Brasil and in Argentina.

[ 189 ] Women interacting with the work Listening to the sounds of death by Teresa Margolles in the Museo de la Memoria y la Tolerancia of Mexico City Ana Mendieta was a conceptual and performance artist born in Cuba and raised in the United States. She's mostly known for her artworks and performance art pieces in land art. Mendieta's work was known mostly in the feminist art critic environment. Years after her death, specially since the Whitney Museum of American Art retrospective in 2004 [ 190 ] and the retrospective in the Haywart Gallery in London in 2013 [ 191 ] she is considered a pioneer of performance art and other practices related to body art and land art, sculpture and photography.

[ 192 ] She described her own work as earth-body art .

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] Tania Bruguera is a Cuban artist specialized in performance art and political art. Her work mainly consists of her interpretation of political and social topics.

[ 195 ] She has developed concepts such as "conduct art" to define her artistic practices with a focus on the limits of language and the body confronted to the reaction and behavior of the spectators. She also came up with "useful art", that it ought to transform certain political and legal aspects of society. Brugera's work revolves around power and control topics, and a great portion of her work questions the current state of her home country, Cuba. In 2002 she created the Cátedra Arte de Conducta in La Habana.

[ 196 ] [ 197 ] [ 198 ] Argentinean Marta Minujín during a performance art piece Regina José Galindo is a Guatemalan artist specialized in performance art. Her work is characterized by its explicit political and critical content, using her own body as a tool of confrontation and social transformation.

[ 199 ] Her artistic career has been marked by the Guatemalan Civil War that took place from 1960 to 1996, which triggered a genocide of more than 200 thousand people, many of them indigenous, farmers, women and children.

[ 189 ] With her work, Galindo denounces violence, sexism (one of her the main topics is femicide), the western beauty standards, the repression of the estates and the abuse of power, especially in the context of her country, even though her language transgresses borders. Since her beginnings she only used her body as media, which she occasionally takes to extreme situations (like in Himenoplasty (2004) where she goes through a hymen reconstruction, a work that won the Golden Lyon in the Venice Biennale ), to later have volunteers or hired people to interact with her, so that she loses control over the action.

[ 200 ] 1990s [ edit ] Performance in the Romanian Pavilion of the Venice Biennial Exhibition by Chinese artist Tehching Hsieh with documentation of his first performance artworks The 1990s was a period of absence for classic European performance, so performance artists kept a low profile. Nevertheless, Eastern Europe experienced a peak. On the other hand, Latin American performance continued to boom, as well as feminist performance art. There also was a peak of this discipline in Asian countries, whose motivation emerged from the Butō dance in the 1950s, but in this period they professionalized and new Chinese artists arose, earning great recognition. There was also a general professionalization in the increase of exhibitions dedicated to performance art, at the opening of the Venice Art Biennial to performance art, where various artists of this discipline have won the Leone d'Oro, including Anne Imhof , Regina José Galindo or Santiago Sierra .

Museum and centre specialized in performance art in Taitung University Performance with political context [ edit ] While the Soviet Bloc dissolved, some forbidden performance art pieces began to spread. Young artists from the former Eastern Bloc, including Russia, devoted themselves to performance art. Scenic arts emerged around the same time in Cuba, the Caribbean and China. "In these contexts, performance art became a new critical voice with a social strength similar to that of Western Europe, the United States and South America in the sixties and early seventies. It must be emphasized that the rise of performance art in the 1990s in Eastern Europe, China, South Africa, Cuba and other places must not be considered secondary or an imitation of the West".

[ 201 ] Professionalization of performance art [ edit ] In the Western World, in the 1990s, performance art joined the mainstream culture. Diverse performance artworks, live, photographed or through documentation started to become part of galleries and museums that began to understand performance art as an art discipline.

[ 202 ] Nevertheless, it was not until the next decade that a major institutionalization happened, when every museum started to incorporate performance art pieces into their collections and dedicating great exhibitions and retrospectives, museums such as the Tate Modern in London, the MoMA in New York City or the Pompidou Centre in Paris. From the 1990s on, many more performance artists were invited to important biennials like the Venice Biennale , the Sao Paulo Biennial and the Lyon Biennial.

Performance in China [ edit ] Main article: Performance art in China In the late 1990s, Chinese contemporary art and performance art received great recognition internationally, as 19 Chinese artists were invited to the Venice Biennial.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] Performance art in China and its history had been growing since the 1970s due to the interest between art, process and tradition in Chinese culture, but it gained recognition from the 1990s on.

[ 205 ] [ 201 ] In China, performance art is part of the fine arts education programme, and is becoming more and more popular.

[ 205 ] [ 206 ] In the early 1990s, Chinese performance art was already acclaimed in the international art scene.

[ 207 ] [ 205 ] [ 208 ] Performance art in the Lyon Biennale Performance art in the Lyon Biennale Performance at the entrance of the Romanian Pavilion at the Venice Biennale Performative installation by Joseph Beuys in the Tate Modern of London Video installation with the Chinese artist Ai Weiwei Tehching Hsieh exhibition in downtown New York City China Pavilion at the Venice Biennale Portrait of Wang Xiaoshuai Liu Xiaodong during a performance artwork Since the 2000s [ edit ] New-media performance [ edit ] New media performance art, 2009 In the late 1990s and into the 2000s, a number of artists incorporated technologies such as the World Wide Web, digital video, webcams, and streaming media, into performance artworks.

[ 209 ] Artists such as Coco Fusco , Shu Lea Cheang , and Prema Murthy produced performance art that drew attention to the role of gender, race, colonialism, and the body in relation to the Internet.

[ 210 ] Other artists, such as Critical Art Ensemble , Electronic Disturbance Theater , and Yes Men , used digital technologies associated with hacktivism and interventionism to raise political issues concerning new forms of capitalism and consumerism.

[ 211 ] [ 212 ] In the second half of the decade, computer-aided forms of performance art began to take place.

[ 213 ] Many of these works led to the development of algorithmic art , generative art , and robotic art , in which the computer itself, or a computer-controlled robot, becomes the performer.

[ 214 ] Coco Fusco is an interdisciplinary Cuban-American artist, writer and curator who lives and works in the United States. Her artistic career began in 1988. In her work, she explores topics such as identity, race, power and gender through performance. She also makes videos, interactive installations and critical writing.

[ 215 ] [ 22 ] Radical performance [ edit ] Petr Pavlensky cutting his own ear in a political action in the Red Square of Moscow Protest for the liberation of Pussy Riot Pussy Riot during a performance with Tania Bruguera During the 2000s and 2010s, performance artists such as Pussy Riot , Tania Bruguera , and Petr Pavlensky were prosecuted for a variety of artistic actions.

[ 216 ] Pussy Riot [ edit ] On February 21, 2012, as a part of their protest against the re-election of Vladímir Putin , various women of the artistic collective Pussy Riot entered the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour of Moscow of the Russian Orthodox Church . They made the sign of the cross, bowed before the shrine, and started to interpret a performance compound by a song and a dance under the motto "Virgin Mary, put Putin Away". On March 3, they were detained.

[ 217 ] On March 3, 2012, Maria Alyokhina and Nadezhda Tolokonnikova , [ 218 ] [ 219 ] Pussy Riot members, were arrested by the Russian authorities and accused of vandalism. At first, they both denied being members of the group and started a hunger strike for being incarcerated and taken apart from their children until the trials began in April.

[ 220 ] On March 16 another woman, Yekaterina Samutsévitch, who had been previously interrogated as a witness, was arrested and accused as well.

[ citation needed ] On July 5, formal charges were filed against the group, along with a 2,800-page indictment .

[ 221 ] That same day they were notified that they had until July 9 to prepare their defense. In reply, they announced a hunger strike, pleading that two days was an inappropriate time frame to prepare their defense.

[ 222 ] On July 21, the court extended their preventive prison to last six more months.

[ 223 ] The three detained members were recognized as political prisoners by the Union of Solidarity with Political Prisoners.

[ 224 ] Amnesty International considers them to be prisoners of conscience for "the severity of the response of the Russian authorities".

[ 225 ] The artist Abel Azcona during The Fathers at museum of Madrid , 2018 Others [ edit ] Since 2012, artist Abel Azcona has been prosecuted for some of his works. The demand that gained the most repercussion [ clarification needed ] was the one carried out by the Archbishopric of Pamplona and Tudela , [ 226 ] in representation of the Catholic Church .

[ 227 ] The Church demanded Azcona for desecration and blasphemy crimes, hate crime and attack against the religious freedom and feelings for his work Amen or The Pederasty .

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] In 2016, Azcona was denounced for extolling terrorism [ 230 ] [ 231 ] for his exhibition Natura Morta , [ 232 ] in which the artist recreated situations of violence, historical memory, terrorism or war conflicts through performance and hyperrealistic sculptures and installations.

[ 233 ] In December 2014 Tania Bruguera was detained in La Habana to prevent her from carrying out new reivindicative [ clarification needed ] works. Her performance art pieces have earned her harsh critiques, and she has been accused of promoting resistance and public disturbances.

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] In December 2015 and January 2016, Bruguera was detained for organizing a public performance in the plaza de la Revolución of La Habana. She was detained along with other Cuban artists, activists and reporters who took part in the campaign Yo También Exijo , which was created after the declarations of Raúl Castro and Barack Obama in favor of restoring their diplomatic relationship. During the performance El Susurro de Tatlin #6 she set microphones and talkers [ clarification needed ] in the Plaza de la Revolución so the Cubans could express their feelings regarding the new political climate. The event had great repercussion in international media, including a presentation of El Susurro de Tatlin #6 in Times Square, and an action in which various artists and intellectuals expressed themselves in favour of the liberation of Bruguera by sending an open letter to Raúl Castro signed by thousands of people around the world asking for the return of her passport and claiming criminal injustice, as she only gave a microphone to the people so they could give their opinion.

[ 236 ] [ 237 ] [ 238 ] [ 239 ] [ 240 ] In November 2015 and October 2017 Petr Pavlensky was arrested for carrying out a radical performance art piece in which he set on fire the entry of the Lubyanka Building, headquarters of the Federal Security Service of Russia, and a branch office of the Bank of France.

[ 241 ] On both occasions he sprayed the main entrance with gasoline; in the second performance he sprayed the inside as well, and ignited it with a lighter. The doors of the building were partially burnt. Both times Pavlenski was arrested without resistance and accused of debauchery. A few hours after the actions, several political and artistic reivindicative videos appeared on the internet.

[ 242 ] Lia Garcia , a transfeminist performance artist from Mexico, who works under the stage name la Novia Sirena, uses themes of touch and vulnerability to highlight issues of gendered violence and transgender belonging. Frequently engaged in site specific spaces, In her piece, Proyecto 10bis (2016-2017) Garcia performed in El Reclusorio Norte, a prison located in Mexico City , dressed as a quinceañera , and danced with the inmates, using touch as a way to contest the spaces that are intended to separate the incarcerated from the rest of the population.

[ 243 ] Institutionalization of performance art / performance collecting processes [ edit ] Marina Abramović performing The Artist Is Present , MoMA , New York, 2010 Since the 2000s, big museums, institutions and collections have supported performance art. Since January 2003, Tate Modern in London has had a curated programme of live art and performance.

[ 244 ] With exhibitions by artists such as Tania Bruguera or Anne Imhof .

[ 245 ] In 2012 The Tanks at Tate Modern were opened: the first dedicated spaces for performance, film and installation in a major modern and contemporary art museum.

The Museum of Modern Art held a major retrospective and performance recreation of Marina Abramović 's work, the biggest exhibition of performance art in MoMA's history, from March 14 to 31, 2010.

[ 246 ] [ 247 ] The exhibition consisted of more than twenty pieces by the artist, most of them from the years 1960–1980. Many of them were re-activated by other young artists of multiple nationalities selected for the show.

[ 248 ] In parallel to the exhibition, Abramovic performed The Artist is Present , a 726-hour and 30-minute static, silent piece, in which she sat immobile in the museum's atrium, while spectators were invited to take turns sitting opposite her.

[ 249 ] The work is an updated reproduction of one of the pieces from 1970, shown in the exhibition, where Abramovic stayed for full days next to Ulay, who was her sentimental companion. The performance attracted celebrities such as Björk , Orlando Bloom and James Franco [ 250 ] who participated and received media coverage.

[ 251 ] Against the background of the institutionalisation of performance, the Bruxelles-based initiative A Performance Affair [ 252 ] co founded by Liv Vaisberg and Will Kerr and the London-based format Performance Exchange [ 253 ] inquire about the collectability of performance works. With The Non-fungible Body?, the Austrian museum and culture centre OÖLKG/OK reflects upon recent developments in institutionalizing performance through a discursive festival format that was presented for the first time in June 2022.

Facade of the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao with a Yoko Ono Banner Work by Doris Salcedo in the Tate Modern in London, 2007 Marina Abramović during her seven performances in Seven Easy Pieces (2005), in the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum Zenith shot of the performance The Artist Is Present in the Museum of Modern Art Work by Marina Abramović reproduced for the retrospective in Bologna , Italy, 2018 Hermann Nitsch carrying out a performance in his homonymous museum (2009) Performance by Bryan Zanisnik, called When I Was a Child I Caught a Fleeting Glimpse , 2009 Exhibition dedicated to Yoko Ono in the Cultural Metropolitan Centre of Quito (2018) Collective revindication performance art [ edit ] A Rapist in Your Path in the main street of Mexico City In 2014 the performance art piece Carry That Weight is created, also known as "the mattress performance". The artist behind this piece is Emma Sulkowicz who, during her end of degree thesis in visual arts in the Columbia University in the city of New York City. In September 2014, Sulkowicz's piece began, as she started carrying her own mattress around the Columbia University campus.

[ 254 ] This work was created by the artist with the goal of denouncing her rape in that same mattress years before, in her own dormitory, which she reported and was not heard by the university or the justice, [ 255 ] so she decided to carry the mattress with her for the entire semester, without leaving it at any moment, until her graduation ceremony in May 2015. The piece generated great controversy, but was supported by a bunch of her companions and activists who joined Sulkowicz multiple times when carrying the mattress, making the work an international revindication. Art critic Jerry Saltz considered the artwork to be one of the most important of the year 2014.

[ 256 ] In 2019 the collective performance art piece A Rapist in Your Path was created by a feminist group from Valparaíso , Chile named Lastesis , which consisted of a demonstration against the women's rights violations in the context of the 2019–2020 Chilean protests .

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] [ 259 ] It was first performed in front of the Second Police Station of the Carabineros de Chile in Valparaíso on November 18, 2019.

[ 260 ] A second performance done by 2000 Chilean women on November 25, 2019, as a part of the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , was filmed and became viral on social media.

[ 261 ] Its reach became global [ 262 ] [ 263 ] after feminist movements in dozens of countries adopted and translated the performance for their own protests and demands for the cessation and punishment of femicide and sexual violence, amongst others.

[ 264 ] Companions of Emma Sulkowicz and the artist herself carrying the mattress to the graduation as a complaint Sulkowicz with the instructions for her performance in the Columbia University Part of Sulkowicz's performance, an action called "Llevemos el peso entre todas" ( Carry That Weight Together ) Sulkowicz's portrait in one of the presentations of the work Roberta Smith , New York Times art critic (left), discussing Mattress Performance with Sulkowicz, Brooklyn Museum , December 14, 2014 Mexican interpretation of A Rapist in Your Path in Oaxaca , November 27, 2019 A Rapist in Your Path presented in the context of the 2019–2020 Chilean protests Peruvian interpretation of A Rapist in Your Path in Lima, December 12, 2019 A Rapist in Your Path presented in the context of the 2019–2020 Chilean protests A child intervening during the performance of A Rapist in Your Path See also [ edit ] ART/MEDIA Classificatory disputes about art COUM Transmissions Danger music Digital Live Art Flash mob Graphic arts Guerrilla theatre List of performance artists Living statue New media art Noise music Poetry slam Radio drama References [ edit ] ^ a b "Performance Art" . Tate Modern . Retrieved May 20, 2020 .

^ "Performance Art Movement Overview" . The Art Story . Retrieved May 12, 2020 .

^ "Media & Performance" . Moma Museo of Modern Art . Retrieved May 20, 2020 .

^ Taylor y Fuentes, Diana y Macela (2011).

"Estudios avanzados de performance" (PDF) . Fondo de Cultura Económica. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 14, 2019 . Retrieved February 8, 2019 .

^ Franco Peplo, Fernando (2014).

"El concepto de performance según Erving Goffman y Judith Butler" (PDF) . Colección Documentos de trabajo. Editorial CEA. Año1. Número 3 . Retrieved February 8, 2019 .

^ "Etimología de performance" . Etimologías de Chile. 2019 . Retrieved May 20, 2020 .

^ Perreault, John (1982). "Marjorie Strider: An Overview". In Van Wagner, Judith K. (ed.).

Marjorie Strider: 10 Years, 1970-1980 . Myers Fine Art Gallery. pp.

11– 15.

^ Carreño Rio, Rodrigo.

"Carolee Schneemann, Pionera y Referente" .

Le Miau Noir . Retrieved June 8, 2020 .

^ "Marina Abramovic, pionera del performance" .

The Vault . April 8, 2018 . Retrieved June 8, 2020 .

^ "Ana Mendieta, la pionera cubana de la performance, está en Madrid" .

Diario de Cuba . February 14, 2020 . Retrieved June 8, 2020 .

^ Calvo, Irene (May 14, 2015).

"Chris Burden, el body art y la performance de los 70: referentes actuales" .

Ah Magazine . Retrieved June 8, 2020 .

^ Davis, Ben (April 28, 2017).

"Vito Acconci, Transgressive Progenitor of Performance Art, Dies at 77" .

London Arte Week . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ "The Top 10 Living Artists of 2015" .

Artsy . 2015 . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ "Abel Azcona, mejor artista de performance" . Hoyu es arte. February 22, 2016 . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ Toledo, Manuel (June 10, 2005).

"Guatemalteca gana Leon de Oro" .

BBC Mundo . Retrieved November 28, 2022 .

^ E. Cué, Carlos (February 17, 2017).

"Marta Minujín "Desde los años sesenta no se ha hecho nada nuevo en arte" " .

El Pais . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ Fischer-Lichte, Erika. The Transformative Power of Performance: A New Aesthetics. New York and London 2008, Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415458566 .

^ Moller, Helen ; Jacobs, Max ; Orchestral Society of New York (March 20, 1918).

Helen Moller and Her Pupils .

Carnegie Hall Archives.

Complete program  collections.carnegiehall.org/C.aspx?VP3=pdfviewer&rid=2RRM1TZL9KAZ  collections.carnegiehall.org/a2c80a53-b8fa-4327-b8cf-bbde0cc95651 ^ "Helen Moller and Dancers Appear" .

The New York Times . December 27, 1918 . Retrieved July 19, 2024 .

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1918/12/27/97056760.html ^ Moller, Helen ; Dunham, Curtis (1918).

Dancing with Helen Moller; her own statement of her philosophy and practice and teaching formed upon the classic Greek model, and adapted to meet the aesthetic and hygienic needs of to-day, with forty-three full page art plates; .

New York and London : John Lane Company . Retrieved July 19, 2024 – via archive.org .

^ "Helen Moller" .

Musical Courier . No. V79. New York: Musical Courier Company. 1919 . Retrieved July 19, 2024 .

^ a b c Carlson, Marvin (1998) [1996].

Performance: A Critical Introduction . London and New York: Routledge. pp.

2, 103–105 .

ISBN 0-415-13703-9 .

^ Parr, Adrian (2005). "Becoming + Performance Art". In Adrian Parr (ed.).

The Deleuze Dictionary . Edinburgh University Press. pp. 25, 2.

ISBN 0748618996 . Retrieved October 26, 2010 .

^ Roussou, Eugenia; Saraiva, Clara; Povedák, István (2019). Roussou, Eugenia; Saraiva, Clara; Povedák, István (eds.).

Expressions of Religion: Ethnography, Performance and the Senses . Ethnology of religion, volume 2. Vienna: LIT Verlag. pp.

12– 13.

ISBN 9783643911100 . Retrieved November 12, 2024 .

[...] a turn to ritual is observed in the early stages of Performance art [...] performance artists use their traumatized body to project their art and the nexus between body, violence and rituals, as a form of contemporary religious expression that transcends sociocultural and religious boundaries.

^ Karen Gonzalez Rice (May 11, 2023). "Revisiting 'Art in the Dark': Thomas McEvilley, Performance Art, and the End(s) of Shamanism". In Bernier, Ronald R.; Rachel Hostetter Smith (eds.).

Religion and Contemporary Art: A Curious Accord . Abingdon: Routledge. p. 203.

ISBN 9781000868456 . Retrieved November 12, 2024 .

By locating performance art within the shamanistic tradition, McEvilley extended this heroic identity to performance artists. [...] As a form of shamanism, he claimed, performance art demands that we look beyond our knee-jerk reactions to confrontation and taboo [...]. This text was the first serious attempt to address performance art in terms of religion [...] ^ Moody, Katharine Sarah (March 3, 2016) [2015].

Radical Theology and Emerging Christianity: Deconstruction, Materialism and Religious Practices . Intensities: Contemporary Continental Philosophy of Religion (reprint ed.). Abingdon: Routledge.

ISBN 9781317071822 . Retrieved November 12, 2024 .

[...] Ikon 's practices [...] were [...] a complex interaction between practice, especially performance art, ritual and liturgy, and theory, including philosophy and theology but also psychoanalysis and Northern Irish politics.

^ "Performanceras y dadaístas" . Con la a. 2020 . Retrieved May 23, 2020 .

^ Rojas, Diego (May 20, 2017).

"La performance, esa forma radical y perturbadora del arte contemporáneo" .

Infobae . Retrieved May 23, 2020 .

^ Sooke, Alastair (July 20, 2016).

"Cabaret Voltaire: A night out at history's wildest nightclub" .

BBC Culture .

^ Tourismus, Schweiz.

"Cabaret Voltaire" .

Suiza Turismo (in Spanish) . Retrieved November 16, 2022 .

^ Sooke, Alastair.

"Cabaret Voltaire: A night out at history's wildest nightclub" . Retrieved March 4, 2018 .

^ World War I and Dada , Museum of Modern Art (MoMA).

^ a b Lomelí, Natalia (December 23, 2015).

"Cabaret Voltaire: El inicio del dadaísmo" .

Cultura Colectiva . Retrieved May 23, 2020 .

^ a b De Micheli, Mario: Le Avanguardie artistiche del Novecento , 1959.

^ Albright, Daniel: Modernism and music: an anthology of sources .

University of Chicago Press , 2004.

ISBN 0-226-01266-2 .

^ Elger, Dietmar: Dadaísmo .

Alemania : Taschen , 2004.

ISBN 3-8228-2946-3 .

^ a b "El Futurismo" . CCapitalia. July 14, 2005 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ Lajo Pérez, Rosina (1990).

Léxico de arte . Madrid – España: Akal. p. 87.

ISBN 978-84-460-0924-5 .

^ Bróccoli, Betina (June 29, 2009).

"El futurismo: a cien años de la estética de la velocidad" .

Argentina Investiga . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ Essers, V., "La modernidad clásica. La pintura durante la primera mitad del siglo XX", en Los maestros de la pintura occidental , volumen II, Taschen, 2005.

ISBN 3-8228-4744-5 , pág. 555 ^ Esaak, Shelley (July 3, 2019).

"Performance Art 1960s-Present" .

Thought CO . Retrieved June 7, 2020 .

^ Casadeval, Gema (September 1, 1997).

"Unesco declara la Bauhaus Patrimonio de la Humanidad" . El Mundo . Retrieved June 7, 2020 .

^ a b "Action Painting Technique: Definition, Characteristics" . Retrieved May 26, 2020 .

^ "Jackson Pollock, el artista de acción" .

Totenart . 2019 . Retrieved May 20, 2020 .

^ Rosenberg, Harold.

" The American Action Painters " . Retrieved May 26, 2020 .

^ "Action Painting Artsy" . Retrieved May 26, 2020 .

^ "Pierre Restany, 'Modern Magic at the Tate', Studio International, June 1968" .

Tate Modern . June 1968 . Retrieved May 20, 2020 .

^ Hannah Weitemeier ( de ), Yves Klein, 1928–1962: Internacional Klein Blue (Cologne, Lisbon, Paris: Taschen, 2001), 8.

ISBN 3-8228-5842-0 .

^ Gilbert Perlein & Bruno Corà (eds) & al., Yves Klein: Long Live the Immaterial!

("An anthological retrospective", catalog of an exhibition held in 2000), New York: Delano Greenidge, 2000, ISBN 978-0-929445-08-3 , p. 226 ^ Oybin, Marina (January 31, 2016).

"La revolución del color: tras las huellas de Yves Klein" .

La Nación . Retrieved May 20, 2020 .

^ "Un salto al vacío. Yves Klein y el nuevo arte del Siglo XX" . Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales . Retrieved May 20, 2020 .

^ Selfridges, Camilla (October 23, 2017).

"Movimientos Del Arte (Tras Yves Klein)" .

Crisol Hoy . Archived from the original on June 15, 2020 . Retrieved May 20, 2020 .

^ a b "Everything Is Illuminated" .

NYMag.com . September 23, 2004.

^ Barnes, Rachel (2001).

The 20th-Century art book (Reprinted. ed.). London: Phaidon Press.

ISBN 0714835420 .

^ "A Visual Essay on Gutai".

Flash Art . Vol. 45, no. 287. Flash Art International. 2012. p. 111.

ISSN 0394-1493 .

^ López, Ianko (November 3, 2017).

"Land Art: el arte de los misterios de la tierra" .

AD Magazine . Retrieved May 22, 2020 .

^ "Earth Art o la naturaleza en el museo" .

www.elcultural.com . November 13, 2009 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ National Gallery of Art.

"Los Angeles to New York: Dwan Gallery, 1959–1971" . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ "La evolución de la performance desde los 60/70" . Universidad de Salamanca. May 4, 2011 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ Lapidario, Josep.

"Pintura, sangre, sexo y muerte: en las tripas del accionismo vienés" .

JotDown . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ "Accionismo Vienés" (PDF) . Centro Andaluz de Arte Contemporáneo . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ "Accionismo vienés o el lenguaje brutal del cuerpo" .

Medium . July 18, 2016 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ Ramis, Mariano (April 21, 1965).

"Accionismo Vienés" . IDIS . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ "Andy Warhol Films" .

www.warholstars.org .

^ "From the research laboratories of Andy Warhol comes this issue of Aspen Magazine" . Evergreen Review. April 1967.

^ Joseph, Branden W.

(Summer 2002). " 'My Mind Split Open': Andy Warhol's Exploding Plastic Inevitable".

Grey Room .

8 : 80– 107.

doi : 10.1162/15263810260201616 .

S2CID 57560227 .

^ Osterweil, Ara; Blaetz, Robin (2007).

Women's Experimental Cinema: Critical Frameworks .

Duke University Press . p. 143.

ISBN 9780822340447 .

^ Martin Torgoff, Martin (2004).

Can't Find My Way Home: America in the Great Stoned Age, 1945-2000 . Nueva York: Simon & Schuster. p. 156.

ISBN 0-7432-3010-8 .

^ Harold, Christine (September 1, 2004).

"Pranking rhetoric: "culture jamming" as media activism" .

Critical Studies in Media Communication .

21 (3): 189– 211.

doi : 10.1080/0739318042000212693 .

ISSN 1529-5036 .

^ Beck, J., El Living Theatre , Madrid, Fundamentos, 1974, pag. 255 ^ Beck, J., El Living Theatre , Madrid, Fundamentos, 1974, pag.102 ^ Simposio Happening, Fluxus y otros comportamientos artísticos de la segunda mitad del siglo XX . Cáceres, 1999, Editorial Regional de Extremadura, ISBN 84-7671-607-9 .

^ Fluxus at 50 . Stefan Fricke, Alexander Klar, Sarah Maske, Kerber Verlag, 2012, ISBN 978-3-86678-700-1 .

^ Dick Higgins on Fluxus , interviewed 1986.

^ Amongst the earliest pieces that would later be published by Fluxus were Brecht's event scores, the earliest of which dated from around 1958/9, and works such as Valoche, which had originally been exhibited in Brecht's solo show 'Toward's Events' at 1959.

^ "Fluxus" . Masdearte.com . Retrieved June 8, 2020 .

^ Pritchett, Kuhn & Garrett 2012 , p. "He has had a greater impact on music in the 20th century than any other American composer.".

sfn error: no target: CITEREFPritchettKuhnGarrett2012 ( help ) ^ Kozinn, Allan (August 13, 1992).

"John Cage, 79, a Minimalist Enchanted With Sound, Dies" .

The New York Times . Retrieved July 21, 2007 .

John Cage, the prolific and influential composer whose Minimalist works have long been a driving force in the world of music, dance and art, died yesterday at St. Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan. He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.

^ Leonard, George J. (1995).

Into the Light of Things: The Art of the Commonplace from Wordsworth to John Cage . University of Chicago Press. p. 120 ("... when Harvard University Press called him, in a 1990 book advertisement, "without a doubt the most influential composer of the last half-century," amazingly, that was too modest.").

ISBN 978-0-226-47253-9 .

^ Greene, David Mason (2007).

Greene's Biographical Encyclopedia of Composers . Reproducing Piano Roll Fnd. p. 1407 ("... John Cage is probably the most influential... of all American composers to date.").

ISBN 978-0-385-14278-6 .

^ Perloff, Junkerman, 1994, 93.

^ Bernstein, Hatch, 2001, 43–45.

^ Bloch, Mark (July 2023).

"A New Book and a Museum Show for Sari Dienes" .

Whitehot Magazine . Retrieved September 8, 2023 .

^ Gottlieb, Baruch (2010).

"Los signos vitales del arte procesual" . Laboral Centro de Arte . Retrieved May 17, 2020 .

^ "Process Art" . Tate Modern . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ "Process Art" . Guggenheim . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Nick Montfort, eds., The New Media Reader (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2003): p. 83.

ISBN 0-262-23227-8 .

^ Montfort, Nick, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin.

The New Media Reader.

Cambridge, Massachusetts [u.a.: MIT, 2003]. Print.

^ Patrice Pavis , "Diccionario del teatro", p. 232 ^ Profesorado.

"El arte de la acción: happening, performance y fluxus" (PDF) . Universidad de Castilla La mancha. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved November 7, 2021 .

^ Smith interview by Loretta Ross, Voices of Feminism Oral History Project , pp. 5–6.

^ Smith, Barbara, interview by Loretta Ross, transcript of video recording, May 7, 2003, Voices of Feminism Oral History Project , Sophia Smith Collection, p. 2.

^ Smith interview by Loretta Ross, Voices of Feminism Oral History Project , pp. 3–4.

^ Smith, Barbara.

Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology , Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, 1983, ISBN 0-913175-02-1 , p. xx, Introduction ^ "Carolee Schneemann Pioneering Feminist Artist Dies Age 79" .

^ "Carolee Schneeman on Feminism, Activism and Ageing" . AnOther magazine . Retrieved March 19, 2016 .

^ "Carolee Schneemann: "Remains to Be Seen: New and Restored Films and Videos" " .

Time Out New York . October 25, 2007. Archived from the original on January 5, 2013 . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ Stiles, Kristine (2003). "The Painter as an Instrument of Real Time".

Imaging Her Erotics: Essays, Interviews, Projects .

Cambridge, Massachusetts : MIT Press . p. 3.

ISBN 026269297X .

^ Carolee Schneemann Speaks , New England Journal of Aesthetic Research . Posted 11 de octubre de 2007.

[ self-published source ] ^ Faculty: Joan Jonas ACT at MIT – MIT Program in Art, Culture and Technology.

^ "Artist Joan Jonas" , Venice Bienniale, Retrieved August 17, 2014.

^ "Joan Jonas: Biography" Archived January 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , Electronic Arts Intermix, Retrieved June 6, 2020.

^ "Collection Online – Joan Jonas" .

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum . Archived from the original on April 16, 2014 . Retrieved June 8, 2014 .

^ "Joan Jonas" .

pbs.org . Archived from the original on October 11, 2014.

^ "Yoko Ono: La Artista desconocida más Famosa del Mundo" .

^ "Yoko Ono, Cut Piece y la performance feminista" .

Mirall . July 12, 2017 . Retrieved May 21, 2020 .

^ Ana López-Varela (September 2017).

"John Lennon, Yoko Ono y Gibraltar" . Vanity Fair . Retrieved May 26, 2020 .

^ "La Yoko que no vemos" .

La Nación . October 1998 . Retrieved May 26, 2020 .

^ "Walker Art Center – Contemporary Art Museum – Minneapolis" .

www.walkerart.org .

^ Tisdall, Caroline (2010).

Joseph Beuys . Thames & Hudson. p. 37.

^ Andre Chahil: Wien 1985: Phänomen Fax-Art. Beuys, Warhol und Higashiyama setzen dem Kalten Krieg ein Zeichen.

^ "Henry Moore Institute" . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ Halpern, John (Director) (April 15, 1988).

[Joseph Beuys / Transformer] (Television sculpture). New York City: I.T.A.P. Pictures.

^ Hopper, Kenneth; Hopper, William (2007).

The Puritan gift: triumph, collapse, and the revival of an American dream . I.B.Tauris. p. 334.

ISBN 978-1-85043-419-1 .

^ Hughes, Robert (1991).

The Shock of the New (revised ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. p.

444 .

ISBN 0-679-72876-7 .

^ "Elias Maria Reti - Künstler – Biografie" .

www.eliasmariareti.de (in German). Archived from the original on December 18, 2018 . Retrieved December 18, 2018 .

^ Ulmer, Gregory (1985).

Applied Grammatology: Post(e)-Pedagogy from Jacques Derrida to Joseph Beuys . Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 230.

^ Christiane Paul , Digital Art, Thames & Hudson, London, pp. 14–15 ^ Petra Stegmann.

The lunatics are on the loose – European Fluxus Festivals 1962–1977, Down with Art!

, Potsdam, 2012, ISBN 978-3-9815579-0-9 .

^ "Los mundos de Nam June Paik" . Museo Guggenheim. September 30, 2002 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ Shelokhonov, Steve.

"Biografía de Nam June Paik" . IMDb . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ "Media Art Net – Vostell, Wolf: YOU" .

www.medienkunstnetz.de . April 12, 2018.

^ Russeth, Andrew (April 28, 2017).

"Vito Acconci, Whose Poetic, Menacing Work Forms Bedrock of Performance, Video Art, Dies at 77" .

ARTnews . Sarah Douglas. Art Media . Retrieved April 28, 2017 .

^ a b Kennedy, Randy (April 28, 2017).

"Vito Acconci, Performance Artist and Uncommon Architect, Dies at 77" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 30, 2017 . Retrieved April 30, 2017 .

^ Scott, Andrea K. (April 28, 2017).

"Postscript: Vito Acconci, 1940–2017" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved March 20, 2018 .

^ a b Capps, Kriston (May 3, 2017).

"Vito Acconci and the Shelf Life of Sensational Art" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved March 20, 2018 .

^ "Vito Acconci, Guggenheim Collection Online" .

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum . Retrieved March 20, 2018 .

^ " Seedbed , Vito Acconci, The Met Collection Online" .

Metropolitan Museum of New York . 1972 . Retrieved March 20, 2018 .

^ a b Fox, Margalit (May 11, 2015).

"Chris Burden, un conceptualista con cicatrices, muere a los 69" .

The New York Times .

^ Schjeldahl, Peter (May 14, 2007).

"Actuación: Chris Burden y los límites del arte" .

The New Yorker .

^ Smith, Roberta (October 3, 2013).

"Las cosas de construir y destruir: 'Chris Burden: Extreme Measures' en el New Museum" .

The New York Times .

^ Work Ethic , by Helen Anne Molesworth, M. Darsie Alexander, Julia Bryan-Wilson, Baltimore Museum of Art, Des Moines Art Center, Wexner Center for the Arts; published 2003 by Penn State Press ^ Simon Taylor, Dennis Oppenheim, New Works , Guild Hall Museum, East Hampton, NY: 2001.

ISBN 0-933793-53-7 ^ Kate Deimling (May 16, 20, Kusama Writes of Hunger, Grudges, and Necking With Joseph Cornell in Her Odd Autobiography Archived November 6, 2013, at the Wayback Machine , Blouinartinfo France.

^ Yamamura, Midori (2015) Yayoi Kusama: Inventing the Singular.

MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262029476 ^ Russeth, Andrew (March 6, 2019).

"Carolee Schneemann, Protean Artist Who Helped Define Contemporary Avant-Garde, Has Died at 79" . New York (Estados Unidos): ArtNews . Retrieved June 6, 2020 .

^ Youngblood, Gene (1970).

Expanded Cinema . New York City: A. Dutton.

^ "To Call Until Exhaustion" . Jochen Gerz . Retrieved June 12, 2020 .

^ "Bruce Nauman" . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ "Bruce Nauman | ArtDiscover" .

www.artdiscover.com . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ "Bruce Nauman" .

www.epdlp.com . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ Ruíz Mantilla, Jesús (April 10, 2011).

"Gilbert & George amantes, socios, artistas" .

El País . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ "Gilbert and George" . Guggenheim Bilbao Museo . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ "Gilbert & George, la vida como obra de arte" .

Masdearte.com . February 5, 2010 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ Ramos, Charo (February 2019).

"El arte para todos de Gilbert & George" .

Diario de Sevilla . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ "Gilbert & George: "Intentamos estar lejos del arte para no contaminarnos" " .

Tendencias . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ For artists in endurance performances "[q]uestioning the limits of their bodies," Tatiana A. Koroleva, Subversive Body in Performance Art , ProQuest, 2008, pp. 29, 44–46.

^ Paul Allain, Jen Harvie, The Routledge Companion to Theatre and Performance , Routledge, 2014, p. 221. Other terms include duration art, live art or time-based art.

^ Michael Fallon, Creating the Future: Art and Los Angeles in the 1970s , Counterpoint, 2014, p. 106: "Burden's performances were so widely observed that they took on a life beyond the artist, helping create a new art genre, 'endurance art'..." ^ Emily Anne Kuriyama, "Everything You Need to Know About Chris Burden's Art Through His Greatest Works" , Complex , October 2, 2013.

^ Andrew Taylor, "Tehching Hsieh: The artist who took the punches as they came" , Sydney Morning Herald , April 30, 2014: "Don't try this endurance art at home. That is Tehching Hsieh's advice to artists inspired to emulate the five year-long performances he began in the late 1970s." ^ Thomas McEvilley, "Performing the Present Tense – A recent piece by Marina Abramovic blended endurance art and Buddhist meditation," Art in America , 91(4), April 2003.

^ Orshi Drozdik, Orsolya (September 2018).

"Sensuality and Matter" . Budapest Gallery . Retrieved June 12, 2020 .

^ "Orshi Drozdik" . 2016 . Retrieved June 12, 2020 .

^ Pajares, Gema (March 2, 2020).

"Muere Ulay, el compañero artístico y vital de Marina Abramovic" .

La Razón . Retrieved March 12, 2020 .

^ "Muere el artista Ulay" .

El Cultural . March 2, 2020 . Retrieved June 12, 2020 .

^ Tate.

" 'Rhythm 0', Marina Abramovic, 1974" .

Tate . Retrieved June 12, 2020 .

^ "Marina Abramović y Ulay en La Artista Está Presente – MoMA 2010" .

YouTube . March 19, 2013.

Archived from the original on December 11, 2021.

^ kunstwissen.de Marina Abramovic (1946– ^ Gudrun Sachse: Die Mutter aller Schmerzen . In: NZZ Folio 1/2007 ^ "Marina Abramović Rhythm 10" . Media Art Net . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ Carlson, Jen (March 9, 2012).

"This Sunday MoMA PS1 May Or May Not Host A "Performance Art Rape" " .

Gothamist . Archived from the original on August 10, 2015 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ Kourlas, Gia (July 30, 2013).

"The Margins of a Form Are, Increasingly, Not Where They Used to Be" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ a b "Panel, Gina" .

Oxford Art Online . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ Hillstrom, Laurie; Hillstrom, Kevin (1999). St. James Press (ed.).

Artistas contemporáneas . Farmington Hills, MI. pp.

507 , 508.

ISBN 1558623728 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b "Gina Pane" .

Broadway 1602 . Archived from the original on October 23, 2015 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ Banes, Sally (1998).

Subversive expectations: performance art and paratheater in New York, 1976–85 . New York City: The University of Michigan Press. pp. 120, 1.

ISBN 0-472-09678-8 . Retrieved March 23, 2011 .

^ Auslander, Philip (1992).

Presence and Resistance: Postmodernism and Cultural politics in Contemporary American Performance . Ann Arbour: University of Michigan Press. pp.

64– 65, 78– 79.

^ Banes, Sally (1998).

Subversive expectations: performance art and paratheater in New York, 1976–85 . New York City: The University of Michigan Press. pp. 10, 1.

ISBN 0-472-09678-8 . Retrieved March 23, 2011 .

^ Zajanckauska, Zane; Interview with Ieva Astahovska.

"Reclaiming the Invisible Past of Eastern Europe" . map – media archive performance. Archived from the original on April 16, 2011 . Retrieved March 1, 2011 .

^ Zajanckauska, Zane; Interview with Ieva Astahovska.

"Reclaiming the Invisible Past of Eastern Europe" . map – media archive performance. Archived from the original on April 16, 2011 . Retrieved March 23, 2011 .

^ Alcázar, Josefina (2001).

Mujeres y performance. El cuerpo como soporte (PDF) . Centro de Investigación Teatral Rodolfo Usigli . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ Guerrilla Girls.

"Our Story" . Retrieved September 21, 2016 .

^ a b Josefina, Pierucci (2017).

Guerrilla Girls . pp. 1, 5 . Retrieved March 23, 2018 .

^ "GUERRILLA GIRLS. La conciencia del mundo del arte" .

www.mujeresenred.net . Retrieved May 24, 2019 .

^ "Guerrilla Girls, la potencia del arte feminista llega a Buenos Aires" .

www.clarin.com . November 5, 2018 . Retrieved May 24, 2019 .

^ "La guerra de Guerrilla Girls" .

Cactus . December 25, 2013 . Retrieved May 24, 2019 .

^ Martín, Yolanda Beteta (April 23, 2013).

"El desafío de las artistas contemporáneas. Una aproximación a la presencia de las creadoras en las ferias de arte contemporáneo. El caso de ARCO" .

Investigaciones Feministas .

4 : 49– 65.

doi : 10.5209/rev_INFE.2013.v4.41877 .

ISSN 2171-6080 . Retrieved March 23, 2018 .

^ "Las Guerrilla Girls, la revolución de las mujeres artistas" .

www.publico.es . February 2, 2019 . Retrieved May 24, 2019 .

^ "Guerrilla Girls: arte feminista" .

Distrito Arte . June 9, 2016. Archived from the original on May 24, 2019 . Retrieved May 24, 2019 .

^ Aiello, Julieta (November 15, 2018).

"Guerrilla Girls: La muestra del icónico colectivo feminista que llega a Buenos Aires" .

Indie Hoy . Retrieved May 24, 2019 .

^ "Guerrilla Girls" .

HA!

. Retrieved May 24, 2019 .

^ Tate.

" 'Do Women Have To Be Naked To Get Into the Met. Museum?', Guerrilla Girls, 1989 | Tate" .

Tate . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ "Cindy Sherman" .

Wolf Foundation . January 13, 2020 . Retrieved January 20, 2020 .

^ Chicago, Judy (1985).

The birth project (1st ed.). Doubleday.

ISBN 0385187106 .

OCLC 11159627 .

^ Chicago, Judy; Richard, David (2012).

Judy Chicago : reviewing powerplay . David Richard Gallery.

ISBN 9780983931232 .

OCLC 841601939 .

^ Chicago, Judy (1993).

Holocaust project: from darkness into light . Penguin Books.

ISBN 0140159916 .

OCLC 27145289 .

^ a b Hutchinson, Kristen (2025).

Kiss & Tell: Lesbian Art & Activism . Toronto: Art Canada Institute.

^ a b "Woman Art House: Regina José Galindo -" .

Plataforma de Arte Contemporáneo . April 20, 2018 . Retrieved May 26, 2020 .

^ Cotter, Holland (July 9, 2004).

"Art Review; Disappearing: Her Special Act" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 28, 2018 .

^ "Hayward Gallery Exhibition Trailer: Ana Mendieta, Traces | Southbank Centre" .

www.southbankcentre.co.uk . Retrieved December 28, 2018 .

^ Josefina, Pierucci (2017).

"Guerrilla Girls" (in Spanish). pp. 1, 5 . Retrieved March 23, 2018 .

^ O'Hagan, Sean (September 21, 2013).

"Ana Mendieta: death of an artist foretold in blood" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ Cabañas, Kaira M. (1999). "Ana Mendieta: "Pain of Cuba, Body I Am" ".

Woman's Art Journal .

20 (1 (Spring – Summer, 1999)): 12– 17.

doi : 10.2307/1358840 .

JSTOR 1358840 .

^ Hemispheric Institute (2009).

"Tania Bruguera" . Archived from the original on October 5, 2016 . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ Tania Bruguera.

"Glosario" . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ Pinto, Roberto (2003).

Ejercicio de Resistencia Tania Bruguera . Turin, Italy: Torino. p. 25.

^ Pinto, Roberto (2003).

Ejercicio de Resistencia Tania Bruguera . Turin, Italy: Galeria Soffiantino. pp.

25– 26.

^ "Conversaciones con Regina José Galindo" . April 2, 2016 . Retrieved May 26, 2020 .

^ "Poetas siglo XXI: Regina José Galindo" . August 23, 2012 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ a b Montano, Linda M. (2000).

Performance artists talking in the eighties . Los Angeles, London: University of California Press Berkeley. pp. 479, 1.

ISBN 0-520-21022-0 . Retrieved March 31, 2011 .

^ Targ Brill, Marlene (2009).

America in the 1990s . Minneapolis: Lerner Publishing Group. pp. 93, 1.

ISBN 978-0-8225-7603-7 . Retrieved March 11, 2011 .

^ Berghuis, Thomas J. (2006).

Performance Art in China . Hong Kong: Timezone 8. p. 52.

ISBN 9889926598 .

^ Cooper, Rafi (July 6, 2008).

"Cultural revolutionary" .

The Observer . UK . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ a b c Chan, Shing-Kwan (September 2019).

"Up Against the Wall: Contemporary Chinese Performance Art and the Great Wall" . Yishu: Journal of Contemporary Chinese Art. p. 45.

^ "Ai Weiwei" . wolseleymedia.com.au. 2008 . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "He Yunchang, China" . Public Delivery. 2014 . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ "Performance by Concept 21 at the Great Wall" .

Asia Art Archive . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ Steve Dixon, Digital Performance: A History of New Media in Theater, Dance, Performance Art, and Installation (MIT Press, 2015), pp. 157ff. and pp. 457ff.

^ Kelly Dennis, "Gendered Ghosts in the Globalized Machine: Coco Fusco and Prema Murthy,” Paradoxa: International Feminist Art Journal , Vol. 23 (2009), pp. 79–86. See separate chapters on Shu Lea Cheang and Prema Murthy in Mark Tribe and Reena Jana, New Media Art (Taschen, 2007).

^ Nato Thompson (ed.), The Interventionists: Users' Manual for the Creative Disruption of Everyday Life (MIT Press, 2006), pp. 106ff, 117ff. See also the catalog for the 1998 Ars Electronica festival InfoWar (Springer, 1998).

^ McEvilley, Thomas (2012). "Video as Vindication for Performance".

The Triumph of Anti-Art: Conceptual and Performance Art in the Formation of Post-Modernism . McPherson & Company.

ISBN 978-0929701929 .

^ Anderson, Nate (2009), "Horrifically bad software demo becomes performance art" ^ LaViers, Amy (May 23, 2019).

"Ideal Mechanization: Exploring the Machine Metaphor through Theory and Performance" .

Arts .

8 (2): 67.

arXiv : 1807.02016 .

doi : 10.3390/arts8020067 .

^ "Coco Fusco | IDIS" . Retrieved May 14, 2020 .

^ Blanco Alcalde, Daniel (February 28, 2015).

"Artistas disidentes en el punto de mira" .

Revista Mito . Retrieved May 15, 2020 .

^ Feigin, Mark.

"Интервью | Гости | Русская служба новостей" . Rusnovosti.ru. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

^ "2 Pussy Riots Band Members assaulted in Moscow" .

IANS . News.biharprabha.com . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ Emma S (November 3, 2017).

"Masha Alyokhina: "Riot Days" | Talks at Google" . YouTube.

Archived from the original on December 11, 2021 . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ "Russian punk band Pussy Riot go on hunger strike in Moscow" .

The Week . March 6, 2012 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

^ "Участниц Pussy Riot официально обвинили в хулиганстве по мотивам религиозной ненависти" . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

^ Earle, Jonathan (July 5, 2012).

"Pussy Riot Suspects Go on Hunger Strike" . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

^ Baczynska, Gabriela (July 20, 2012).

"Russia extends jailing of Pussy Riot activists" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on February 3, 2016 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

^ "Троих предполагаемых участниц Pussy Riot признали политзаключенными" .

Росбалт . March 25, 2012.

Google translation.

^ "Russia: Release punk singers held after performance in church" . Amnesty International. April 3, 2012 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

[ dead link ] ^ Europa, Press (November 24, 2015).

"El Arzobispado de Pamplona-Tudela se moviliza contra la exposición de Abel Azcona" .

Europa Press . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ H. Riaño, Peio (April 9, 2017).

"Abel Azcona: "Tatuarme a Donald Trump en el ano no transforma nada" " . El Español . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ Domínguez, Dani (June 26, 2018).

"Abel Azcona: "Prefiero artistas en las cárceles que artistas callados en su estudio" " . La Marea . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ H. Riaño, Peio (February 5, 2019).

"El artista Abel Azcona planta al juez que lo investiga por escribir "pederastia" con hostias consagradas" .

El País . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ "Abel Azcona, de la profanación a la humillación de las víctimas del terrorismo" .

Infovaticana . December 20, 2016 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ Tecé, Gerardo (February 16, 2016).

"Coños, antisistema y medias mentiras" .

Contexto CTX . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ Roca Umbert, Fábrica de las Artes (2016).

"Instal-lacions vives a l´exposició Naturaleza Muerta d´Abel Azcona" .

Museo Roca Umbert . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ "L'art viu, sobre la mort, d'Abel Azcona" .

Cultura Granollers . April 10, 2017 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ Espejo, Bea (February 6, 2015).

"Tania Brugera: "Cuba favorece hoy un arte fácil y superficial" " .

El Cultural . Retrieved May 16, 2020 .

^ BBC (January 2, 2015).

"Tania Bruguera, la artista que desafía al gobierno de Cuba" . Retrieved May 16, 2020 .

^ Hemispheric Institute (2009).

"Tania Bruguera" . Archived from the original on October 5, 2016 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ Tania Bruguera.

"Glosario" . Retrieved November 14, 2014 .

^ Pinto, Roberto (2003).

Ejercicio de Resistencia Tania Bruguera . Turin, Italy: Torino. p. 25.

^ Pinto, Roberto (2003).

Ejercicio de Resistencia Tania Bruguera . Turin, Italy: Galeria Soffiantino. pp.

25– 26.

^ Corral, María (2005). Vivian Lechuga (ed.).

Tania Bruguera . Chicago, Illinois. p. 8.

ISBN 0-9769449-0-1 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Russian Artist Pyotr Pavlensky Sentenced over Paris Bank Fire" .

ArtForum . January 15, 2019 . Retrieved May 16, 2020 .

^ Jones, Jonathan (November 9, 2015).

"Pyotr Pavlensky is setting Russia's evil history ablaze" .

The Guardian . Retrieved February 24, 2020 .

^ Huitrón, Delgado, and Cynthia Citlallin. “Haptic TacticHypertenderness for the [Mexican] State and the Performances of Lia García.” TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly 6, no. 2 (May 1, 2019): 164–79. https://doi.org/10.1215/23289252-7348454.

^ "Tate Modern Performance. BMW Tate Live" .

Lupita. Arte de América Latina en Europa . 2016 . Retrieved May 11, 2020 .

^ Tate, Modern (2019).

"Anne Imnhof: Sex" . Tate Modern . Retrieved May 13, 2020 .

^ Kino, Carol (March 10, 2010).

A Rebel Form Gains Favor. Fights Ensue.

, The New York Times . Retrieved April 16, 2010.

^ "Marina Abramovic: Performance y Polémica en el Moma" .

Revista Arcadia . March 30, 2010 . Retrieved May 11, 2020 .

^ Cotter, Holland (May 30, 2010).

"700-Hour Silent Opera Reaches Finale at MoMA" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 11, 2020 .

^ Arboleda, Yazmany (May 28, 2010).

"SBringing Marina Flowers" .

The Huffington Post . Archived from the original on August 22, 2011 . Retrieved June 16, 2010 .

^ Bell, Christopher (June 14, 2012).

"Review: 'Marina Abramović: The Artist Is Present' Is A Good But Conventional Doc On An Unconventional Artist" .

IndieWire . Retrieved May 11, 2020 .

^ thoughtcatalog.com/2010/marina-abramovic ^ Kerr, Liv Vaisberg, Will.

"APA • A Performance Affair • re:production, The Second Edition 2019" .

aperformanceaffair.com . Retrieved September 12, 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Home" .

Performance Exchange . Retrieved September 12, 2022 .

^ Sylvie McNamara (October 28, 2019).

"Did Emma Sulkowicz Get Redpilled? At the very least, she's found a new social set" .

The Cut . Retrieved February 21, 2020 .

^ McDonald, Soraya Nadia (October 29, 2014).

"It's hard to ignore a woman toting a mattress everywhere she goes, which is why Emma Sulkowicz is still doing it" .

The Washington Post .

^ Slatz, Jerry (December 10, 2014).

"The 19 Best Art Shows of 2014" .

Vulture .

^ Rodríguez, Darinka (November 28, 2019).

"Ellas son las chilenas que crearon 'Un violador en tu camino' " .

Verne . Retrieved November 30, 2019 .

^ Patiño, Daniela (November 30, 2019).

"Las protestas virales al ritmo de la música" .

CNN . Retrieved November 30, 2019 .

^ BBC (November 30, 2019).

" "El violador eres tú": el potente himno feminista nacido en Chile que da la vuelta al mundo" . Retrieved November 30, 2019 .

^ "Las Tesis: Intervención viralizada del colectivo feminista se expande por Chile y el mundo" .

RedGol . November 29, 2019 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ " "Un violador en tu camino", el canto viral de un colectivo feminista chileno contra la violencia de género [VIDEO]" .

larepublica.pe . November 28, 2019 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ "El mundo se une al grito de 'Un violador en tu camino'; así las protestas" .

Excélsior . November 30, 2019 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ "El cántico chileno de 'Un violador en tu camino' retumba en todo el mundo" .

La Vanguardia . November 30, 2019 . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

^ " "Un violador en tu camino": Himno feminista de Lastesis es interpretado en todo Chile, América Latina y Europa" .

CNN Chile . Retrieved June 5, 2020 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Atkins, Robert (2013).

A Guide to Contemporary Ideas, Movements, and Buzzwords, 1945 to the present . Abbeville Press.

ISBN 978-0789211514 .

Bäckström, Per . "Performing the Poem: The Cross-Aesthetic Art of the Nordic Neo-Avant-Garde", The Angel of History. Literature, History and Culture . Vesa Haapala, Hannamari Helander, Anna Hollsten, Pirjo Lyytikäinen & Rita Paqvalen (eds.), Helsinki: The Department of Finnish Language and Literature, University of Helsinki, 2009.

Bäckström, Per .

“Kisses Sweeter than Wine: Öyvind Fahlström and Billy Klüver: The Swedish Neo-Avant-Garde in New York” , Artl@s Bulletin , vol. 6, 2017: 2 Migrations, Transfers, and Resemantization .

Bäckström, Per .

“The Intermedial Cluster.Åke Hodell's Lågsniff” , Acta Universitatis Sapientiae , Series Film & Media Studies, de Gruyter, no. 10 2015.

Bäckström, Per .

”’The Trumpet in the Bottom’. Öyvind Fahlström and the Uncanny” , Edda 2017: 2.

Beisswanger, Lisa: Performance on Display. Zur Geschichte lebendiger Kunst im Museum .

Deutscher Kunstverlag, Berlin 2021.

ISBN 978-3-422-98448-6 (in German) Beuys Brock Vostell. Aktion Demonstration Partizipation 1949–1983 . ZKM – Zentrum für Kunst und Medientechnologie, Hatje Cantz , Karlsruhe, 2014, ISBN 978-3-7757-3864-4 .

Battcock, Gregory; Nickas, Robert (1984).

The Art of Performance: A Critical Anthology . New York, E.P. Dutton.

ISBN 0-525-48039-0 Carlson, Marvin (1996).

Performance: A Critical Introduction . London and New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-13702-0 , ISBN 0-415-13703-9 Carr, C. (1993).

On Edge: Performance at the End of the Twentieth Century . Wesleyan University Press.

ISBN 0-8195-5267-4 , ISBN 0-8195-6269-6 Dempsey, Amy, Art in the Modern Era: A Guide to Styles, Schools, & Movements , Publisher: Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 978-0810941724 (basic definition and basic overview provided).

Dreher, Thomas: Performance Art nach 1945. Aktionstheater und Intermedia.

München: Wilhelm Fink 2001.

ISBN 3-7705-3452-2 (in German) Fischer-Lichte, Erika: Ästhetik des Performativen . Frankfurt: edition suhrkamp 2004.

ISBN 3-518-12373-4 (in German) Fischer-Lichte, Erika (2008).

The Transformative Power of Performance: A New Aesthetics . New York and London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415458566 .

Fischer-Lichte, Erika; Arjomand, Minou (2014).

The Routledge Introduction to Theatre and Performance Studies . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-50420-1 .

Fischer-Lichte, Erika; Wihstutz, Benjamin (2018).

Transformative Aesthetics . Oxon and New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-05717-3 .

Goldberg, Roselee (1998) Performance: Live Art Since 1960 . Harry N. Abrams, NY NY.

ISBN 978-0-8109-4360-5 Goldberg, Roselee (2001).

Performance Art: From Futurism to the Present (World of Art). Thames & Hudson Goldberg, Roselee (2018) Performance Now: Live Art for the 21st Century, London: Thames & Hudson, ISBN 978-0-500-02125-5 .

Gómez-Peña, Guillermo (2005).

Ethno-techno: Writings on performance, activism and pedagogy . Routledge, London.

ISBN 0-415-36248-2 Jones, Amelia and Heathfield, Adrian (eds.) (2012), Perform, Repeat, Record. Live Art in History . Intellect, Bristol.

ISBN 978-1-84150-489-6 Phelan, Peggy: Unmarked. The Politics of Performance.

Routledge, London 1993.

ISBN 978-0-415-06822-2 Rockwell, John (2004). "Preserve Performance Art?" New York Times , April 30.

Schimmel, Paul (ed.) (1998).

Out of Actions: Between Performance and the Object, 1949–1979 . Thames and Hudson, Los Angeles. Library of the Congress NX456.5.P38 S35 1998 Smith, Roberta (2005). "Performance Art Gets Its Biennial".

New York Times , November 2.

Best, Susan, "The Serial Spaces of Ana Mendieta" Art History, April 2007 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8365.2007.00532.x Best, Susan, "Ana Mendieta: Affect Miniatiarizatin, Emotional Ties and the Silueta Series," Visualizing Feeling: Affect and the Feminine Avant-Garde (London: I B Tauris, 2011) 92–115 ISBN 978-1-78076-709-3 Del Valle, Alejandro (2015).

"Primitivism in the Art of Ana Mendieta" . PhD. Universitat Pompeu Fabra . Retrieved July 8, 2017 .

Del Valle, Alejandro. "Ana Mendieta: Performance in the way of the primitive".

Arte, Individuo y Sociedad , 26 (1) 508–523 "Ana Mendieta: Earth Body, Sculpture and Performance 1972–1985." Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden. Traditional Fine Arts Organization, Inc.

Ana Mendieta: New Museum archive Van Langendonck, Katleen (2024), The Art of Performance: 25 conversations, Royal Academy of Fine Arts, ISBN 9789490521646 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Performance art .

Live Art Archives at the University of Bristol Theatre Collection Thomas Dreher : Intermedia Art: Performance Art (most articles in German) " Transgressive and Experimental Performances " in Kristen Hutchinson's Kiss & Tell: Lesbian Art & Activism , 2025. Toronto: Art Canada Institute.

v t e Performance art Work 7000 Oaks (1982) Amen or The Pederasty (2015) Bed-in (1969) Breathing in/breathing out (1977) Body Pressure (1974) Buried (2015) Ceci N'est Pas Un Viol (2015) Couple in The Cage: Two Undiscovered Amerindians Visit the West (1992–93) Cut Piece (1964) Eating (2012) Empathy and Prostitution (2013) Food for the Spirit (1971) How to Explain Pictures to a Dead Hare (1965) I'm too sad to tell you (1970–71) Luminosity (1997) Mattress Performance (Carry That Weight) (2014–2015) One & Other (2009) Rest Energy (1980) Rhythm 10 (1973) Rhythm 5 (1974) Rhythm 2 (1974) Rhythm 0 (1974) Seedbed (1972) Seven Easy Pieces (2005) Shot Marilyns (1964) The Artist Is Present (2010) The Death of The Artist (2018) The Fathers (2016) The Shadow (2014) The Shame (2018) Three Weeks in May (1977) Untitled (Rape Scene) (1973) Untitled [Senior Thesis], 2008 (2008) Artists Marina Abramović Vito Acconci Bas Jan Ader Laurie Anderson Ron Athey Abel Azcona Franko B Matthew Barney Rebecca Belmore Joseph Beuys David Blaine Mark Bloch Stuart Brisley Günter Brus Nancy Buchanan Chris Burden James Lee Byars Sophie Calle Papo Colo Valie Export Bob Flanagan Terry Fox Coco Fusco Guillermo Gómez-Peña Cai Guo-Qiang Ann Hamilton David Hammons Jo Hanson Newton Harrison Sharon Hayes Lynn Hershman Rebecca Horn Tehching Hsieh Zhang Huan Natalie Jeremijenko Joan Jonas Allan Kaprow Andy Kaufman Ragnar Kjartansson Yves Klein Terence Koh Paul Kos Yayoi Kusama Suzanne Lacy Phoebe Legere James Luna Miki Malör Eric Millikin Marta Minujín Kent Monkman Linda Montano Frank Moore Charlotte Moorman Bruce Nauman Shirin Neshat Pat Oleszko Pauline Oliveros Mihai Olos Yoko Ono Eiko Otaki Nam June Paik Gina Pane Mark Pauline Petr Pavlensky Dorothy Podber Jim Pomeroy Duke Riley Rachel Rosenthal Martha Rosler Carolee Schneemann Tino Sehgal Aliza Shvarts Barbara T. Smith Michael Smith Stelarc Melati Suryodarmo Mierle Laderman Ukeles Ulay Wolf Vostell Robert Whitman Hannah Wilke Groups Ant Farm Concept 21 COUM Transmissions Fallen Fruit General Idea LaBeouf, Rönkkö & Turner Los Angeles Urban Rangers Mavo The Yes Men Media Mondo New York (1988 film) Kusama: Infinity (2018 film) Other Body art Endurance art Feminist art Fluxus Happening Hunger artist monochrom Participatory art Performance art in China Survival Research Laboratories Viennese Actionism Process art v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐hz9sv
Cached time: 20250815063427
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.684 seconds
Real time usage: 3.022 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14762/1000000
Revision size: 153890/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 549452/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11029/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 941040/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.646/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9007508/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2479.802      1 -total
 60.61% 1502.957      1 Template:Reflist
 26.63%  660.310    105 Template:Cite_web
 13.61%  337.394     62 Template:Cite_news
 11.47%  284.324     43 Template:Cite_book
  5.29%  131.144     15 Template:Clarify
  4.99%  123.725      7 Template:Navbox
  4.81%  119.331     15 Template:Fix-span
  4.10%  101.739      1 Template:Sfn
  3.69%   91.482      1 Template:Performance_art Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:149281:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815063427 and revision id 1305980846. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Performance_art&oldid=1305980846 " Categories : Performance art 1969 neologisms Contemporary art movements Performing arts Theatre Culture jamming techniques Postmodern theatre The arts Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1: unfit URL Harv and Sfn no-target errors All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from December 2020 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: location missing publisher All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2020 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2020 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from October 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 06:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Performance art 55 languages Add topic

