Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 History 3 References Toggle the table of contents Petrographic microscope 18 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Slovenščina Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Optical microscope This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Petrographic microscope" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Plain light with the first filter (above), crossed-polarized light with both filters (below) in a volcanic lithic fragment (sand grain). Scale box in millimeters.

Leica DMRX incident light microscope with mechanical stage and Swift F automated point counter for analysis of organic composition of coal and rock samples Thin sections under a microscope.

Photomicrograph of a thin section of gabbro in cross-polarized light A petrographic microscope is a type of optical microscope used to identify rocks and minerals in thin sections . The microscope is used in optical mineralogy and petrography , a branch of petrology which focuses on detailed descriptions of rocks. The method includes aspects of polarized light microscopy (PLM).

Description [ edit ] Depending on the grade of observation required, petrographic microscopes are derived from conventional brightfield microscopes of similar basic capabilities by: Adding a Nicol prism polarizer filter to the light path beneath the sample slide Replacing the normal stage with a circular rotating stage (typically graduated with vernier scales for reading orientations to better than 1 degree of arc) Adding a second rotatable and removable Nicol prism filter, called the analyzer, to the light path between objective and eyepiece Adding a phase telescope , also known as a Bertrand lens, which allows the viewer to see conoscopic interference patterns Adding a slot for insertion of wave plates Petrographic microscopes are constructed with optical parts that do not add unwanted polarizing effects due to strained glass, or polarization by reflection in prisms and mirrors. These special parts add to the cost and complexity of the microscope. However, a "simple polarizing" microscope is easily made by adding inexpensive polarizing filters to a standard biological microscope, often with one in a filter holder beneath the condenser, and a second inserted beneath the head or eyepiece. These can be sufficient for many non-quantitative purposes.

The two Nicol prisms (occasionally referred to as nicols ) of the petrographic microscope have their polarizing planes oriented perpendicular to one another. When only an isotropic material such as air, water, or glass exists between the filters, all light is blocked, but most crystalline materials and minerals change the polarizing light directions, allowing some of the altered light to pass through the analyzer to the viewer. Using one polarizer makes it possible to view the slide in plane polarized light; using two allows for analysis under cross polarized light. A particular light pattern on the upper lens surface of the objectives is created as a conoscopic interference pattern (or interference figure) characteristic of uniaxial and biaxial minerals, and produced with convergent polarized light . To observe the interference figure, true petrographic microscopes usually include an accessory called a Bertrand lens, which focuses and enlarges the figure. It is also possible to remove an eyepiece lens to make a direct observation of the objective lens surface.

In addition to modifications of the microscope's optical system, petrographic microscopes allow for the insertion of specially-cut oriented filters of biaxial minerals (the quartz wedge, quarter-wave mica plate and half-wave mica plate ), into the optical train between the polarizers to identify positive and negative birefringence , and in extreme cases, the mineral order when needed.

History [ edit ] As early as 1808, the French physicist Étienne Louis Malus discovered the refraction and polarization of light.

William Nicol invented a prism for polarization in 1829, which was an indispensable part of the polarizing microscope for over 100 years. Later the Nicol prisms were replaced by cheaper polarizing filters .

The first complete polarizing microscope was built by Giovanni Battista Amici in 1830.

Rudolf Fuess built the first polarization microscope specifically for petrographic purposes in 1875. This was described by Harry Rosenbusch in the yearbook for mineralogy.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ "R. Fuess Berlin #131. The Rosenbusch model c.1878" .

www.antique-microscopes.com . Retrieved 2020-10-13 .

Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Petrographic_microscope&oldid=1305087660 " Categories : Microscopes Optical mineralogy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2010 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 00:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Petrographic microscope 18 languages Add topic

