Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Definition 3 Ranks 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Taxon 80 languages Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Кырык мары Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Malti Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Seeltersk Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Grouping of biological populations For the journal, see Taxon (journal) . For other uses, see Taxa (disambiguation) .

African elephants form the genus Loxodonta , a widely accepted taxon.

In biology , a taxon ( back-formation from taxonomy ; pl.

: taxa ) is a group of one or more populations of an organism or organisms seen by taxonomists to form a unit. Although neither is required, a taxon is usually known by a particular name and given a particular ranking , especially if and when it is accepted or becomes established. It is very common, however, for taxonomists to remain at odds over what belongs to a taxon and the criteria used for inclusion, especially in the context of rank-based (" Linnaean ") nomenclature (much less so under phylogenetic nomenclature ).

[ 1 ] If a taxon is given a formal scientific name , its use is then governed by one of the nomenclature codes specifying which scientific name is correct for a particular grouping.

Initial attempts at classifying and ordering organisms (plants and animals) were presumably set forth in prehistoric times by hunter-gatherers, as suggested by the fairly sophisticated folk taxonomies. Much later, Aristotle, and later still, European scientists, like Magnol , [ 2 ] Tournefort [ 3 ] and Carl Linnaeus 's system in Systema Naturae , 10th edition (1758), [ 4 ] , as well as an unpublished work by Bernard and Antoine Laurent de Jussieu , contributed to this field. The idea of a unit-based system of biological classification was first made widely available in 1805 in the introduction of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck 's Flore françoise , and Augustin Pyramus de Candolle 's Principes élémentaires de botanique . Lamarck set out a system for the "natural classification" of plants. Since then, systematists continue to construct accurate classifications encompassing the diversity of life; today, a "good" or "useful" taxon is commonly taken to be one that reflects evolutionary relationships .

[ note 1 ] Many modern systematists, such as advocates of phylogenetic nomenclature , use cladistic methods that require taxa to be monophyletic (all descendants of some ancestor). Therefore, their basic unit, the clade , is equivalent to the taxon, assuming that taxa should reflect evolutionary relationships. Similarly, among those contemporary taxonomists working with the traditional Linnean (binomial) nomenclature, few propose taxa they know to be paraphyletic .

[ 5 ] An example of a long-established taxon that is not also a clade is the class Reptilia , the reptiles; birds and mammals are the descendants of animals traditionally classed as reptiles, but neither is included in the Reptilia (birds are traditionally placed in the class Aves , and mammals in the class Mammalia ).

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] The term taxon was first used in 1926 by Adolf Meyer-Abich for animal groups, as a back-formation from the word taxonomy ; the word taxonomy had been coined a century before from the Greek components τάξις ( táxis ), meaning "arrangement", and νόμος ( nómos ), meaning " method ".

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] For plants, it was proposed by Herman Johannes Lam in 1948, and it was adopted at the VII International Botanical Congress , held in 1950.

[ 9 ] Definition [ edit ] The glossary of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (1999) defines [ 10 ] a "taxon, (pl. taxa), n.

A taxonomic unit, whether named or not: i.e. a population, or group of populations of organisms which are usually inferred to be phylogenetically related and which have characters in common which differentiate (q.v.) the unit (e.g. a geographic population, a genus, a family, an order) from other such units. A taxon encompasses all included taxa of lower rank (q.v.) and individual organisms. [...]" Ranks [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The hierarchy of biological classification 's eight major taxonomic ranks .  Intermediate minor rankings are not shown.

A taxon can be assigned a taxonomic rank , usually (but not necessarily) when it is given a formal name.

[ citation needed ] " Phylum " applies formally to any biological domain , but traditionally it was always used for animals, whereas "division" was traditionally often used for plants , fungi , etc.

[ citation needed ] A prefix is used to indicate a ranking of lesser importance. The prefix super- indicates a rank above, the prefix sub- indicates a rank below. In zoology , the prefix infra- indicates a rank below sub- . For instance, among the additional ranks of class are superclass, subclass and infraclass.

[ citation needed ] Rank is relative, and restricted to a particular systematic schema. For example, liverworts have been grouped, in various systems of classification, as a family, order, class, or division (phylum). The use of a narrow set of ranks is challenged by users of cladistics ; for example, the mere 10 ranks traditionally used between animal families (governed by the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN)) and animal phyla (usually the highest relevant rank in taxonomic work) often cannot adequately represent the evolutionary history as more about a lineage's phylogeny becomes known.

[ citation needed ] In addition, the class rank is quite often not an evolutionary but a phenetic or paraphyletic group and as opposed to those ranks governed by the ICZN (family-level, genus-level and species -level taxa), can usually not be made monophyletic by exchanging the taxa contained therein. This has given rise to phylogenetic taxonomy and the ongoing development of the PhyloCode , which has been proposed as a new alternative to replace Linnean classification and govern the application of names to clades . Many cladists do not see any need to depart from traditional nomenclature as governed by the ICZN, International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants , etc.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Biology portal ABCD Schema Alpha taxonomy Chresonym Cladistics Folk taxonomy Ichnotaxon International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants International Code of Nomenclature of Prokaryotes International Code of Phylogenetic Nomenclature International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN) List of taxa named by anagrams Rank (botany) Rank (zoology) Segregate (taxonomy) Virus classification Wastebasket taxon Notes [ edit ] ^ This is not considered as mandatory, however, as indicated by terms for non- monophyletic groupings ("invertebrates", "conifers", "fish", etc).

References [ edit ] ^ Cantino, Philip D.; de Queiroz, Kevin (2000).

International Code of Phylogenetic Nomenclature (PhyloCode): A Phylogenetic Code of Biological Nomenclature . Boca Raton, Fl: CRC Press. pp. xl + 149.

ISBN 0429821352 .

^ Magnol, Petrus (1689).

Prodromus historiae generalis plantarum in quo familiae plantarum per tabulas disponuntur (in Latin). Montpellier: Pech. p. 79.

^ Tournefort, Joseph Pitton de (1694).

Elemens de botanique, ou Methode pour connoître les plantes. I. [Texte.] / . Par Mr Pitton Tournefort... [T. I-III] . Paris: L’Imprimerie Royale. p. 562.

^ Quammen, David (June 2007).

"A Passion for Order" . National Geographic Magazine. Archived from the original on August 27, 2008 . Retrieved 27 April 2013 .

^ de Queiroz, K & J Gauthier (1990).

"Phylogeny as a Central Principle in Taxonomy: Phylogenetic Definitions of Taxon Names" (PDF) .

Systematic Zoology .

39 (4): 307– 322.

doi : 10.2307/2992353 .

JSTOR 2992353 .

^ Romer, A. S. (1970) [1949].

The Vertebrate Body (4th ed.). W.B. Saunders.

^ Sylvain Adnet; Brigitte Senut ; Thierry Tortosa; Romain Amiot, Julien Claude, Sébastien Clausen, Anne-Laure Decombeix, Vincent Fernandez, Grégoire Métais, Brigitte Meyer-Berthaud, Serge Muller (25 September 2013).

Principes de paléontologie . Dunod. p. 122.

ISBN 978-2-10-070313-5 .

La taxinomie s'enrichit avec l'invenition du mot «taxon» par Adolf Meyer-Abich, naturaliste allemand, dans sa Logik der morphologie, im Rahmen einer Logik der gesamten Biologie (1926) [Translation: Taxonomy is enriched by the invention of the word "taxon" by Adolf Meyer-Abich, German naturalist, in his Logik der morphologie, im Rahmen einer Logik der gesamten Biologie (1926).] {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Meyer-Abich, Adolf (1926).

Logik der Morphologie im Rahmen einer Logik der gesamten Biologie .

Springer-Verlag . p. 127.

ISBN 978-3-642-50733-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Naik, V. N. (1984).

Taxonomy of Angiosperms .

New Delhi : Tata McGraw Hill . p. 2.

^ ICZN (1999) International Code of Zoological Nomenclature. Glossary Archived 2005-01-03 at the Wayback Machine . International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature.

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of taxon at Wiktionary v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐6cj5j
Cached time: 20250814215254
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.533 seconds
Real time usage: 0.663 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2339/1000000
Revision size: 11525/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 76299/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3852/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 54880/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.352/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16621757/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  573.356      1 -total
 23.26%  133.352      3 Template:Reflist
 16.16%   92.650      7 Template:Cite_book
 15.09%   86.501      1 Template:Evolution
 14.66%   84.058      1 Template:Navbox
 14.57%   83.537      2 Template:Wikt-lang
 11.91%   68.284      5 Template:Citation_needed
  9.41%   53.940      5 Template:Fix
  9.38%   53.771      1 Template:Short_description
  7.59%   43.523      1 Template:Unreferenced_section Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:199556:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215254 and revision id 1279572815. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taxon&oldid=1279572815 " Categories : Organisms Taxa Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Zoological nomenclature Hidden categories: CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 This page was last edited on 9 March 2025, at 09:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Taxon 80 languages Add topic

