Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Relevant research 2 Response and criticism 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothesis about the evolution of human language The cognitive tradeoff hypothesis argues that in the cognitive evolution of humans , there was an evolutionary tradeoff between short-term working memory and complex language skills. Specifically, early hominids sacrificed the robust working memory seen in chimpanzees for more complex representations and hierarchical organization used in language. The theory was first brought forth by Japanese primatologist Tetsuro Matsuzawa , a former director of the Primate Research Institute of Kyoto University (KUPRI).

Matsuzawa suggests that at a certain point in evolution, because of limitations in brain capacity, the human brain may have acquired new functions in parallel with losing others – such as acquiring language while losing visuospatial temporal storage ability.

Relevant research [ edit ] Matsuzawa, whose research focuses on chimpanzee intelligence , suggests the tradeoff hypothesis as a possible explanation as to why chimpanzees have better memory than humans for immediately capturing and retaining visual stimuli in his paper "Symbolic representation of number in chimpanzees".

[ 1 ] The following rationalization is his attempt to explain the reasoning behind the hypothesis: "The common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees may have had the same kind of memory skill. However, in the course of human evolution, we lost the skill while we acquired other language‐related skills: representation, chunking, hierarchical organization, syntactic rules, etc. Brain volume capacity was limited at a certain point in evolution, so we had to lose some function to get a new function." [ 2 ] As a part of The Ai Project, [ 3 ] some chimpanzees at Matsuzawa's lab at KUPRI were trained to play a game that involved memorizing a series of numerals that flash on the screen for a brief period of time, as well as their respective positions. The study found that the chimpanzees completed the task with a higher level of accuracy and speed than did the human subjects, suggesting that their working memory capabilities are more powerful.

While the chimpanzees outperformed human adults in memorizing briefly presented numbers that appeared on the screen, [ 1 ] the researchers found that chimpanzees were less proficient at a variety of other cognitive tasks including imitation, cross-modal matching, symmetry of symbols and referents, and one-to-one correspondence. Matsuzawa came up with the cognitive tradeoff hypothesis to explain this difference in cognitive capabilities of human beings and chimpanzees, their closest living relatives.

Response and criticism [ edit ] In his paper, Matsuzawa claims that his tradeoff theory has support from a phylogenetic as well as ontogenetic perspective. In human beings, the youth often outperform adults on certain memory tasks. In the course of cognitive development, human children may acquire linguistic skills at the cost of losing a chimpanzee-like photographic memory.

Some critics have brought up research contradicting the ideas proposed by the cognitive tradeoff hypothesis: First, there is not necessarily a need to have lost certain functions to gain new facilities, as the human brain is about three times larger than the brain of the chimpanzee. Moreover, the cerebral cortex of the human brain – which plays a key role in memory, attention, awareness and thought – contains twice as many cells in humans as the same region in chimpanzees.

[ 4 ] Secondly, the recent evolution of chimpanzees and humans has been in completely different environments, with different survival needs. Therefore, the difference in working memory capabilities and other cognitive functions discussed by Matsuzawa might be adaptive rather than "tradeoffs".

Despite these criticisms, the results from a study by Sean Roberts at the Max Planck Institute revealed that, accounting for task training, chimpanzees do appear to have enhanced working memory abilities in various tasks. While chimps have been reported to perform correctly 80% of the time, with 8 numerals at 210ms, out of a large pool of human participants, the best human performer was only able to get 80% of his trials correct on only 6 numerals, at 210ms. The authors conclude, "this study found evidence that humans can perform better than suggested by Matsuzawa in the limited-hold memory task. However, human performance is still below that of chimpanzees. This difference appears to stem from an inability to keep the location of symbols in working memory" [ 5 ] In popular culture [ edit ] The cognitive tradeoff hypothesis is referenced by the song of the same name in the album Cave World by Viagra Boys .

See also [ edit ] Ai (chimpanzee) Ayumu Animal consciousness Neuropsychological Tests Primate Intelligence Working memory References [ edit ] ^ a b Matsuzawa, T. (2009).

Symbolic representation of number in chimpanzees . Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 19(1), pp. 92–98.

^ Matsuzawa, Tetsuro. (2007).

Comparative Cognitive Development . Developmental Science, 10(1), 97-103.} ^ Matsuzawa, T. (2003).

The Ai project: Historical and ecological contexts . Animal Cognition, 6(4), pp. 199–211.

^ Mora-Bermúdez, Felipe; Badsha, Farhath; Kanton, Sabina; Camp, J Gray; Vernot, Benjamin; Köhler, Kathrin; Voigt, Birger; Okita, Keisuke; Maricic, Tomislav (2016-09-26).

"Differences and similarities between human and chimpanzee neural progenitors during cerebral cortex development" .

eLife .

5 .

doi : 10.7554/elife.18683 .

ISSN 2050-084X .

PMC 5110243 .

PMID 27669147 .

^ Roberts, S. G., & Quillinan, J. (2014). The Chimp Challenge: Working memory in chimps and humans. In L. McCrohon, B. Thompson, T. Verhoef, & H. Yamauchi (Eds.), The Past, Present and Future of Language Evolution Research: Student volume of the 9th International Conference on the Evolution of Language (pp. 31-39). Tokyo: EvoLang9 Organising Committee.

External links [ edit ] Vsauce (5 December 2018).

"The Cognitive Tradeoff Hypothesis" .

YouTube . Retrieved 5 April 2019 .

Briggs, H. (2007, December 3). Science/Nature | Chimps beat humans in memory test . Retrieved April 5, 2019, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7124156.stm v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cognitive_tradeoff_hypothesis&oldid=1281199946 " Categories : Psychological theories Animal intelligence Cognitive science Biological evolution Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 22:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis 1 language Add topic

