Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Components 3 Outline Toggle Outline subsection 3.1 Header 3.2 Chief complaint (CC) 3.3 History of present illness (HPI) 3.4 Allergies 3.5 Past medical history (PMHx) 3.6 Past surgical history (PSurgHx, PSxHx) 3.7 Family history (FmHx) 3.8 Social history (SocHx) 3.9 Medications 3.10 Review of systems (ROS) 3.11 Physical exam 3.12 Labs 3.13 Diagnostics 3.14 Assessment and plan 4 References 5 See also Toggle the table of contents Admission note 3 languages العربية Deutsch Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An admission note is part of a medical record that documents the patient 's status (including history and physical examination findings ), reasons why the patient is being admitted for inpatient care to a hospital or other facility, and the initial instructions for that patient's care.

[ 1 ] Purpose [ edit ] Admission notes document the reasons why a patient is being admitted for inpatient care to a hospital or other facility, the patient's baseline status, and the initial instructions for that patient's care.  Health care professionals use them to record a patient's baseline status and may write additional on-service notes , progress notes ( SOAP notes ), preoperative notes , operative notes , postoperative notes , procedure notes , delivery notes , postpartum notes , and discharge notes . These notes constitute a large part of the medical record . Medical students often develop their clinical reasoning skills by writing admission notes. The traditional, rational definition of being admitted usually involves spending an overnight in the hospital. This definition is sometimes stretched in the U.S. medical billing industry , where hospital corporations may blur the definitions of "admission" and "observation" because of reimbursement rules under which healthcare payors pay less for the care if an "admission" was involved.

[ 2 ] Components [ edit ] An admission note may sometimes be incorrectly referred to as an HPI ( history of present illness ) or H and P (history and physical), which include only portions of an admission note.

An admission note can include the following sections: Section Example Comments chief complaint (CC) "abdominal pain" Can also include a more detailed line, such as "30 yo F c/o abdominal pain", though this can be redundant to the HPI. Some notes include a "reason for consultation", which is similar but may address a physical finding from a physician as opposed to a symptom from a patient.

history of present illness (HPI) "Pt is a 30 yo female (with a PMH of x and y) presenting with a 3 hour history of abdominal pain ..." Including a separate paragraph summarizing related history. May follow OPQRST or similar format. Components from review of systems may be moved here if they are seen as relevant to the chief complaint. May exclude first line if this information is included in CC section.

review of systems (ROS) "negative except as above" Brief or handwritten ROS sections are often very brief, while template-driven ROS sections from electronic medical records often explicitly enumerate each system reviewed.

allergies "NKDA" including drug allergies (including antigens and responses). "NKA" = "no known allergies". "NKDA" = "no known drug allergies". Some sources include both acronyms, [ 3 ] which reduces ambiguity between drug allergies and other allergies (such as food allergies or allergies to pets) medications "none" Includes both prescription and over-the-counter medications. May also include herbal medications or nutritional supplements. May include data on dosage and compliance.

past medical history (PMH) "none" Although remote childhood PMH is sometimes omitted, this information can sometimes be useful (for example, childhood asthma can be associated with adult atopic disorders.) past surgical history (PSH) "none" Admissions to a hospital not associated with a surgery are also sometimes included here, though admissions associated with childbirth are often described in a distinct section. For example, an "OB/GYN" section may be included, including language such as " G3P2 , menarche at age 14, LMP 2 weeks ago, regular".

family history (FH) "noncontributory" Including health of siblings, parents, spouse, and children, living and dead. Age of diagnosis may also be included (for example, in conditions such as colon cancer ). A phrase such as "no family h/o of heart or lung problems" may be used to specifically indicate that questions about a system were asked.

social history (SH) "Denies x3" Can be very detailed. Usually includes information about tobacco use, alcohol , and illegal or recreational drugs . Each of these may include quantities or frequencies, and responses to CAGE questions may be reported. May also include information about travel and occupation . May also include sexual history , though this may be split off in a separate section.

physical exam see Physical examination#Example see Physical examination#Example labs and diagnostics studies "none" May cover studies performed at an outside hospital, during prior admissions, or in the ER before the current admission.

assessment and plan (A&P) "Pt is a 30 yo female..." Assessment and plan are very closely related, and are often reported in a single section. May be begun with a paragraph that is similar to the first line of the HPI, but with a greater emphasis on clinical reasoning. A list of problems may be organized by priority or by organ system, with specific actions associated with each item on the problem list. Additional sections for "fluids, electrolytes, and nutrition" and "disposition" may be added near the end.

Outline [ edit ] Not every admission note explicitly discusses every item listed below, however, the ideal admission note would include: Header [ edit ] Patient identifying information (maybe located separately) name ID number chart number room number date of birth attending physician sex admission date Date Time Service Chief complaint (CC) [ edit ] Main article: Chief complaint Typically one sentence including age race sex presenting complaint example: "34 yo white male with right-sided weakness and slurred speech." History of present illness (HPI) [ edit ] Main article: History of the present illness statement of health status detailed description of chief complaint positive and negative symptoms related to the chief complaint based on the differential diagnosis the health care provider has developed.

emergency actions taken and patient responses if relevant Allergies [ edit ] Main article: Allergy first antigen and response second antigen and response etc.

Past medical history (PMHx) [ edit ] List of the patient's on-going medical problems. Chronic problems should be addressed as to whether or not they are well controlled or uncontrolled. Include dates of pertinent items.

Past surgical history (PSurgHx, PSxHx) [ edit ] List of surgeries in the past with dates of pertinent items.

Family history (FmHx) [ edit ] Main article: Family history (medicine) Health or cause of death for: Parents Siblings Children Spouse Social history (SocHx) [ edit ] Main article: Social history (medicine) In medicine, a social history is a portion of the admission note addressing familial, occupational, and recreational aspects of the patient's personal life that have the potential to be clinically significant.

Medications [ edit ] Main article: Pharmaceutical drug for each: generic name - amount - rate medications on arrival ( aspirin , Goody's medicated powder, herbal remedies , prescriptions , etc.) medications on transfer Review of systems (ROS) [ edit ] Main article: Review of systems General Head Eyes Ears Nose and sinuses Throat, mouth, and neck Breasts Cardiovascular system Respiratory system Gastrointestinal system Urinary system Genital system Vascular system Musculoskeletal system Nervous system Psychiatric Hematologic system Endocrine system Physical exam [ edit ] Main article: Physical examination Physical examination or clinical examination is the process by which a health care provider investigates the body of a patient for signs of disease .

Labs [ edit ] e.g.: electrolytes , arterial blood gases , liver function tests , etc.

Diagnostics [ edit ] e.g.: EKG , CXR , CT , MRI Assessment and plan [ edit ] Main article: Assessment and plan Assessment includes a discussion of the differential diagnosis and supporting history and exam findings.

References [ edit ] ^ "General Info" . Archived from the original on 12 March 2009 . Retrieved 3 April 2009 .

^ Hoholik, Suzanne (2011-02-14), "Fewer admissions: Hospital 'observation' status a matter of billing" , Columbus [Ohio, USA] Dispatch , archived from the original on 2013-01-22 , retrieved 2011-06-03 ^ Ellen Chiocca (1 March 2010).

Advanced Pediatric Assessment . Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. pp. 300–.

ISBN 978-0-7817-9165-6 . Retrieved 20 June 2011 .

See also [ edit ] Admitting privileges v t e Medical examination and history taking Medical history Chief complaint History of the present illness Systems review Nursing assessment Allergies Medications Past medical history Family history Social history Psychiatric history Progress notes Mnemonics SAMPLE OPQRST SOAP COASTMAP Physical examination General/ IPPA Inspection Auscultation Palpation Percussion Vital signs Temperature Heart rate Blood pressure Respiratory rate HEENT Eye examination Ophthalmoscopy Swinging light test Hearing Weber Rinne Respiratory Respiratory sounds Cardiovascular Cardiac examination Peripheral vascular examination Heart sounds Other Abdominojugular test Ankle–brachial pressure index Abdominal Liver span Rectal examination Bowel sounds Musculoskeletal Knee examination Hip examination Shoulder examination Elbow examination GALS screen Neurological Mental status Mini–mental state examination Cranial nerve examination Upper limb neurological examination Neonatal Apgar score Ballard Maturational Assessment Gynecological Well-woman examination Pap test Breast examination Sports Athletic heart syndrome Sudden cardiac death RED-S Assessment and plan Medical diagnosis Differential diagnosis v t e Telemedicine and telehealth Background concepts Health informatics In absentia health care Telecommunication Medical record Admission note Blue Button De-identification Electronic health record Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Personal health record Patient participation Decision aids Doctor–patient relationship E-patient Health 2.0 Health education Knowledge translation mHealth Participative decision-making in organizations Patient Activation Measure Shared decision-making Health information on the Internet Health information on Wikipedia Online patient education PubMed PubMed Central Telemedicine subspecialties eHealth Remote surgery Remote therapy Remote patient monitoring Tele-audiology Tele-epidemiology Teledentistry Teledermatology Telemental health Telenursing Teleophthalmology Telepathology Telepharmacy Telepsychiatry Teleradiology Telerehabilitation Roles to play Open-source healthcare software Patient opinion leader Research participant Virtual patient NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lnrdl
Cached time: 20250812042940
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.285 seconds
Real time usage: 0.354 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 783/1000000
Revision size: 10021/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 49585/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 92/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33580/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.190/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4340970/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  291.967      1 -total
 41.42%  120.946      1 Template:Reflist
 29.66%   86.610      1 Template:Cite_web
 27.23%   79.510      3 Template:Navbox
 25.54%   74.559      1 Template:Medical_records
 19.37%   56.544      1 Template:Globalize
 15.08%   44.020      1 Template:Ambox
 10.10%   29.494      9 Template:Main
  2.41%    7.048      1 Template:Telemedicine_navbox
  2.24%    6.531      1 Template:Citation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12237479:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812042940 and revision id 1287327111. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Admission_note&oldid=1287327111 " Category : Medical terminology Hidden category: Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2021 This page was last edited on 25 April 2025, at 14:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Admission note 3 languages Add topic

