Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Lincoln's election 2 Outbreak of the war Toggle Outbreak of the war subsection 2.1 Secession crisis 2.2 Battle of Fort Sumter 2.3 Attitude of the border states 3 War Toggle War subsection 3.1 Mobilization 3.2 Southern Unionists 3.3 Prisoners 3.4 Women 3.5 Union Navy 3.6 Union blockade 3.6.1 Blockade runners 3.6.2 Economic impact 3.7 Diplomacy 4 Eastern theater Toggle Eastern theater subsection 4.1 Background 4.1.1 Army of the Potomac 4.1.2 Army of Northern Virginia 4.2 Battles 5 Western theater Toggle Western theater subsection 5.1 Background 5.1.1 Army of the Cumberland and Army of the Tennessee 5.2 Battles 6 Trans-Mississippi theater Toggle Trans-Mississippi theater subsection 6.1 Background 6.2 Battles 7 Lower seaboard theater Toggle Lower seaboard theater subsection 7.1 Background 7.2 Battles 8 Pacific coast theater 9 Conquest of Virginia Toggle Conquest of Virginia subsection 9.1 Grant's Overland Campaign 9.2 Sheridan's Valley Campaign 9.3 Sherman's March to the Sea 9.4 The Waterloo of the Confederacy 10 End of the war 11 Union victory 12 Casualties 13 Emancipation Toggle Emancipation subsection 13.1 Emancipation Proclamation 14 Reconstruction 15 Memory and historiography Toggle Memory and historiography subsection 15.1 Lost Cause 15.1.1 The United Daughters of the Confederacy 15.2 Battlefield preservation 15.3 Commemoration 15.4 Technological significance 16 In works of culture and art Toggle In works of culture and art subsection 16.1 Literature 16.2 Film 16.3 Music 16.4 Video games 17 See also 18 Notes 19 References Toggle References subsection 19.1 Bibliography 19.1.1 Sources referenced 19.2 Web sources 19.3 Further reading 19.4 Soldier life: North and South 20 External links Toggle the table of contents American Civil War 149 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ अंगिका Ænglisc العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego گیلکی 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano ߒߞߏ Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sardu Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1861–1865 conflict in the United States American Civil War Battle of Gettysburg Battle of Franklin US Horse Artillery Brigade officers under Captain John Tidball Battle of Antietam A Harvest of Death Ironclad USS Atlanta Date April 12, 1861 – May 26, 1865 [ a ] [ b ] (4 years, 1 month and 2 weeks) Location United States , Atlantic Ocean Result Union victory Territorial changes Dissolution of the Confederate States of America Belligerents United States Confederate States Commanders and leaders Abraham Lincoln X Ulysses S. Grant and others...

Jefferson Davis Robert E. Lee and others...

Strength 698,000 at peak [ 1 ] 2,200,000 total [ 2 ] 360,000 at peak [ 2 ] [ 3 ] 750,000–1,000,000 total [ 4 ] Casualties and losses 110,000+ KIA or DOW 230,000+ died from accidents or disease [ 5 ] [ 6 ] 25,000–30,000 died in Confederate prisons [ 2 ] [ 5 ] 365,000+ total dead [ 7 ] 282,000+ wounded [ 6 ] 181,193 captured [ 8 ] [ c ] 828,000+ total casualties 94,000+ KIA or DOW [ 5 ] 164,000+ died from accidents or disease [ 2 ] 26,000–31,000 died in Union prisons [ 6 ] 290,000+ total dead 137,000+ wounded 436,658 captured [ 8 ] [ d ] 864,000+ total casualties 50,000 free civilians died [ 9 ] 60,000 documented slaves, "tens of thousands" of undocumented slaves died from disease [ 10 ] 616,222 [ 11 ] –1,000,000+ total dead [ 12 ] [ 13 ] v t e Theaters of the American Civil War Union blockade Eastern Western Lower seaboard Trans-Mississippi Pacific coast This article is part of a series on the History of the United States Timeline and periods Prehistoric and Pre-Columbian Era until 1607 Colonial Era 1607–1765 1776–1789 American Revolution 1765–1783 Confederation period 1783–1788 1789–1815 Federalist Era 1788–1801 Jeffersonian Era 1801–1817 1815–1849 Era of Good Feelings 1817–1825 Jacksonian Era 1825–1849 1849–1865 Civil War Era 1849–1865 Greater Reconstruction 1846–1898 1865–1917 Reconstruction Era 1865–1877 Gilded Age 1877–1896 Progressive Era 1896–1917 1917–1945 World War I 1917–1918 Roaring Twenties 1918–1929 Great Depression 1929–1941 World War II 1941–1945 1945–1964 Post-World War II Era 1945–1964 Civil Rights Era 1954–1968 1964–1980 Civil Rights Era 1954–1968 Vietnam War 1964–1975 1980–1991 Reagan Era 1981–1991 1991–2016 Post-Cold War Era 1991–present 2016–present 2016–present Topics American Century Antisemitism Civil unrest Racial violence Cultural Cinema Music Newspapers Sports Demography Immigration Economy Banking Education Higher education Flag Government Abortion Capital punishment Civil rights Corruption The Constitution Debt ceiling Direct democracy Foreign policy Law enforcement Postal service Taxation Voting rights Journalism Maritime Military Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard Party Systems First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Religion Social class Slavery Sexual slavery Technology and industry Agriculture Labor Lumber Medicine Railway Groups African Americans Asian Americans Chinese Americans Filipino Americans Indian Americans Japanese Americans Korean Americans Thai Americans Vietnamese Americans European Americans Albanian Americans English Americans Estonian Americans Finnish Americans German Americans Irish Americans Italian Americans Lithuanian Americans Polish Americans Serbian Americans Hispanic and Latino Americans Mexican Americans Jewish Americans Middle Eastern Americans Egyptian Americans Iranian Americans Iraqi Americans Lebanese Americans Palestinian Americans Saudi Americans Native Americans Cherokee Comanche Pacific Islander Americans Chamorros Hawaiians Women LGBTQ Gay men Lesbians Transgender people Places Territorial evolution Admission to the Union Historic regions American frontier Manifest destiny Indian removal Regions New England The South The West Coast States AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY Territories DC AS GU MP PR VI Cities Urban history Cities Outline List of years Historiography Category Portal v t e The American Civil War (April 12, 1861 – May 26, 1865; also known by other names ) was a civil war in the United States between the Union [ e ] ("the North") and the Confederacy ("the South"), which was formed in 1861 by states that had seceded from the Union. The central conflict leading to war was a dispute over whether slavery should be permitted to expand into the western territories, leading to more slave states , or be prohibited from doing so, which many believed would place slavery on a course of ultimate extinction.

[ 14 ] Decades of controversy over slavery came to a head when Abraham Lincoln , who opposed slavery's expansion, won the 1860 presidential election . Seven Southern slave states responded to Lincoln's victory by seceding from the United States and forming the Confederacy. The Confederacy seized US forts and other federal assets within its borders. The war began on April 12, 1861, when the Confederacy bombarded Fort Sumter in South Carolina . A wave of enthusiasm for war swept over the North and South, as military recruitment soared. Four more Southern states seceded after the war began and, led by its president, Jefferson Davis , the Confederacy asserted control over a third of the US population in eleven states. Four years of intense combat, mostly in the South, ensued.

During 1861–1862 in the Western theater , the Union made permanent gains—though in the Eastern theater the conflict was inconclusive. The abolition of slavery became a Union war goal on January 1, 1863, when Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation , which declared all slaves in rebel states to be free, applying to more than 3.5 million of the 4 million enslaved people in the country. To the west, the Union first destroyed the Confederacy's river navy by the summer of 1862, then much of its western armies, and seized New Orleans . The successful 1863 Union siege of Vicksburg split the Confederacy in two at the Mississippi River , while Confederate general Robert E. Lee 's incursion north failed at the Battle of Gettysburg . Western successes led to General Ulysses S. Grant 's command of all Union armies in 1864. Inflicting an ever-tightening naval blockade of Confederate ports, the Union marshaled resources and manpower to attack the Confederacy from all directions. This led to the fall of Atlanta in 1864 to Union general William Tecumseh Sherman , followed by his March to the Sea , which culminated in his taking Savannah . The last significant battles raged around the ten-month Siege of Petersburg , gateway to the Confederate capital of Richmond . The Confederates abandoned Richmond, and on April 9, 1865, Lee surrendered to Grant following the Battle of Appomattox Court House , setting in motion the end of the war .

[ f ] Lincoln lived to see this victory but was shot by an assassin on April 14, dying the next day.

By the end of the war, much of the South's infrastructure had been destroyed. The Confederacy collapsed, slavery was abolished, and four million enslaved black people were freed. The war-torn nation then entered the Reconstruction era in an attempt to rebuild the country, bring the former Confederate states back into the United States, and grant civil rights to freed slaves. The war is one of the most extensively studied and written about episodes in the history of the United States . It remains the subject of cultural and historiographical debate . Of continuing interest is the myth of the Lost Cause of the Confederacy . The war was among the first to use industrial warfare . Railroads, the electrical telegraph , steamships, the ironclad warship , and mass-produced weapons were widely used. The war left an estimated 698,000 soldiers dead, along with an undetermined number of civilian casualties, making the Civil War the deadliest military conflict in American history.

[ g ] The technology and brutality of the Civil War foreshadowed the coming world wars .

Origins Main article: Origins of the American Civil War Further information: Timeline of events leading to the American Civil War , Slave states and free states , Slavery in the United States , and Abolitionism in the United States The origins of the war were rooted in the desire of the Southern states to preserve the institution of slavery .

[ 15 ] Historians in the 21st century overwhelmingly agree on the centrality of slavery in the conflict—at least for the Southern states. They disagree on which aspects (ideological, economic, political, or social) were most important, and on the North 's reasons for refusing to allow the Southern states to secede.

[ 16 ] The pseudo-historical Lost Cause ideology denies that slavery was the principal cause of the secession, a view disproven by historical evidence, notably some of the seceding states' own secession documents .

[ 17 ] After leaving the Union, Mississippi issued a declaration stating, "Our position is thoroughly identified with the institution of slavery—the greatest material interest of the world." [ 18 ] [ 19 ] The principal political battle leading to Southern secession was over whether slavery would expand into the Western territories destined to become states. Initially Congress had admitted new states into the Union in pairs, one slave and one free . This had kept a sectional balance in the Senate but not in the House of Representatives , as free states outstripped slave states in numbers of eligible voters.

[ 20 ] Thus, at mid-19th century, the free-versus-slave status of the new territories was a critical issue, both for the North, where anti-slavery sentiment had grown, and for the South, where the fear of slavery's abolition had grown. Another factor leading to secession and the formation of the Confederacy was the development of white Southern nationalism in the preceding decades.

[ 21 ] The primary reason for the North to reject secession was to preserve the Union, a cause based on American nationalism .

[ 22 ] Background factors in the run up to the Civil War were partisan politics , abolitionism , nullification versus secession , Southern and Northern nationalism, expansionism , economics , and modernization in the antebellum period . As a panel of historians emphasized in 2011, "while slavery and its various and multifaceted discontents were the primary cause of disunion, it was disunion itself that sparked the war." [ 23 ] Lincoln's election Main article: 1860 United States presidential election Portrait of Abraham Lincoln , an 1860 photograph portrait of Abraham Lincoln by Mathew Brady Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 presidential election .

[ 24 ] Southern leaders feared Lincoln would stop slavery's expansion and put it on a course toward extinction.

[ 25 ] His victory triggered declarations of secession by seven slave states of the Deep South , all of whose riverfront or coastal economies were based on cotton that was cultivated by slave labor.

Lincoln was not inaugurated until March 4, 1861, four months after his 1860 election, which afforded the South time to prepare for war.

[ 26 ] Nationalists in the North and "Unionists" in the South refused to accept the declarations of secession, and no foreign government ever recognized the Confederacy . The US government , under President James Buchanan , refused to relinquish the nation's forts, which the Confederacy claimed were located in their territory.

According to Lincoln, the American people had demonstrated, beginning with their victory in the American Revolution and Revolutionary War and subsequent establishment of a sovereign nation, that they could successfully establish and administer a republic. Yet, Lincoln believed, a question remained unanswered: Could the nation be maintained as a republic, where its government was selected based on the people's vote, given ongoing internal attempts to destroy or separate from such a system.

[ 27 ] Outbreak of the war Secession crisis Main article: Ordinance of Secession Status of the states, 1861 Slave states that seceded before April 15, 1861 Slave states that seceded after April 15, 1861 Border Southern states that permitted slavery but did not secede (both KY and MO had dual competing Confederate and Unionist governments) Union states that banned slavery Territories Lincoln's election provoked South Carolina 's legislature to call a state convention to consider secession. South Carolina had done more than any other state to advance the notion that a state had the right to nullify federal laws and even secede. On December 20, 1860, the convention unanimously voted to secede and adopted a secession declaration . It argued for states' rights for slave owners but complained about states' rights in the North in the form of resistance to the federal Fugitive Slave Act, claiming that Northern states were not fulfilling their obligations to assist in the return of fugitive slaves. The "cotton states" of Mississippi , Florida , Alabama , Georgia , Louisiana , and Texas followed suit, seceding in January and February 1861.

[ 26 ] Division of the states during the American Civil War: Union Confederacy Border states Territories Among the ordinances of secession, those of Texas, Alabama, and Virginia mentioned the plight of the "slaveholding states" at the hands of Northern abolitionists. The rest made no mention of slavery but were brief announcements by the legislatures of the dissolution of ties to the Union.

[ 28 ] However, at least four—South Carolina, [ 29 ] Mississippi, [ 30 ] Georgia, [ 31 ] and Texas [ 32 ] —provided detailed reasons for their secession, all blaming the movement to abolish slavery and its influence over the North. Southern states believed that the Fugitive Slave Clause made slaveholding a constitutional right. These states agreed to form a new federal government, the Confederate States of America , on February 4, 1861.

[ 33 ] They took control of federal forts and other properties within their boundaries, with little resistance from outgoing president James Buchanan , whose term ended on March 4. Buchanan said the Dred Scott decision was proof the Southern states had no reason to secede and that the Union "was intended to be perpetual". He added, however, that "The power by force of arms to compel a State to remain in the Union" was not among the "enumerated powers granted to Congress".

[ 34 ] A quarter of the US army—the Texas garrison—was surrendered in February to state forces by its general, David E. Twiggs , who joined the Confederacy.

[ 35 ] As Southerners resigned their Senate and House seats, Republicans could pass projects that had been blocked. These included the Morrill Tariff , land grant colleges, a Homestead Act , a transcontinental railroad, [ 36 ] the National Bank Act , authorization of United States Notes by the Legal Tender Act of 1862 , the end of slavery in the District of Columbia , and a ban on slavery in the territories.

[ 37 ] The Revenue Act of 1861 introduced income tax to help finance the war.

[ 38 ] Jefferson Davis , President of the Confederate States of America (1861–1865) In December 1860, the Crittenden Compromise was proposed to re-establish the Missouri Compromise line, by constitutionally banning slavery in territories to the north of it, while permitting it to the south. The Compromise would likely have prevented secession, but Lincoln and the Republicans rejected it.

[ 39 ] Lincoln stated that any compromise that would extend slavery would bring down the Union.

[ 40 ] A February peace conference met in Washington, proposing a solution similar to the Compromise; it was rejected by Congress. The Republicans proposed the Corwin Amendment , an alternative, not to interfere with slavery where it existed, but the South regarded it as insufficient. The remaining eight slave states rejected pleas to join the Confederacy, following a no-vote in Virginia's First Secessionist Convention on April 4.

[ 41 ] On March 4, Lincoln was sworn in as president. In his inaugural address , he argued that the Constitution was a more perfect union than the earlier Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union , was a binding contract, and that secession was "legally void".

[ 42 ] He did not intend to invade Southern states, nor to end slavery where it existed, but he said he would use force to maintain possession of federal property, [ 42 ] including forts, arsenals, mints, and customhouses that had been seized.

[ 43 ] "The mails, unless repelled, will continue to be furnished in all parts of the Union." Where conditions did not allow peaceful enforcement of federal law, US marshals and judges would be withdrawn. No mention was made of bullion lost from mints. He stated that it would be US policy "to collect the duties and imposts"; "there will be no invasion, no using of force against or among the people anywhere" that would justify an armed revolution. His speech closed with a plea for restoration of the bonds of union, famously calling on "the mystic chords of memory" binding the two regions.

[ 42 ] The Davis government of the new Confederacy sent delegates to Washington to negotiate a peace treaty. Lincoln rejected negotiations, because he claimed that the Confederacy was not a legitimate government and to make a treaty with it would recognize it as such.

[ 44 ] Lincoln instead attempted to negotiate directly with the governors of seceded states, whose administrations he continued to recognize.

[ 45 ] Complicating Lincoln's attempts to defuse the crisis was Secretary of State William H. Seward , who had been Lincoln's rival for the Republican nomination . Embittered by his defeat, Seward agreed to support Lincoln's candidacy only after he was guaranteed the executive office then considered the second most powerful. In the early stages of Lincoln's presidency Seward held little regard for him, due to his perceived inexperience. Seward viewed himself as the de facto head of government, the " prime minister " behind the throne. Seward attempted to engage in unauthorized and indirect negotiations that failed.

[ 44 ] Lincoln was determined to hold all remaining Union-occupied forts in the seceded states: Fort Pickens , Fort Jefferson , and Fort Taylor in Florida, and Fort Sumter in South Carolina.

[ 46 ] Battle of Fort Sumter Main article: Battle of Fort Sumter See also: Proclamation 80 The Battle of Fort Sumter, as depicted by Currier and Ives The American Civil War began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces opened fire on the Union-held Fort Sumter. Fort Sumter is located in the harbor of Charleston , South Carolina.

[ 47 ] Its status had been contentious for months. Outgoing president Buchanan had dithered in reinforcing its garrison, commanded by Major Robert Anderson . Anderson took matters into his own hands and on December 26, 1860, under the cover of darkness, sailed the garrison from the poorly placed Fort Moultrie to the stalwart island Fort Sumter.

[ 48 ] Anderson's actions catapulted him to hero status in the North. An attempt to resupply the fort on January 9, 1861, failed and nearly started the war then, but an informal truce held.

[ 49 ] On March 5, Lincoln was informed the fort was low on supplies.

[ 50 ] Fort Sumter proved a key challenge to Lincoln's administration.

[ 50 ] Back-channel dealing by Seward with the Confederates undermined Lincoln's decision-making; Seward wanted to pull out.

[ 51 ] But a firm hand by Lincoln tamed Seward, who was a staunch Lincoln ally. Lincoln decided holding the fort, which would require reinforcing it, was the only workable option. On April 6, Lincoln informed the Governor of South Carolina that a ship with food but no ammunition would attempt to supply the fort. Historian McPherson describes this win-win approach as "the first sign of the mastery that would mark Lincoln's presidency"; the Union would win if it could resupply and hold the fort, and the South would be the aggressor if it opened fire on an unarmed ship supplying starving men.

[ 52 ] An April 9 Confederate cabinet meeting resulted in Davis ordering General P. G. T. Beauregard to take the fort before supplies reached it.

[ 53 ] At 4:30 a.m. on April 12, Confederate forces fired the first of 4,000 shells at the fort; it fell the next day. The loss of Fort Sumter lit a patriotic fire under the North.

[ 54 ] On April 15, Lincoln called on the states to field 75,000 militiamen for 90 days; impassioned Union states met the quotas quickly.

[ 55 ] On May 3, 1861, Lincoln called for an additional 42,000 volunteers for three years.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Shortly after this, Virginia , Tennessee , Arkansas , and North Carolina seceded and joined the Confederacy. To reward Virginia, the Confederate capital was moved to Richmond .

[ 58 ] Attitude of the border states Main article: Border states (American Civil War) US secession map, showing the Union and the Confederacy Union states Union territories not permitting slavery Southern Border Union states, permitting slavery (One of these states, West Virginia , was created in 1863, while KY, WV and MO had dual competing Confederate and Unionist governments) Confederate states Union territories that permitted slavery (claimed by Confederacy) at the start of the war, but where slavery was outlawed by the US in 1862 Maryland , Delaware , Missouri , West Virginia and Kentucky were slave states whose people had divided loyalties to Northern and Southern businesses and family members. Some men enlisted in the Union Army and others in the Confederate Army.

[ 59 ] West Virginia separated from Virginia and was admitted to the Union on June 20, 1863, though half its counties were secessionist.

[ 60 ] Maryland's territory surrounded Washington, D.C.

, and could cut it off from the North.

[ 61 ] It had anti-Lincoln officials who tolerated anti-army rioting in Baltimore and the burning of bridges, both aimed at hindering the passage of troops to the South. Maryland's legislature voted overwhelmingly to stay in the Union, but rejected hostilities with its southern neighbors, voting to close Maryland's rail lines to prevent their use for war.

[ 62 ] Lincoln responded by establishing martial law and unilaterally suspending habeas corpus in Maryland, along with sending in militia units.

[ 63 ] Lincoln took control of Maryland and the District of Columbia by seizing prominent figures, including arresting one-third of the members of the Maryland General Assembly on the day it reconvened.

[ 62 ] [ 64 ] All were held without trial, with Lincoln ignoring a ruling on June 1, 1861, by Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger Taney , not speaking for the Court, [ h ] that only Congress could suspend habeas corpus ( Ex parte Merryman ). Federal troops imprisoned a Baltimore newspaper editor, Frank Key Howard , after he criticized Lincoln in an editorial for ignoring Taney's ruling.

[ 67 ] In Missouri, an elected convention on secession voted to remain in the Union. When pro-Confederate Governor Claiborne Fox Jackson called out the state militia, it was attacked by federal forces under General Nathaniel Lyon , who chased the governor and rest of the State Guard to the southwestern corner of Missouri (see Missouri secession ). Early in the war the Confederacy controlled southern Missouri through the Confederate government of Missouri but was driven out after 1862. In the resulting vacuum, the convention on secession reconvened and took power as the Unionist provisional government of Missouri.

[ 68 ] Kentucky did not secede, it declared itself neutral. When Confederate forces entered in September 1861, neutrality ended and the state reaffirmed its Union status while maintaining slavery. During an invasion by Confederate forces in 1861, Confederate sympathizers and delegates from 68 Kentucky counties organized the secession Russellville Convention, formed the shadow Confederate Government of Kentucky , inaugurated a governor, and Kentucky was admitted into the Confederacy on December 10, 1861. Its jurisdiction extended only as far as Confederate battle lines in the Commonwealth, which at its greatest extent was over half the state, and it went into exile after October 1862.

[ 69 ] After Virginia's secession, a Unionist government in Wheeling asked 48 counties to vote on an ordinance to create a new state in October 1861. A voter turnout of 34% approved the statehood bill (96% approving).

[ 70 ] Twenty-four secessionist counties were included in the new state, [ 71 ] and the ensuing guerrilla war engaged about 40,000 federal troops for much of the war.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Congress admitted West Virginia to the Union on June 20, 1863. West Virginians provided about 20,000 soldiers to each side in the war.

[ 74 ] A Unionist secession attempt occurred in East Tennessee , but was suppressed by the Confederacy, which arrested over 3,000 men suspected of loyalty to the Union; they were held without trial.

[ 75 ] War See also: List of American Civil War battles and Military leadership in the American Civil War The Civil War was marked by intense and frequent battles. Over four years, 237 named battles were fought, along with many smaller actions, often characterized by their bitter intensity and high casualties. Historian John Keegan described it as "one of the most ferocious wars ever fought", where in many cases the only target was the enemy's soldiers.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Mobilization See also: Economic history of the American Civil War Rioters attacking a building during the New York anti-draft riots of 1863 As the Confederate states organized, the US Army numbered 16,000, while Northern governors began mobilizing their militias.

[ 78 ] The Confederate Congress authorized up to 100,000 troops in February. By May, Jefferson Davis was pushing for another 100,000 soldiers for one year or the duration, and the US Congress responded in kind.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] In the first year of the war, both sides had more volunteers than they could effectively train and equip. After the initial enthusiasm faded, relying on young men who came of age each year was not enough. Both sides enacted draft laws (conscription) to encourage or force volunteering, though relatively few were drafted. The Confederacy passed a draft law in April 1862 for men aged 18–35, with exemptions for overseers, government officials, and clergymen. The US Congress followed in July, authorizing a militia draft within states that could not meet their quota with volunteers. European immigrants joined the Union Army in large numbers, including 177,000 born in Germany and 144,000 in Ireland.

[ 81 ] About 50,000 Canadians served, around 2,500 of whom were black.

[ 82 ] When the Emancipation Proclamation went into effect in January 1863, ex-slaves were energetically recruited to meet state quotas. States and local communities offered higher cash bonuses for white volunteers. Congress tightened the draft law in March 1863. Men selected in the draft could provide substitutes or, until mid-1864, pay commutation money. Many eligibles pooled their money to cover the cost of anyone drafted. Families used the substitute provision to select which man should go into the army and which should stay home. There was much evasion and resistance to the draft, especially in Catholic areas. The New York City draft riots in July 1863 involved Irish immigrants who had been signed up as citizens to swell the vote of the city's Democratic political machine , not realizing it made them liable for the draft.

[ 83 ] Of the 168,649 men procured for the Union through the draft, 117,986 were substitutes, leaving only 50,663 who were conscripted.

[ 84 ] In the North and South, draft laws were highly unpopular. In the North, some 120,000 men evaded conscription, many fleeing to Canada, and another 280,000 soldiers deserted during the war.

[ 85 ] At least 100,000 Southerners deserted, about 10 percent of the total. Southern desertion was high because many soldiers were more concerned about the fate of their local area than the Southern cause.

[ 86 ] In the North, " bounty jumpers " enlisted to collect the generous bonus, deserted, then re-enlisted under a different name for a second bonus; 141 were caught and executed.

[ 87 ] From a tiny frontier force in 1860, the Union and Confederate armies grew into the "largest and most efficient armies in the world" within a few years. Some European observers at the time dismissed them as amateur and unprofessional, [ 88 ] but historian John Keegan concluded that each outmatched the French, Prussian, and Russian armies, and without the Atlantic, could have threatened any of them with defeat.

[ 89 ] Southern Unionists Main article: Southern Unionist Newton Knight (Mississippi), leader of the Knight Company and one of the founders of the Free State of Jones Unionism was strong in certain areas within the Confederacy. As many as 100,000 men living in states under Confederate control served in the Union Army or pro-Union guerrilla groups. Although they came from all classes, most Southern Unionists differed socially, culturally, and economically from their region's dominant prewar, slave-owning planter class.

[ 90 ] Prisoners Main article: American Civil War prison camps A Union soldier held as a POW in Georgia At the war's start, a parole system operated, under which captives agreed not to fight until exchanged. They were held in camps run by their army, paid, but not allowed to perform any military duties.

[ 91 ] The system of exchanges collapsed in 1863 when the Confederacy refused to exchange black prisoners. After that, about 56,000 of the 409,000 POWs died in prisons, accounting for 10 percent of the conflict's fatalities.

[ 92 ] Women See also: Women in the military § United States , and Gender issues in the American Civil War Historian Elizabeth D. Leonard writes that between 500 and 1,000 women enlisted as soldiers on both sides, disguised as men.

[ 93 ] Women also served as spies, resistance activists, nurses, and hospital personnel.

[ 94 ] Women served on the Union hospital ship Red Rover and nursed Union and Confederate troops at field hospitals.

[ 95 ] Mary Edwards Walker , the only woman ever to receive the Medal of Honor , served in the Union Army and was given the medal for treating the wounded during the war.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] One woman, Jennie Hodgers, fought for the Union under the name Albert D. J. Cashier. After she returned to civilian life, she continued to live as a man until she died in 1915 at the age of 71.

[ 98 ] Union Navy Further information: Union Navy Battle between the USS Monitor and Merrimack The Union Navy in 1861 was relatively small but, by 1865, expanded rapidly to 6,000 officers, 45,000 sailors, and 671 vessels totaling 510,396 tons.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Its mission was to blockade Confederate ports, control the river system, defend against Confederate raiders on the high seas, and be ready for a possible war with the British Royal Navy .

[ 101 ] The main riverine war was fought in the West, where major rivers gave access to the Confederate heartland. The US Navy eventually controlled the Red, Tennessee, Cumberland, Mississippi, and Ohio rivers. In the East, the Navy shelled Confederate forts and supported coastal army operations.

[ 102 ] The Civil War occurred during the early stages of the industrial revolution , leading to naval innovations, including the ironclad warship . The Confederacy, recognizing the need to counter the Union's naval superiority, built or converted over 130 vessels, including 26 ironclads.

[ 103 ] Despite these efforts, Confederate ships were largely unsuccessful against Union ironclads.

[ 104 ] The Union Navy used timberclads, tinclads, and armored gunboats. Shipyards in Cairo, Illinois , and St. Louis built or modified steamboats .

[ 105 ] The Confederacy experimented with the submarine CSS Hunley , which proved unsuccessful, and with the ironclad CSS Virginia , rebuilt from the sunken Union ship Merrimack .

[ 106 ] On March 8, 1862, Virginia inflicted significant damage on the Union's wooden fleet, but the next day, the first Union ironclad, USS Monitor , arrived to challenge it in the Chesapeake Bay . The resulting three-hour Battle of Hampton Roads was a draw, proving ironclads were effective warships.

[ 107 ] The Confederacy scuttled the Virginia to prevent its capture, while the Union built many copies of the Monitor . The Confederacy's efforts to obtain warships from Great Britain failed, as Britain had no interest in selling warships to a nation at war with a stronger enemy and feared souring relations with the US.

[ 108 ] Union blockade Main article: Union blockade General Scott's Anaconda Plan , featuring a tightening naval blockade, forcing rebels out of Missouri along the Mississippi River, Kentucky Unionists sit on the fence, idled cotton industry illustrated in Georgia.

By early 1861, General Winfield Scott had devised the Anaconda Plan to win the war with minimal bloodshed, calling for a blockade of the Confederacy to suffocate the South into surrender.

[ 109 ] Lincoln adopted parts of the plan but opted for a more active war strategy.

[ 110 ] In April 1861, Lincoln announced a blockade of all Southern ports; commercial ships could not get insurance, ending regular traffic. The South blundered by embargoing cotton exports before the blockade was fully effective; by the time they reversed this decision, it was too late. " King Cotton " was dead, as the South could export less than 10% of its cotton. The blockade shut down the ten Confederate seaports with railheads that moved almost all the cotton. By June 1861, warships were stationed off the principal Southern ports, and a year later nearly 300 ships were in service.

[ 111 ] Blockade runners Main article: Blockade runners of the American Civil War Gunline of nine Union ironclads.

South Atlantic Blockading Squadron off Charleston. Continuous blockade of all major ports was sustained by North's overwhelming war production.

The Confederates began the war short on military supplies, which the agrarian South could not produce. Northern arms manufacturers were restricted by an embargo, ending existing and future contracts with the South. The Confederacy turned to foreign sources, connecting with financiers and companies like S. Isaac, Campbell & Company and the London Armoury Company in Britain, becoming the Confederacy's main source of arms.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] To transport arms safely to the Confederacy, British investors built small, fast, steam-driven blockade runners that traded arms and supplies from Britain, through Bermuda, Cuba, and the Bahamas in exchange for high-priced cotton. Many were lightweight and designed for speed, only carrying small amounts of cotton back to England.

[ 114 ] When the Union Navy seized a blockade runner, the ship and cargo were condemned as a prize of war and sold, with proceeds given to the Navy sailors; the captured crewmen, mostly British, were released.

[ 115 ] Economic impact The Southern economy nearly collapsed during the war due to multiple factors, the most notable being severe food shortages, failing railroads, loss of control over key rivers, foraging by Northern armies, and the seizure of animals and crops by Confederate forces.

[ 116 ] Historians agree the blockade was a major factor in ruining the Confederate economy; however, Wise argues blockade runners provided enough of a lifeline to allow Robert E. Lee , a Confederate general, to continue fighting for additional months, as a result of supplies that included 400,000 rifles, lead, blankets, and boots that Confederate economy could no longer supply.

[ 116 ] The Confederate cotton crop became nearly useless, which cut off the Confederacy's primary income source. Critical imports were scarce, and coastal trade also largely ended.

[ 117 ] The blockade's success was not measured by the few ships, which slipped through, but by the thousands that never tried. European merchant ships could not obtain insurance for their ships and transport, and were too slow to evade the blockade, leading them to cease docking in Confederate ports.

[ 118 ] To fight an offensive war, the Confederacy purchased arms in Britain and converted British-built ships into commerce raiders , which targeted United States Merchant Marine ships in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The Confederacy smuggled 600,000 arms, enabling it to continue fighting for two more years.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] As insurance rates soared, American-flagged ships largely ceased traveling in international waters, though some were reflagged with European flags, which allowed them to continue operating.

[ 104 ] After the conclusion of the Civil War, the US government demanded Britain reimburse it for the damage caused by blockade runners and raiders outfitted in British ports. Britain paid the US $15 million in 1871, which covered costs associated with commerce raiding but nothing more.

[ 121 ] Diplomacy Main article: Diplomacy of the American Civil War Further information: United Kingdom and the American Civil War and France and the American Civil War A December 1861 cartoon in Punch magazine in London ridicules American aggressiveness in the Trent Affair .

John Bull , at right, warns Uncle Sam , "You do what's right, my son, or I'll blow you out of the water." Although the Confederacy hoped Britain and France would join them against the Union, this was never likely, so they sought to bring them in as mediators.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] The Union worked to block this and threatened war against any country that recognized the Confederacy. In 1861, Southerners voluntarily embargoed cotton shipments, hoping to start an economic depression in Europe that would force Britain to enter the war, but this failed. Worse, Europe turned to Egypt and India for cotton, which they found superior, hindering the South's postwar recovery.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Cotton diplomacy proved a failure, because Europe had a surplus of cotton, while the 1860–62 crop failures in Europe made the North's grain exports critically important. It also helped turn European opinion against the Confederacy. It was said that "King Corn was more powerful than King Cotton", as US grain increased from a quarter to almost half of British imports.

[ 124 ] Meanwhile, the war created jobs for arms makers, ironworkers, and ships to transport weapons.

[ 125 ] Lincoln's administration initially struggled to appeal to European public opinion. At first, diplomats explained that the US was not committed to ending slavery and emphasized legal arguments about the unconstitutionality of secession. Confederate representatives, however, focused on their struggle for liberty, commitment to free trade, and the essential role of cotton in the European economy.

[ 126 ] The European aristocracy was "absolutely gleeful in pronouncing the American debacle as proof that the entire experiment in popular government had failed. European government leaders welcomed the fragmentation of the ascendant American Republic." [ 127 ] However, a European public with liberal sensibilities remained, which the US sought to appeal to by building connections with the international press. By 1861, Union diplomats like Carl Schurz realized emphasizing the war against slavery was the Union's most effective moral asset in swaying European public opinion. Seward was concerned an overly radical case for reunification would distress European merchants with cotton interests; even so, he supported a widespread campaign of public diplomacy.

[ 128 ] US minister to Britain Charles Francis Adams proved adept and convinced Britain not to challenge the Union blockade. The Confederacy purchased warships from commercial shipbuilders in Britain, with the most famous being the CSS Alabama , which caused considerable damage and led to serious postwar disputes . However, public opinion against slavery in Britain created a political liability for politicians, where the anti-slavery movement was powerful.

[ 129 ] War loomed in late 1861 between the US and Britain over the Trent Affair , which began when US Navy personnel boarded the British ship Trent and seized two Confederate diplomats. However, London and Washington smoothed this over after Lincoln released the two men.

[ 130 ] Prince Albert left his deathbed to issue diplomatic instructions to Lord Lyons during the Trent Affair. His request was honored, and, as a result, the British response to the US was toned down, helping avert war.

[ 131 ] In 1862, the British government considered mediating between the Union and Confederacy, though such an offer would have risked war with the US British prime minister Lord Palmerston reportedly read Uncle Tom's Cabin three times when deciding what his decision would be.

[ 130 ] The Union victory at the Battle of Antietam caused the British to delay this decision. The Emancipation Proclamation increased the political liability of supporting the Confederacy. Realizing that Washington could not intervene in Mexico as long as the Confederacy controlled Texas, France invaded Mexico in 1861 and installed the Habsburg Austrian archduke Maximilian I as emperor.

[ 132 ] Washington repeatedly protested France's violation of the Monroe Doctrine . Despite sympathy for the Confederacy, France's seizure of Mexico ultimately deterred it from war with the Union. Confederate offers late in the war to end slavery in return for diplomatic recognition were not seriously considered by London or Paris. After 1863, the Polish revolt against Russia further distracted the European powers and ensured they remained neutral.

[ 133 ] Russia supported the Union, largely because it believed the US counterbalanced its geopolitical rival, the UK. In 1863, the Imperial Russian Navy 's Baltic and Pacific fleets wintered in the American ports of New York and San Francisco, respectively.

[ 134 ] Eastern theater Further information: Eastern theater of the American Civil War County map of Civil War battles by theater and year The Eastern theater refers to the military operations east of the Appalachian Mountains , including Virginia, West Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylvania , the District of Columbia , and the coastal fortifications and seaports of North Carolina .

[ 135 ] Background Army of the Potomac Maj. Gen.

George B. McClellan took command of the Union Army of the Potomac on July 26, 1861, and the war began in earnest in 1862. The 1862 Union strategy called for simultaneous advances along four axes: [ 136 ] McClellan would lead the main thrust in Virginia towards Richmond.

Ohio forces would advance through Kentucky into Tennessee.

The Missouri Department would drive south along the Mississippi River.

The westernmost attack would originate from Kansas.

Army of Northern Virginia Robert E. Lee The primary Confederate force in the Eastern theater was the Army of Northern Virginia . The Army originated as the (Confederate) Army of the Potomac , which was organized on June 20, 1861, from all operational forces in Northern Virginia. On July 20 and 21, the Army of the Shenandoah and forces from the District of Harpers Ferry were added. Units from the Army of the Northwest were merged into the Army of the Potomac between March 14 and May 17, 1862. The Army of the Potomac was renamed Army of Northern Virginia on March 14. The Army of the Peninsula was merged into it on April 12, 1862.

When Virginia declared its secession in April 1861, Robert E. Lee chose to follow his home state, despite his desire for the country to remain intact and an offer of a senior Union command. In his four-volume biography of Lee published in 1934 and 1935, historian Douglas S. Freeman wrote that the army received its final name from Lee when he issued orders assuming command on June 1, 1862.

[ 137 ] However, Freeman wrote, Lee corresponded with Brigadier General Joseph E. Johnston , his predecessor in army command, before that date and referred to Johnston's command as the Army of Northern Virginia. Part of the confusion results from the fact that Johnston commanded the Department of Northern Virginia as of October 22, 1861, and the name Army of Northern Virginia was seen as an informal consequence of its parent department's name. Jefferson Davis and Johnston did not adopt the name, but the organization of units as of March 14 was clearly the same organization that Lee received on June 1, and is generally referred to as the Army of Northern Virginia, even if that is correct only in retrospect.

On July 4 at Harper's Ferry, Colonel Thomas J. Jackson assigned Jeb Stuart command of all cavalry companies of the Army of the Shenandoah, and Jackson eventually commanded the Army of Northern Virginia's cavalry.

Battles A portrait depicting the Battle of Antietam , which resulted in over 22,000 casualties, the Civil War's deadliest one-day battle Called the "Philippi Races" because of its brevity, Philippi, VA (now Philippi, WV ) was the scene of the first organized land action of the American Civil War, on June 3, 1861. In July 1861, in the first in a series of prominent battles in the war, Union Army troops commanded by Maj. Gen.

Irvin McDowell attacked Confederate forces, which were under the command of Beauregard near the national capital in Washington . The Confederacy successfully repelled the attack in the First Battle of Bull Run . In the beginning of the Civil War, the Union appeared to hold the upper hand. The Union Army routed Confederate forces, then holding defensive positions, but Confederate reinforcements under Joseph E. Johnston arrived from the Shenandoah Valley by railroad, and the battle's course quickly changed. A brigade of Virginians , commanded by Thomas J. Jackson , then a relatively unknown brigadier general from Virginia Military Institute , stood its ground, leading to Jackson earning the nickname "Stonewall". Lincoln urged the Union Army to commence offensive operations against Confederate forces , which led General George B. McClellan , in the spring of 1862, to attack Virginia by way of the peninsula between the York River and James River southeast of Richmond . McClellan's army reached the gates of Richmond in the Peninsula campaign .

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] Also in the spring of 1862, in Shenandoah Valley , Jackson led his Valley Campaign , during which he employed rapid and unpredictable movements on interior lines. Jackson's 17,000 troops marched 646 miles (1,040 km) in 48 days, during which they won minor battles as they successfully engaged three Union armies, comprising 52,000 men, including those of Nathaniel P. Banks and John C. Frémont , preventing them from reinforcing the Union offensive against Richmond. The swiftness of Jackson's troops earned them the nickname foot cavalry . Johnston halted McClellan's advance at the Battle of Seven Pines , but he was wounded in the battle, and Robert E. Lee assumed his position of command. Lee and his senior subordinates, James Longstreet and Stonewall Jackson, defeated McClellan in the Seven Days Battles , forcing McClellan's retreat.

[ 141 ] Union soldiers in the trenches, just prior to the Second Battle of Fredericksburg in May 1863 During the Northern Virginia Campaign , which included the Second Battle of Bull Run , Confederate forces registered another important military victory.

[ 142 ] McClellan resisted General-in-Chief Halleck's orders to send reinforcements to John Pope's Union Army of Virginia , which enabled Lee's Confederate forces to defeat twice the number of combined enemy troops.

[ 143 ] Emboldened by Second Bull Run, Confederate forces launched their first invasion of the North in the Maryland Campaign during which Lee led 45,000 Army of Northern Virginia troops across the Potomac River into Maryland on September 5. Lincoln then restored Pope's troops to McClellan, and McClellan and Lee clashed in the Battle of Antietam near Sharpsburg, Maryland , on September 17, 1862, which proved the bloodiest single day in both the Civil War and US military history.

[ 141 ] [ 144 ] Lee's army retreated to Virginia before McClellan could destroy it, leading the Battle of Antietam to be widely viewed as a Union victory since it halted Lee's invasion of the North and provided an opportunity for Lincoln to issue the Emancipation Proclamation , which he issued as an executive order on January 1, 1863.

[ 145 ] McClellan failed to respond in any measurable way to Lee's attempt to invade the North at Antietam led to his replacement by Maj. Gen.

Ambrose Burnside . Burnside led Union Army troops in the Battle of Fredericksburg , [ 146 ] where they were defeated on December 13, 1862. Over 12,000 Union soldiers were killed or wounded during futile attempts by Union troops to launch frontal assaults against Marye's Heights.

[ 147 ] After the battle, Burnside was replaced by Maj. Gen.

Joseph Hooker .

[ 148 ] A portrait depicting Pickett's Charge on July 3, 1863, the final day of the Battle of Gettysburg , which proved the Civil War's deadliest battle but also one of its most significant, altering the course of the war in the Union's favor Hooker, too, proved unable to defeat Lee's army; despite having more than twice as many troops as Lee, Hooker's proved Chancellorsville Campaign ultimately proved ineffective, and he was soundly defeated in the Battle of Chancellorsville , which was fought between April 30 and May 6, 1863.

[ 149 ] Chancellorsville is known as Lee's "perfect battle" because his risky decision to divide his army paid off. During the Battle of Chancellorsville, Stonewall Jackson was shot in his left arm and right hand by friendly fire, leading to the amputation of his arm, and he died of pneumonia .

[ 150 ] Lee famously said: "He has lost his left arm, but I have lost my right arm." [ 151 ] The fiercest fighting of the battle—and the second bloodiest day of the Civil War—occurred on May 3 as Lee launched multiple attacks against the Union position at Chancellorsville. That same day, John Sedgwick advanced across the Rappahannock River , defeated the small Confederate force at Marye's Heights in the Second Battle of Fredericksburg , and then moved to the west. Confederate forces succeeded in militarily delaying Union forces in the Battle of Salem Church .

[ 152 ] Hooker was replaced by Maj. Gen.

George Meade during Lee's second invasion of the North , in June. In the Battle of Gettysburg , which proved the war's bloodiest and one of its most strategically significant, Meade defeated Lee in a three-day battle between July 1 and 3, 1863.

[ 153 ] The Battle of Gettysburg caused over 50,000 Union and Confederate casualties, but also proved the war's turning point , altering the course of the war in the Union's favor.

Pickett's Charge , launched July 3, on the final day of the Battle of Gettysburg, is considered the high-water mark of the Confederacy , representing the collapse of any credible prospect that the Confederacy could prevail in the war. At Gettysburg, Lee's Army of Northern Virginia suffered 28,000 casualties versus Meade's 23,000, and Lee was repelled in a failed attempt to invade and occupy Union territory.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] Western theater Further information: Western theater of the American Civil War The Western theater refers to military operations between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River, including Alabama , Georgia , Florida , Mississippi , North Carolina, Kentucky, South Carolina , Tennessee , and parts of Louisiana .

[ 156 ] Background Army of the Cumberland and Army of the Tennessee Main articles: Army of the Cumberland and Army of the Tennessee Ulysses S. Grant , a Union army general who was later elected the nation's 18th president The primary Union forces in this theater were the Army of the Tennessee and Army of the Cumberland , named for the two rivers, Tennessee River and Cumberland River . After Meade's inconclusive fall campaign, Lincoln turned to the Western theater for new leadership. At the same time, the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg surrendered, giving the Union control of the Mississippi River, permanently isolating the western Confederacy, and producing the new leader Lincoln needed, Ulysses S. Grant .

[ 157 ] The Army of Tennessee, which served as the primary Confederate force in the Western theater, was formed on November 20, 1862, when General Braxton Bragg renamed the former Army of Mississippi . While Confederate forces had successes in the Eastern theater, they were defeated many times in the West.

[ 156 ] Battles The Union's key strategist and tactician in the West was Ulysses S. Grant , who led the Union to victories in battles at Fort Henry (February 6, 1862) and Fort Donelson (February 11 to 16, 1862), earning him the nickname of "Unconditional Surrender" Grant. With these victories, the Union gained control of the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers .

[ 158 ] Nathan Bedford Forrest rallied nearly 4,000 Confederate troops and led them to escape across the Cumberland River .

Nashville and central Tennessee fell to the Union, leading to attrition of local food supplies and livestock and a breakdown in social organization.

[ citation needed ] Confederate general Leonidas Polk 's subsequently invaded Columbus, Kentucky , which ended Kentucky's policy of neutrality and turned it against the Confederacy. Grant used river transport and Andrew Hull Foote 's gunboats of the Western Flotilla, threatening the Confederacy's "Gibraltar of the West" in Columbus, Kentucky. Although rebuffed at Belmont, Grant cut off Columbus. Confederate forces, lacking their gunboats, were forced to retreat and the Union took control of west Kentucky and opened Tennessee in March 1862.

[ 159 ] At the Battle of Shiloh , in Shiloh, Tennessee , in April 1862, Confederates forces launched surprise attack on Union forces, pushing them back to river as night fell. Over that night, however, the Navy landed reinforcements, and Grant counterattacked. Grant and the Union ultimately won a decisive victory in the first battle with a high number of casualties in what proved to be the first in a series of such battles.

[ 160 ] Confederate forces lost Albert Sidney Johnston , considered their finest general, before Lee emerged to assume command.

[ 161 ] The Battle of Chickamauga , the war's highest two-day loss battle One of the early Union objectives was to capture the Mississippi River , which would permit it to cut the Confederacy in half. The Mississippi was opened to Union traffic to the southern border of Tennessee after it took Island No. 10 , New Madrid, Missouri , and then Memphis, Tennessee .

[ 162 ] In April 1862, the Union Navy captured New Orleans .

[ 162 ] "The key to the river was New Orleans, the South's largest port [and] greatest industrial center." [ 163 ] US naval forces under Farragut ran past Confederate defenses south of New Orleans . Confederate forces abandoned the city, giving the Union a critical anchor in the deep South, [ 164 ] which allowed Union forces to move up the Mississippi.

Memphis fell to Union forces on June 6, 1862, allowing it to serve as a key base for further Union advances south along the Mississippi. On the Mississippi River, the Union took every fortress city with the exception of Vicksburg, Mississippi . But Confederate control of Vicksburg was sufficient in preventing the Union from controlling the entire river.

[ 165 ] Bragg's second invasion of Kentucky in the Confederate Heartland Offensive included initial successes, including Kirby Smith 's triumph in the Battle of Richmond and the capture of the Kentucky capital of Frankfort, Kentucky , on September 3, 1862.

[ 166 ] The campaign ended with a meaningless victory over Maj. Gen.

Don Carlos Buell at the Battle of Perryville , and Bragg was forced to end his attempt to invade and control Kentucky. Lacking logistical support and infantry recruits, Bragg was instead forced to retreat, [ 167 ] and ended up being narrowly defeated by Maj. Gen.

William Rosecrans in the Battle of Stones River in Tennessee in what proved to be the culmination of the Stones River Campaign .

[ 168 ] US naval forces assisted Grant in the long, complex Vicksburg Campaign , which resulted in Confederate forces surrendering in the Battle of Vicksburg in July 1863, which cemented Union control of the Mississippi River in one of the war's turning points.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] The one clear Confederate victory in the West was the Battle of Chickamauga . After Rosecrans' successful Tullahoma Campaign , Bragg, reinforced by Lt. Gen.

James Longstreet's corps , defeated Rosecrans, despite the defensive stand of Maj. Gen.

George Henry Thomas .

[ citation needed ] Rosecrans retreated to Chattanooga, Tennessee , where Bragg was then besieged in the Chattanooga Campaign . Grant marched to the relief of Rosecrans, where he led the defeat of Bragg in the Third Battle of Chattanooga, [ 171 ] eventually causing Longstreet to abandon his Knoxville Campaign and driving Confederate forces out of Tennessee and opening a route to Atlanta and the heart of the Confederacy.

[ 172 ] Trans-Mississippi theater Further information: Trans-Mississippi theater of the American Civil War Background The Trans-Mississippi theater refers to military operations west of the Mississippi, encompassing most of Missouri, Arkansas , most of Louisiana, and the Indian Territory in present-day Oklahoma . The Trans-Mississippi District was formed by the Confederate States Army to better coordinate Ben McCulloch 's command of troops in Arkansas and Louisiana, Sterling Price 's Missouri State Guard , as well as the portion of Earl Van Dorn 's command that included the Indian Territory and excluded the Army of the West. The Union's command was the Trans-Mississippi Division, or the Military Division of West Mississippi .

[ 173 ] Battles Nathaniel Lyon secured docks and arsenal in St. Louis , leading Union Army forces to expel the Missouri Confederate forces and government.

[ 174 ] The first battle of the Trans-Mississippi theater was the Battle of Wilson's Creek (August 1861). The Confederates were driven from Missouri early in the war as a result of the Battle of Pea Ridge .

[ 175 ] Extensive guerrilla warfare characterized the trans-Mississippi region, as the Confederacy lacked the troops and logistics to support regular armies that could challenge Union control.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] Roving Confederate bands such as Quantrill's Raiders terrorized the countryside, striking military installations and civilian settlements.

[ 178 ] The "Sons of Liberty" and "Order of the American Knights" attacked pro-Union people, elected officeholders, and unarmed uniformed soldiers. These partisans could not be driven out of Missouri, until an entire regular Union infantry division was engaged. By 1864, these violent activities harmed the nationwide antiwar movement organizing against the re-election of Lincoln. Missouri not only stayed in the Union, but Lincoln took 70 percent of the vote to win re-election.

[ 179 ] Small-scale military actions south and west of Missouri sought to control Indian Territory and New Mexico Territory for the Union. The Battle of Glorieta Pass was the decisive battle of the New Mexico Campaign . The Union repulsed Confederate incursions into New Mexico in 1862, and the exiled Arizona government withdrew into Texas. In the Indian Territory, civil war broke out within tribes. About 12,000 Indian warriors fought for the Confederacy but fewer for the Union.

[ 180 ] The most prominent Cherokee was Brigadier General Stand Watie , the last Confederate general to surrender.

[ 181 ] After the fall of Vicksburg in July 1863, Jefferson Davis informed General Kirby Smith in Texas that he could expect no further help from east of the Mississippi. Although he lacked resources to beat Union armies, he built up a formidable arsenal at Tyler, along with his own Kirby Smithdom economy, a virtual "independent fiefdom" in Texas, including railroad construction and international smuggling. The Union, in turn, did not directly engage him.

[ 182 ] Its 1864 Red River Campaign to take Shreveport, Louisiana, failed and Texas remained in Confederate hands throughout the war.

[ 183 ] Lower seaboard theater Further information: Lower seaboard theater of the American Civil War Background The lower seaboard theater refers to military and naval operations that occurred near the coastal areas of the Southeast as well as the southern part of the Mississippi. Union naval activities were dictated by the Anaconda Plan.

[ 184 ] Battles New Orleans captured One of the earliest battles was fought in November 1861 at Port Royal Sound , south of Charleston. Much of the war along the South Carolina coast concentrated on capturing Charleston. In attempting to capture Charleston, the Union military tried two approaches: by land over James or Morris Islands or through the harbor. However, the Confederates were able to drive back each attack. A famous land attack was the Second Battle of Fort Wagner , in which the 54th Massachusetts Infantry took part. The Union suffered a serious defeat, losing 1,515 soldiers while the Confederates lost only 174. However, the 54th was hailed for its valor, which encouraged the general acceptance of the recruitment of African American soldiers into the Union Army, which reinforced the Union's numerical advantage.

[ 185 ] Fort Pulaski on the Georgia coast was an early target for the Union navy. Following the capture of Port Royal, an expedition was organized with engineer troops under the command of Captain Quincy Adams Gillmore , forcing a Confederate surrender. The Union army occupied the fort for the rest of the war after repairing it.

[ 186 ] In April 1862, a Union naval task force commanded by Commander David Dixon Porter attacked Forts Jackson and St. Philip , which guarded the river approach to New Orleans from the south. While part of the fleet bombarded the forts, other vessels forced a break in the obstructions in the river and enabled the rest of the fleet to steam upriver to the city. A Union army force commanded by Maj. Gen.

Benjamin Butler landed near the forts and forced their surrender. Butler's controversial command of New Orleans earned him the nickname "Beast".

[ 187 ] The following year, the Union Army of the Gulf commanded by Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks laid siege to Port Hudson for nearly eight weeks, the longest siege in US military history. The Confederates attempted to defend with the Bayou Teche Campaign but surrendered after Vicksburg. These surrenders gave the Union control over the Mississippi.

[ 157 ] Several small skirmishes but no major battles were fought in Florida. The biggest was the Battle of Olustee in early 1864.

[ citation needed ] Pacific coast theater Further information: Pacific coast theater of the American Civil War The Pacific coast theater refers to military operations on the Pacific Ocean and in the states and territories west of the Continental Divide .

[ 188 ] Conquest of Virginia William Tecumseh Sherman At the beginning of 1864, Lincoln made Grant commander of all Union armies. Grant made his headquarters with the Army of the Potomac and put Maj. Gen.

William Tecumseh Sherman in command of most of the western armies. Grant understood the concept of total war and believed, along with Lincoln and Sherman, that only the utter defeat of Confederate forces and their economic base would end the war.

[ 189 ] This was total war not in killing civilians, but in injuring the Confederacy's capacity to produce and transport the supplies needed to continue the war. Sherman, at Grant's direction, seized provisions and destroyed homes, farms, and railroads, which Grant said "would otherwise have gone to the support of secession and rebellion. This policy I believe exercised a material influence in hastening the end." [ 190 ] Grant devised a coordinated strategy that would strike at the entire Confederacy from multiple directions. Generals Meade and Benjamin Butler were ordered to move against Lee near Richmond, General Franz Sigel was to attack the Shenandoah Valley , General Sherman was to capture Atlanta and march to the Atlantic Ocean, Generals George Crook and William W. Averell were to operate against railroad supply lines in West Virginia, and Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks was to capture Mobile , Alabama.

[ 191 ] Grant's Overland Campaign Grant's army set out on the Overland Campaign intending to draw Lee into a defense of Richmond, where they would attempt to pin down and destroy the Confederate army. The Union army first attempted to maneuver past Lee and fought several battles, notably at the Wilderness , Spotsylvania , and Cold Harbor . These resulted in heavy losses on both sides and forced Lee's Confederates to fall back repeatedly.

[ 192 ] At the Battle of Yellow Tavern , the Confederates lost Jeb Stuart.

[ 193 ] An attempt to outflank Lee from the south failed under Butler, who was trapped inside the Bermuda Hundred river bend. Each battle resulted in setbacks for the Union that mirrored those they had suffered under prior generals, though unlike them, Grant chose to fight on rather than retreat. Grant was tenacious and kept pressing Lee's Army of Northern Virginia back to Richmond. While Lee was preparing for an attack on Richmond, Grant unexpectedly turned south to cross the James River and began the protracted Siege of Petersburg , where the two armies engaged in trench warfare for over nine months.

[ 194 ] Sheridan's Valley Campaign Philip Sheridan To deny the Confederacy continued use of the Shenandoah Valley as a base from which to launch invasions of Maryland and the Washington area, and to threaten Lee's supply lines for his forces, Grant launched the Valley campaigns in the spring of 1864. Initial efforts led by Gen. Sigel were repelled at the Battle of New Market by Confederate Gen.

John C. Breckinridge . The Battle of New Market was the Confederacy's last major victory, and included a charge by teenage VMI cadets. After relieving Sigel, and following mixed performances by his successor, Grant finally found a commander, General Philip Sheridan , aggressive enough to prevail against the army of Maj. Gen.

Jubal A. Early . After a cautious start, Sheridan defeated Early in a series of battles in September and October 1864, including a decisive defeat at the Battle of Cedar Creek . Sheridan then proceeded through that winter to destroy the agricultural base of the Shenandoah Valley, a strategy similar to the tactics Sherman later employed in Georgia.

[ 195 ] Sherman's March to the Sea Meanwhile, Sherman maneuvered from Chattanooga to Atlanta, defeating Confederate Generals Joseph E. Johnston and John Bell Hood . The fall of Atlanta on September 2, 1864, guaranteed the reelection of Lincoln.

[ 196 ] Hood left the Atlanta area to swing around and menace Sherman's supply lines and invade Tennessee in the Franklin–Nashville Campaign . Union Maj. Gen.

John Schofield defeated Hood at the Battle of Franklin , and George H. Thomas dealt Hood a massive defeat at the Battle of Nashville , effectively destroying Hood's army.

[ 197 ] Leaving Atlanta, and his base of supplies, Sherman's army marched, with no destination set, laying waste to about 20% of the farms in Georgia in his " March to the Sea ". He reached the Atlantic at Savannah , Georgia, in December 1864. Sherman's army was followed by thousands of freed slaves; there were no major battles along the march. Sherman turned north through South Carolina and North Carolina, to approach the Confederate Virginia lines from the south, increasing the pressure on Lee's army.

[ 198 ] The Waterloo of the Confederacy Lee's army, thinned by desertion and casualties, was now much smaller than Grant's. One last Confederate attempt to break the Union hold on Petersburg failed at the decisive Battle of Five Forks on April 1. The Union now controlled the entire perimeter surrounding Richmond–Petersburg, completely cutting it off from the Confederacy. Realizing the capital was now lost, Lee's army and the Confederate government were forced to evacuate. The Confederate capital fell on April 2–3, to the Union XXV Corps , composed of black troops. The remaining Confederate units fled west after a defeat at Sayler's Creek on April 6.

[ 199 ] End of the war Main article: Conclusion of the American Civil War This New York Times front page celebrated Lee's surrender, headlining how Grant let Confederate officers retain their sidearms and "paroled" the Confederate officers and men.

[ 200 ] News of Lee's April 9 surrender reached this southern newspaper (Savannah, Georgia) on April 15—after the April 14 shooting of President Lincoln. The article quotes Grant's terms of surrender.

[ 201 ] Lee did not intend to surrender, but planned to regroup at Appomattox Station , where supplies were to be waiting, and then continue the war. Grant chased Lee and got in front of him, so that when Lee's army reached the village of Appomattox Court House , they were surrounded. After an initial battle , Lee decided the fight was hopeless, and surrendered his Army of Northern Virginia to Grant on April 9, 1865, during a conference at the McLean House .

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] In an untraditional gesture and as a sign of Grant's respect and anticipation of peacefully restoring Confederate states to the Union, Lee was permitted to keep his sword and horse, Traveller . His men were paroled , and a chain of Confederate surrenders began.

[ 204 ] On April 14, 1865, Lincoln was shot by John Wilkes Booth , a Confederate sympathizer. Lincoln died early the next morning. Lincoln's vice president, Andrew Johnson , was unharmed, because his would-be assassin, George Atzerodt , lost his nerve, so Johnson was immediately sworn in as president.

Meanwhile, Confederate forces across the South surrendered, as news of Lee's surrender reached them.

[ i ] On April 26, the same day Sergeant Boston Corbett killed Booth at a tobacco barn, Johnston surrendered nearly 90,000 troops of the Army of Tennessee to Sherman at Bennett Place , near present-day Durham, North Carolina. It proved to be the largest surrender of Confederate forces. On May 4, all remaining Confederate forces in Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana east of the Mississippi, under the command of Lt. General Richard Taylor , surrendered.

[ 205 ] Confederate president Davis was captured in retreat at Irwinville, Georgia on May 10.

[ 206 ] The final land battle was fought on May 13, 1865, at the Battle of Palmito Ranch in Texas.

[ 207 ] [ 208 ] [ 209 ] On May 26, 1865, Confederate Lt. Gen.

Simon B. Buckner , acting for Edmund Smith, signed a military convention surrendering Confederate forces in the Trans-Mississippi Department .

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] This date is often cited by contemporaries and historians as the effective end date of the war.

[ a ] [ b ] On June 2, with most of his troops having already gone home, a reluctant Kirby Smith had little choice but to sign the official surrender document.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] On June 23, Cherokee leader and Brig. General Stand Watie became the last Confederate general to surrender his forces.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] On June 19, 1865, Union Maj. Gen.

Gordon Granger announced General Order No. 3 , bringing the Emancipation Proclamation into effect in Texas and freeing the last slaves of the Confederacy.

[ 216 ] The anniversary of this date is now celebrated as Juneteenth .

[ 217 ] The naval part of the war ended more slowly. It had begun on April 11, two days after Lee's surrender, when Lincoln proclaimed that foreign nations had no further "claim or pretense" to deny equality of maritime rights and hospitalities to US warships and, in effect, that rights extended to Confederate ships to use neutral ports as safe havens from US warships should end.

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] Having no response to Lincoln's proclamation, President Johnson issued a similar proclamation dated May 10, more directly stating that the war was almost at an end and insurgent cruisers still at sea, and prepared to attack US ships, should not have rights to do so through use of safe foreign ports or waters.

[ 220 ] Britain finally responded on June 6, by transmitting a letter from Foreign Secretary John Russell, 1st Earl Russell , to the Lords of the Admiralty withdrawing rights to Confederate warships to enter British ports and waters.

[ 221 ] US Secretary of State Seward welcomed the withdrawal of concessions to the Confederates.

[ 222 ] Finally, on October 18, Russell advised the Admiralty that the time specified in his June message had elapsed and "all measures of a restrictive nature on vessels of war of the United States in British ports, harbors, and waters, are now to be considered as at an end".

[ 223 ] Nonetheless, the final Confederate surrender was in Liverpool, England where James Iredell Waddell , the captain of CSS Shenandoah , surrendered the cruiser to British authorities on November 6.

[ 224 ] Legally, the war did not end until August 20, 1866, when President Johnson issued a proclamation that declared "that the said insurrection is at an end and that peace, order, tranquillity, and civil authority now exist in and throughout the whole of the United States of America".

[ j ] Union victory Map of Confederate territory losses year by year The causes of the war , reasons for its outcome, and even its name are subjects of lingering contention. The North and West grew wealthy while the once-rich South became poor for a century. The national political power of the slaveowners and rich Southerners ended. Historians are less sure about the results of postwar Reconstruction, especially regarding the second-class citizenship of the freedmen and their poverty.

[ 225 ] Historians have debated whether the Confederacy could have won the war. Most scholars, including James M. McPherson , argue Confederate victory was possible.

[ 226 ] McPherson argues that the North's advantage in population and resources made Northern victory likely, but not guaranteed. He argues that if the Confederacy had fought using unconventional tactics, it would have more easily been able to hold out long enough to exhaust the Union.

[ 227 ] Confederates did not need to invade and hold enemy territory to win, but only to fight a defensive war to convince the North the cost of winning was too high. The North needed to conquer and hold vast stretches of enemy territory and defeat Confederate armies to win.

[ 227 ] Lincoln was not a military dictator and could fight only as long as the American public supported the war. The Confederacy sought to win independence by outlasting Lincoln; however, after Atlanta fell and Lincoln defeated McClellan in the election of 1864, hope for a political victory for the South ended. Lincoln had secured the support of the Republicans, War Democrats, border states, emancipated slaves, and the neutrality of Britain and France. By defeating the Democrats and McClellan, he defeated the Copperheads , who had wanted a negotiated peace with the Confederacy.

[ 228 ] Comparison of Union and Confederacy, 1860–1864 [ 229 ] [ 230 ] Year Union Confederacy Population 1860 22,100,000 (71%) 9,100,000 (29%) 1864 28,800,000 (90%) [ k ] 3,000,000 (10%) [ 231 ] Free 1860 21,700,000 (98%) 5,600,000 (62%) Slave 1860 490,000 (2%) 3,550,000 (38%) 1864 negligible 1,900,000 [ l ] Soldiers 1860–64 2,100,000 (67%) 1,064,000 (33%) Railroad miles [ 232 ] 1860 21,800 (71%) 8,800 (29%) 1864 29,100 (98%) [ m ] negligible Manufactures 1860 90% 10% 1864 98% 2% Arms production 1860 97% 3% 1864 98% 2% Cotton bales 1860 negligible 4,500,000 1864 300,000 negligible Exports 1860 30% 70% 1864 98% 2% Some scholars argue the Union held an insurmountable long-term advantage over the Confederacy in industrial strength and population. Confederate actions, they argue, only delayed defeat.

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] Historian Shelby Foote expressed this view succinctly: I think that the North fought that war with one hand behind its back.... If there had been more Southern victories, and a lot more, the North simply would have brought that other hand out from behind its back. I don't think the South ever had a chance to win that War.

[ 236 ] A minority view among historians is that the Confederacy lost because, as E. Merton Coulter put it, "people did not will hard enough and long enough to win".

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] However, most historians reject the argument.

[ 239 ] McPherson, after reading thousands of letters written by Confederate soldiers, found strong patriotism that continued to the end; they truly believed they were fighting for freedom and liberty. Even as the Confederacy was visibly collapsing in 1864–65, most Confederate soldiers were fighting hard.

[ 240 ] Historian Gary Gallagher cites General Sherman, who in early 1864 commented, "The devils seem to have a determination that cannot but be admired." Despite their loss of slaves and wealth, with starvation looming, Sherman continued, "yet I see no sign of let-up—some few deserters—plenty tired of war, but the masses determined to fight it out".

[ 241 ] Also important were Lincoln's eloquence in articulating the national purpose and his skill in keeping the border states committed to the Union cause. The Emancipation Proclamation was an effective use of the president's war powers.

[ 242 ] The Confederate government failed to get Europe involved militarily. Southern leaders needed to get European powers to help break the blockade the Union had created around Southern ports. Lincoln's naval blockade was 95 percent effective at stopping trade goods; as a result, imports and exports to the South declined significantly. The abundance of European cotton and Britain's hostility to slavery, along with Lincoln's naval blockades, severely decreased any chance that Britain or France would enter the war.

[ 243 ] Historian Don H. Doyle has argued that the Union victory had a major impact on world history.

[ 244 ] The Union victory energized popular democratic forces. A Confederate victory, on the other hand, would have meant a new birth of slavery, not of freedom. Historian Fergus Bordewich , following Doyle, argues: The North's victory decisively proved the durability of democratic government. Confederate independence, on the other hand, would have established an American model for reactionary politics and race-based repression that would likely have cast an international shadow into the 20th century and perhaps beyond.

[ 245 ] Scholars have debated what the effects of the war were on political and economic power in the South.

[ 246 ] The prevailing view is that the southern planter elite retained its powerful position in the South.

[ 246 ] However, a 2017 study challenges this, noting that while some Southern elites retained their economic status, the turmoil of the 1860s created greater opportunities for economic mobility in the South, than in the North.

[ 246 ] Casualties One in thirteen veterans were amputees.

Remains of both sides were reinterred.

Andersonville National Cemetery , Georgia Casualties according to the US National Park Service [ 2 ] Category Union Confederate Killed in action 110,100 94,000 Disease 224,580 164,000 Wounded in action 275,154 194,026 Captured (inc those who died as POWs) 211,411 (30,192) 462,634 (31,000) Total 821,245 914,660 Further information: Environmental history of the United States § Civil War Exact casualty figures were collected for the Union, but Confederate records were poorly kept, or lost in the chaos of defeat. Thus, the casualty figures are imprecise and based on statistical extrapolation. Neither side kept a tally of civilian deaths due to the war. In the 19th century, the death toll had been estimated at a lower 620,000.

[ 9 ] In 2011, the death toll was recalculated based on a 1% sample of census data, yielding approximately 750,000 soldier deaths, 20 percent higher than traditionally estimated, and possibly as high as 850,000.

[ 12 ] [ 247 ] The figure was recalculated to 698,000 soldier deaths in 2024 after examining newly available full census records. Mortality rates among men were as high as 19 percent in Louisiana, and 16.6–16.7 percent in Georgia and South Carolina respectively.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] The war resulted in at least 1,030,000 casualties (3 percent of the population), including an estimated 698,000 soldier deaths—two-thirds by disease.

[ 249 ] [ 9 ] Based on 1860 census figures, 8 percent of all white men aged 13–43 died in the war, including 6 percent in the North and 18 percent in the South.

[ 250 ] [ 251 ] About 56,000 soldiers died in prison camps during the War.

[ 252 ] An estimated 60,000 soldiers lost limbs.

[ 253 ] As McPherson notes, the war's "cost in American lives was as great as in all of the nation's other wars combined through Vietnam ".

[ 254 ] Of the 359,528 Union Army dead, amounting to 15 percent of the over two million who served: [ 5 ] 110,070 were killed in action (67,000) or died of wounds (43,000).

199,790 died of disease (75 percent was due to the war, the remainder would have occurred in civilian life anyway) 24,866 died in Confederate prison camps 9,058 were killed by accidents or drowning 15,741 other/unknown deaths In addition, there were 4,523 deaths in the Navy (2,112 in battle) and 460 in the Marines (148 in battle).

[ 6 ] After the Emancipation Proclamation authorized freed slaves to "be received into the armed service of the United States", former slaves who escaped from plantations or were liberated by the Union Army were recruited into the United States Colored Troops regiments of the Union Army, as were black men who had not been slaves. The US Colored Troops made up 10 percent of the Union death toll—15 percent of Union deaths from disease and less than 3 percent of those killed in battle.

[ 5 ] Losses among African Americans were high. In the last year and a half and from all reported casualties, approximately 20 percent of all African Americans enrolled in the military died during the war. Their mortality rate was significantly higher than white soldiers. While 15 percent of US Volunteers and just 9 percent of white Regular Army troops died, 21 percent of US Colored Troops died.

[ 255 ] : 16 An illustration of the war dead following the Battle of Antietam battlefield in 1862 While the figures of 360,000 army deaths for the Union and 260,000 for the Confederacy remained commonly cited, they are incomplete. In addition to many Confederate records being missing, partly as a result of Confederate widows not reporting deaths due to being ineligible for benefits, both armies only counted troops who died during their service and not the tens of thousands who died of wounds or diseases after being discharged. This often happened only days or weeks later.

Francis Amasa Walker , superintendent of the 1870 census, used census and surgeon general data to estimate a minimum of 500,000 Union military deaths and 350,000 Confederate military deaths, a total of 850,000 soldiers. While Walker's estimates were originally dismissed because of the 1870 census's undercounting, it was later found that the census was only off by 6.5 percent and that the data Walker used would be roughly accurate.

[ 12 ] Losses were far higher than during the war with Mexico, which saw roughly 13,000 American deaths, including fewer than two thousand killed in battle, between 1846 and 1848. One reason for the high number of battle deaths in the civil war was the continued use of tactics similar to those of the Napoleonic Wars , such as charging . With the advent of more accurate rifled barrels, Minié balls , and (near the end of the war for the Union) repeating firearms such as the Spencer repeating rifle and the Henry repeating rifle , soldiers were mowed down when standing in lines in the open. This led to the adoption of trench warfare, a style of fighting that defined much of World War I .

[ 256 ] Deaths among former slaves has proven hard to estimate, due to the lack of reliable census data, though they were known to be considerable, as former slaves were set free or escaped in massive numbers in areas where the Union army did not have sufficient shelter, doctors, or food for them. Professor Jim Downs states that tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of slaves died during the war from disease, starvation, or exposure, and that if these deaths are counted in the war's total, the death toll would exceed 1 million.

[ 257 ] It is estimated that during the war, of the equines killed, including horses, mules, donkeys and even confiscated children's ponies , over 32,600 of them belonged to the Union and 45,800 the Confederacy. However, other estimates place the total at 1,000,000.

[ 258 ] It is estimated that 544 Confederate flags were captured during the war by the Union. The flags were sent to the War Department in Washington.

[ 259 ] [ 260 ] The Union flags captured by the Confederates were sent to Richmond.

[ citation needed ] Emancipation Abolition of slavery in the various states over time: Abolition of slavery during or shortly after the American Revolution The Northwest Ordinance, 1787 Gradual emancipation in New York (starting 1799, completed 1827) and New Jersey (starting 1804, completed by Thirteenth Amendment, 1865) The Missouri Compromise, 1821 Effective abolition of slavery by Mexican or joint US/British authority Abolition of slavery by Congressional action, 1861 Abolition of slavery by Congressional action, 1862 Emancipation Proclamation as originally issued, January 1, 1863 Subsequent operation of the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863 Abolition of slavery by state action during the Civil War Operation of the Emancipation Proclamation in 1864 Operation of the Emancipation Proclamation in 1865 Thirteenth Amendment to the US constitution, December 18, 1865 Territory incorporated into the US after the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment Abolishing slavery was not a Union war goal from the outset, but quickly became one.

[ 261 ] Lincoln's initial claims were that preserving the Union was the central goal.

[ 262 ] In contrast, the South fought to preserve slavery.

[ 261 ] While not all Southerners saw themselves as fighting for slavery, most officers and over a third of the rank and file in Lee's army had close family ties to slavery. To Northerners, the motivation was primarily to preserve the Union, not to abolish slavery.

[ 263 ] However, as the war dragged on, and it became clear slavery was central to the conflict, and that emancipation was (to quote the Emancipation Proclamation) "a fit and necessary war measure for suppressing [the] rebellion", Lincoln and his cabinet made ending slavery a war goal, culminating in the Emancipation Proclamation.

[ 261 ] [ 264 ] Lincoln's decision to issue the Proclamation angered Peace Democrats ("Copperheads") and War Democrats , but energized most Republicans.

[ 264 ] By warning that free blacks would flood the North, Democrats made gains in the 1862 elections , but they did not gain control of Congress. The Republicans' counterargument that slavery was the mainstay of the enemy steadily gained support, with the Democrats losing decisively in the 1863 elections in the Northern state of Ohio, when they tried to resurrect anti-black sentiment.

[ 265 ] Emancipation Proclamation Main article: Emancipation Proclamation The Emancipation Proclamation legally freed the slaves in states "in rebellion", but, as a practical matter, slavery for the 3.5 million black people in the South effectively ended in each area when Union armies arrived. The last Confederate slaves were freed on June 19, 1865, celebrated as the modern holiday of Juneteenth. Slaves in the border states and those in some former Confederate territory occupied before the Emancipation Proclamation were freed by state action or (on December 6, 1865) by the Thirteenth Amendment .

[ 266 ] [ 267 ] The Emancipation Proclamation enabled African Americans, both free blacks and escaped slaves, to join the Union Army. About 190,000 volunteered, further enhancing the numerical advantage the Union armies enjoyed over the Confederates, who did not dare emulate the equivalent manpower source for fear of undermining the legitimacy of slavery.

[ n ] During the war, sentiment concerning slaves, enslavement, and emancipation in the United States was divided. Lincoln's fears of making slavery a war issue were based on a harsh reality: abolition did not enjoy wide support in the west, the territories, and the border states.

[ 269 ] [ o ] In 1861, Lincoln worried that premature attempts at emancipation would mean the loss of the border states, and that "to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game".

[ o ] Copperheads and some War Democrats opposed emancipation, although the latter eventually accepted it as part of the total war needed to save the Union.

[ 270 ] Lincoln reversed attempts at emancipation by Secretary of War Simon Cameron and Generals John C. Frémont and David Hunter , in an effort to retain the loyalty of the border states and the War Democrats. Lincoln warned the border states that a more radical type of emancipation would happen if they rejected his plan of gradual compensated emancipation and voluntary colonization .

[ 271 ] But compensated emancipation occurred only in the District of Columbia, where Congress had the power to enact it. When Lincoln told his cabinet about his proposed emancipation proclamation, which would apply to the states still in rebellion on January 1, 1863, Seward advised Lincoln to wait for a Union military victory before issuing it, because to do otherwise would seem like "our last shriek on the retreat".

[ 272 ] Walter Stahr, however, writes, "There are contemporary sources, however, that suggest others were involved in the decision to delay", and Stahr quotes them.

[ 273 ] Contrabands , who were fugitive slaves, including cooks, laundresses, laborers, teamsters, railroad repair crews, fled to the Union Army , but were not legally freed until the Emancipation Proclamation , which Lincoln signed on January 1, 1863, more than two years before the end of the Civil War.

In 1863, the Union Army accepted Freedmen ; seen here are black and white teenaged soldiers who volunteered to fight for the Union.

Lincoln laid the groundwork for public support in an open letter published in response to Horace Greeley 's "The Prayer of Twenty Millions"; the letter stated that Lincoln's goal was to save the Union, and that, if he freed the slaves, it would be as a means to that end.

[ 274 ] [ 275 ] [ 276 ] He also had a meeting at the White House with five African American representatives on August 14, 1862. Arranging for a reporter to be present, he urged his visitors to agree to the voluntary colonization of black people. Lincoln's motive for both his letter to Greeley and his statement to the black visitors was apparently to make his forthcoming Emancipation Proclamation more palatable to racist white people .

[ 277 ] A Union victory in the Battle of Antietam on September 17, 1862, provided Lincoln with an opportunity to issue the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, and the War Governors' Conference added support for the proclamation.

[ 278 ] Lincoln issued his preliminary Emancipation Proclamation on September 22, 1862. It stated that slaves in all states in rebellion on January 1, 1863, would be free. He issued his final Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1863, keeping his promise. In his letter to Albert G. Hodges, Lincoln explained his belief that "If slavery is not wrong, nothing is wrong .... And yet I have never understood that the Presidency conferred upon me an unrestricted right to act officially upon this judgment and feeling ... I claim not to have controlled events, but confess plainly that events have controlled me." [ 279 ] [ p ] Lincoln's moderate approach succeeded in inducing the border states to remain in the Union and War Democrats to support the Union. The border states, which included Kentucky, Missouri, Maryland, Delaware, and Union-controlled regions around New Orleans, Norfolk, Virginia , and elsewhere, were not covered by the Emancipation Proclamation. Nor was Tennessee, which had come under Union control.

[ 281 ] Missouri and Maryland abolished slavery on their own; Kentucky and Delaware did not.

[ 282 ] Still, the proclamation did not enjoy universal support. It caused much unrest in what were then considered western states, where racist sentiments led to a great fear of abolition. There was some concern that the proclamation would lead to the secession of western states, and its issuance prompted the stationing of Union troops in Illinois in case of rebellion.

[ 269 ] Since the Emancipation Proclamation was based on the president's war powers, it applied only in territory held by Confederates at the time it was issued. However, the Proclamation became a symbol of the Union's growing commitment to add emancipation to the Union's definition of liberty.

[ 283 ] The Emancipation Proclamation greatly reduced the Confederacy's hope of being recognized or otherwise aided by Britain or France.

[ 284 ] By late 1864, Lincoln was playing a leading role in getting the House of Representatives to vote for the Thirteenth Amendment, which mandated the ending of chattel slavery.

[ 285 ] Reconstruction Main article: Reconstruction era Through the supervision of the Freedmen's Bureau , Northern teachers traveled into the South to provide education and training for the newly freed population.

The war devastated the South and posed serious questions of how it would be reintegrated into the Union. The war destroyed much of the South's wealth, in part because wealth held in enslaved people (at least $1,000 each for a healthy adult prior to the war) was wiped off the books.

[ 286 ] All accumulated investment in Confederate bonds was forfeited; most banks and railroads were bankrupt. The income per person dropped to less than 40 percent of that of the North, and that lasted into the 20th century. Southern influence in the federal government , previously considerable, was greatly diminished until the second half of the 20th century.

[ 287 ] Reconstruction began during the war, with the Emancipation Proclamation of January 1863, and it continued until 1877.

[ 288 ] It comprised multiple complex methods to resolve the outstanding issues of the aftermath, the most important of which were the three " Reconstruction Amendments " to the Constitution: the 13th outlawing slavery (1865), the 14th guaranteeing citizenship to former slaves (1868), and the 15th prohibiting the denial of voting rights "on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude" (1870). From the Union perspective, the goals of Reconstruction were to consolidate victory by reuniting the Union, to guarantee a "republican form of government" for the ex-Confederate states, and to permanently end slavery—and prevent semi-slavery status.

[ 289 ] President Johnson, who took office in April 1865, took a lenient approach and saw the achievement of the main war goals as realized in 1865, when each ex-rebel state repudiated secession and ratified the Thirteenth Amendment.

Radical Republicans demanded proof that Confederate nationalism was dead and that the slaves were truly free. They overrode Johnson's vetoes of civil rights legislation , and the House impeached him, although the Senate did not convict him. In 1868 and 1872, the Republican candidate Grant won the presidency. In 1872, the "Liberal Republicans" argued that the war goals had been achieved and Reconstruction should end. They chose Horace Greeley to head a presidential ticket in 1872 but were decisively defeated. In 1874, Democrats, primarily Southern, took control of Congress and opposed further reconstruction. The Compromise of 1877 closed with a national consensus, except on the part of former slaves, that the war had finally ended.

[ 290 ] With the withdrawal of federal troops, however, white men retook control of every Southern legislature, and the Jim Crow era of disenfranchisement and legal segregation was ushered in.

[ 291 ] The war had a demonstrable impact on American politics. Many veterans on both sides were elected to political office, including five US Presidents: Ulysses Grant, Rutherford B. Hayes , James A. Garfield , Benjamin Harrison , and William McKinley .

[ 292 ] Memory and historiography Monument to the Grand Army of the Republic , a Union veteran organization Cherokee Confederates reunion in New Orleans in 1903 The war is a central event in American collective memory. There are innumerable statues, commemorations, books, and archival collections. The memory includes the home front, military affairs, the treatment of soldiers, both living and dead, in the war's aftermath, depictions of the war in literature and art, evaluations of heroes and villains, and considerations of the moral and political lessons of the war.

[ 293 ] The last theme includes moral evaluations of racism and slavery, heroism and cowardice in combat [ 294 ] and behind the lines, and issues of democracy and minority rights, as well as the notion of an " Empire of Liberty " influencing the world.

[ 295 ] Historians have paid more attention to the causes of the war than to the war itself. Military history has largely developed outside academia, leading to a proliferation of studies by non-scholars who nevertheless are familiar with the primary sources and pay close attention to battles and campaigns and who write for the general public.

[ 296 ] [ 297 ] Practically every major figure in the war, both North and South, has had a serious biographical study.

[ citation needed ] Even the name used for the conflict has been controversial, with many names used for it . During and immediately after the war, Northern historians often used a term like "War of the Rebellion". Writers in rebel states often referred to the "War for Southern Independence". Some Southerners have described it as the "War of Northern Aggression".

[ 298 ] Lost Cause Main article: Lost Cause of the Confederacy The memory of the war in the white South crystallized in the myth of the "Lost Cause": that the Confederate cause was just and heroic. The myth shaped regional identity and race relations for generations.

[ 299 ] Alan T. Nolan notes that the Lost Cause was expressly a rationalization, a cover-up to vindicate the name and fame of those in rebellion. Some claims revolve around the insignificance of slavery as a cause; some appeals highlight cultural differences between North and South; the military conflict by Confederate actors is idealized; in any case, secession was said to be lawful.

[ 300 ] Nolan argues that the adoption of the Lost Cause perspective facilitated the reunification of the North and the South while excusing the "virulent racism" of the 19th century , sacrificing black American progress to white man's reunification. He also deems the Lost Cause "a caricature of the truth. This caricature wholly misrepresents and distorts the facts of the matter" in every instance.

[ 301 ] The Lost Cause myth was formalized by Charles A. Beard and Mary R. Beard , whose The Rise of American Civilization (1927) spawned Beardian historiography . The Beards downplayed slavery, abolitionism, and issues of morality. Though this interpretation was abandoned by the Beards in the 1940s, and by historians generally by the 1950s, Beardian themes still echo among Lost Cause writers.

[ 302 ] [ 303 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] The United Daughters of the Confederacy The United Daughters of the Confederacy (UDC) is a Southern heritage organization founded in 1894 in Nashville, Tennessee, by a group of women whose stated mission was to honor Confederate veterans and preserve their memory. The organization quickly grew in influence during the late 19th and early 20th centuries and ended up playing a pivotal role in shaping the collective memory of the American Civil War.
The UDC focused on erecting Confederate monuments, funding the education of Confederate descendants, and promoting Confederate history through textbooks and public ceremonies. The group emphasized the valor of Confederate soldiers and the righteousness of the Southern cause, often omitting or downplaying the central role of slavery in the conflict.

The UDC became a major proponent of the Lost Cause ideology, a narrative that romanticized the Confederacy as a noble, states'-rights-driven effort rather than a rebellion to preserve slavery. Through speeches, publications, and curriculum influence, the UDC worked to recast the Confederacy in a sympathetic light, framing the Civil War as a struggle against Northern aggression.
This effort contributed to the widespread proliferation of Confederate symbols and a sanitized portrayal of Southern history in public spaces and schools. Critics argue that the UDC's activities perpetuated racist ideologies by fostering nostalgia for the antebellum South and minimizing the horrors of slavery.

In recent years, the role of the UDC and the Lost Cause myth has come under scrutiny amid debates over Confederate monuments and systemic racism in the United States. Many of the monuments and historical markers the UDC sponsored have been reevaluated and removed, sparking ongoing discussions about memory, heritage, and justice.

Battlefield preservation Main article: American Civil War battlefield preservation Beginning in 1961, the US Post Office released commemorative stamps for five famous battles, each issued on the 100th anniversary of the respective battle.

The first efforts at Civil War battlefield preservation and memorialization came during the war, with the establishment of National Cemeteries at Gettysburg, Mill Springs and Chattanooga. Soldiers began erecting markers on battlefields beginning with the First Battle of Bull Run in 1861. The oldest surviving monument is the Hazen Brigade Monument near Murfreesboro in Central Tennessee , built in the summer of 1863 by soldiers in Union Col.

William B. Hazen's brigade to mark the spot where they buried their dead, following the Battle of Stones River.

[ 304 ] In the 1890s, the government established five Civil War battlefield parks under the jurisdiction of the War Department, beginning with the creation of the Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park at Fort Oglethorpe, Georgia , and the Antietam National Battlefield in Sharpsburg, Maryland, in 1890. The Shiloh National Military Park was established in 1894 in Shiloh, Tennessee , followed by the Gettysburg National Military Park in 1895, and Vicksburg National Military Park in 1899. In 1933, these five parks and other national monuments were transferred to the National Park Service.

[ 305 ] Chief among modern efforts to preserve Civil War sites has been the American Battlefield Trust , with more than 130 battlefields in 24 states.

[ 306 ] [ 307 ] The five major battlefield parks operated by the National Park Service had a combined 3 million visitors in 2018, down 70% from 10 million in 1970.

[ 308 ] Commemoration Further information: Commemoration of the American Civil War and Commemoration of the American Civil War on postage stamps Grand Army of the Republic (Union) United Confederate Veterans The Civil War has been commemorated in many ways, ranging from the reenactment of battles, to statues and memorial halls being erected, to films, and to stamps and coins with Civil War themes being issued, all of which helped to shape public memory. These commemorations occurred in greater numbers on the 100th and 150th anniversaries of the war.

[ 309 ] Hollywood 's take on the war has been especially influential in shaping public memory, as in such film classics as The Birth of a Nation (1915), Gone with the Wind (1939), and Lincoln (2012).

Ken Burns 's PBS television series The Civil War (1990) is well-remembered, though criticized for its historical inaccuracy.

[ 310 ] [ 311 ] Technological significance Technological innovations during the war had a great impact on 19th-century science. The war was an early example of an " industrial war ", in which technological might is used to achieve military supremacy.

[ 312 ] New inventions, such as the train and telegraph , delivered soldiers, supplies and messages at a time when horses had been the fastest way to travel.

[ 313 ] [ 314 ] It was also in this war that aerial warfare, in the form of reconnaissance balloons , was first used.

[ 315 ] It saw the first action involving steam-powered ironclad warships in naval warfare history.

[ 316 ] Repeating firearms such as the Henry rifle, Spencer rifle, Colt revolving rifle , Triplett & Scott carbine and others, first appeared during the Civil War; they were a revolutionary invention that would soon replace muzzle-loading and single-shot firearms. The war saw the first appearances of rapid-firing weapons and machine guns such as the Agar gun and Gatling gun .

[ 317 ] In works of culture and art The Peacemakers by George Peter Alexander Healy portrays, from left to right, Sherman, Grant, Lincoln, and Porter discussing plans for the last weeks of the Civil War aboard the steamer River Queen in March 1865. It currently hangs in the Oval Office dining room.

The Civil War is one of the most studied events in American history, and the collection of cultural works around it is enormous.

[ 318 ] This section gives an abbreviated overview of the most notable works.

Literature When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd and O Captain! My Captain!

(1865) by Walt Whitman , famous poetic eulogies to Lincoln Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War (1866), poetry by Herman Melville The Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government (1881) by Jefferson Davis The Private History of a Campaign That Failed (1885) by Mark Twain Texar's Revenge, or, North Against South (1887) by Jules Verne An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge (1890) by Ambrose Bierce The Red Badge of Courage (1895) by Stephen Crane The Challenge to Sirius (1917) by Sheila Kaye-Smith Gone with the Wind (1936) by Margaret Mitchell North and South (1982) by John Jakes The March: A Novel (2005) by E. L. Doctorow , fictionalized account of Sherman's March to the Sea Film The Birth of a Nation (1915, US) The General (1926, US) Operator 13 (1934, US) Gone with the Wind (1939, US) The Red Badge of Courage (1951, US) The Horse Soldiers (1959, US) Shenandoah (1965, US) The Good, the Bad and the Ugly (1966, Italy-Spain-FRG) The Beguiled (1971, US) The Outlaw Josey Wales (1976, US) North and South (miniseries; 1985–1994, US) Glory (1989, US) The Civil War (1990, US) Gettysburg (1993, US) The Last Outlaw (1993, US) Cold Mountain (2003, US) Gods and Generals (2003, US) Lincoln (2012, US) Free State of Jones (2016, US) The Legend of Van Dorn (2025, US) Music See also: Music of the American Civil War " Dixie " " Battle Cry of Freedom " " Battle Hymn of the Republic " " The Bonnie Blue Flag " " John Brown's Body " " When Johnny Comes Marching Home " " Marching Through Georgia " " The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down " " O Captain! My Captain!

", Walt Whitman's poem set to music by Kurt Weill " When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd ", Walt Whitman's poem set to music by Paul Hindemith , by Roger Sessions , by Jennifer Higdon , and by Charles Villiers Stanford Video games North & South (1989, France) Sid Meier's Gettysburg!

(1997, US) Sid Meier's Antietam!

(1999, US) American Conquest: Divided Nation (2006, US) Forge of Freedom: The American Civil War (2006, US) The History Channel: Civil War – A Nation Divided (2006, US) AGEOD's American Civil War (2007, US/France) History Civil War: Secret Missions (2008, US) Call of Juarez: Bound in Blood (2009, US) Darkest of Days (2009, US) Victoria II: A House Divided (2011, US) AGEOD's American Civil War II (2013, US/France) Ultimate General: Gettysburg (2014, Ukraine) Ultimate General: Civil War (2016, Ukraine) War of Rights (TBD, US) See also American Civil War portal American Civil War by state Foreign enlistment in the American Civil War African Americans in the American Civil War German Americans in the American Civil War Hispanics in the American Civil War Irish Americans in the American Civil War Italian Americans in the Civil War Native Americans in the American Civil War Cherokee Choctaw Outline of the American Civil War Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials Notes ^ a b "End of the Rebellion; The Last Rebel Army Disbands" .

The New York Times .

United States Department of War . May 29, 1865. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018 . Retrieved July 29, 2022 .

Robertson 1963 , p. 31. "Lee's surrender left Johnston with no place to go. On April 26, near Durham, N.C., the Army of Tennessee laid down its arms before Sherman's forces. With the surrender of isolated forces in the Trans-Mississippi West on May 4, 11, and 26, the most costly war in American history came to an end." Catton 1965 , p. 445. "[A]nd on May 26 he [E. Kirby Smith] surrendered and the war was over." Gallagher et al. 2003 , p. 308. "By 26 May, General Edward Kirby Smith had surrendered the Rebel forces in the trans-Mississippi west. The war was over." Blair 2015 , p. 9. "The sheer weight of scholarship has leaned toward portraying the surrenders of the Confederate armies as the end of the war." ^ a b Among the many other contemporary sources and later historians citing May 26, 1865, as the end date for the American Civil War hostilities are George Templeton Strong , who was a prominent New York lawyer; a founder, treasurer, and member of the Executive Committee of United States Sanitary Commission throughout the war; and a diarist. A diary excerpt is published in Gienapp, William E. (ed.).

The Civil War and Reconstruction: A Documentary Collection.

New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2001, pp. 313–314 ISBN 978-0-393-97555-0 . A footnote in Gienapp shows the excerpt was taken from an edited version of the diaries by Allan Nevins and Milton Halsey Thomas, eds., The Diary of George Templeton Strong , vol. 2 (New York: The Macmillan Company), pp. 600–601, which differs from the volume and page numbers of the original diaries; the page in Strong's original handwriting is shown at "Volume 4, pages 124–125: diary entries for May 23 (continued)–June 7, 1865" .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2022 – via New-York Historical Society Museum & Library.

^ 211,411 Union soldiers were captured, and 30,218 died in prison. The ones who died have been excluded to prevent double-counting of casualties.

^ 462,634 Confederate soldiers were captured and 25,976 died in prison. The ones who died have been excluded to prevent double-counting of casualties.

^ The Union was the US government and included the states that remained loyal to it, both the non-slave states and the border states (Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware) where slavery was legal. Missouri and Kentucky were also claimed by the Confederacy and given full state delegations in the Confederate Congress for the duration of the war.

^ Appomattox is often referred to as the end of the war , although different dates for the war's conclusion have been considered. (See, Vorenberg, Michael.

Lincoln's Peace: The Struggle to End the American Civil War . New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2025.) Lee's surrender to Grant set off a wave of Confederate surrenders. The last military department of the Confederacy, the Trans-Mississippi Department disbanded on May 26.

^ This assumes that Union and Confederate casualties are counted together; more Americans were killed in World War II than in either the Union or Confederate Armies if their casualty totals are counted separately.

^ Historians disagree as to whether Roger Taney heard Ex parte Merryman as a US circuit judge or as a Supreme Court justice in chambers.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] ^ Unaware of the surrender of Lee, on April 16 the last major battles of the war were fought at the Battle of Columbus, Georgia , and the Battle of West Point .

^ Murray 1967 , p.

336 Neff 2010 , p. 207 Trudeau 1994 , p. 396. In United States v. Anderson , 76 U.S. 56 (1869), "The U.S. attorneys argued that the Rebellion had been suppressed following the surrender of the Trans-Mississippi Department, as established in the surrender document negotiated on May 26, 1865." Trudeau 1994 , p. 397. The Supreme Court decided that the "legal end of the American Civil War had been decided by Congress to be August 20, 1866—the date of Andrew Johnson's final proclamation on the conclusion of the Rebellion." ^ "Union population 1864" aggregates 1860 population, average annual immigration 1855–1864, and population governed formerly by CSA per Kenneth Martis source. Contrabands and after the Emancipation Proclamation freedmen, migrating into Union control on the coasts and to the advancing armies, and natural increase are excluded.

^ "Slave 1864, CSA" aggregates 1860 slave census of Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia and Texas. It omits losses from contraband and after the Emancipation Proclamation, freedmen migrating to the Union controlled coastal ports and those joining advancing Union armies, especially in the Mississippi Valley.

^ "Total Union railroad miles" aggregates existing track reported 1860 @ 21800 plus new construction 1860–1864 @ 5000, plus southern railroads administered by USMRR @ 2300.

[ 233 ] ^ In spite of the South's shortage of soldiers, most Southern leaders—until 1865—opposed enlisting slaves. They used them as laborers to support the war effort. As Howell Cobb said, "If slaves will make good soldiers our whole theory of slavery is wrong." Confederate generals Patrick Cleburne and Robert E. Lee argued in favor of arming blacks late in the war, and Jefferson Davis was eventually persuaded to support plans for arming slaves to avoid military defeat. The Confederacy surrendered at Appomattox before this plan could be implemented.

[ 268 ] ^ a b Lincoln's letter to O. H. Browning, September 22, 1861.

Wittke 1952 [ failed verification ] . "Sentiment among German Americans was largely antislavery especially among Forty-Eighters , resulting in hundreds of thousands of German Americans volunteering to fight for the Union." Keller 2009 .

for primary sources, see Walter D. Kamphoefner and Wolfgang Helbich, eds., Germans in the Civil War: The Letters They Wrote Home (2006). "On the other hand, many of the recent immigrants in the North viewed freed slaves as competition for scarce jobs, and as the reason why the Civil War was being fought." Baker 2003 . "Due in large part to this fierce competition with free blacks for labor opportunities, the poor and working class Irish Catholics generally opposed emancipation. When the draft began in the summer of 1863, they launched a major riot in New York City that was suppressed by the military, as well as much smaller protests in other cities." Schecter 2007 , ch. 6. "Many Catholics in the North had volunteered to fight in 1861, sending thousands of soldiers to the front and suffering high casualties, especially at Fredericksburg ; their volunteering fell off after 1862." ^ In late March 1864 Lincoln met with Governor Bramlette , Archibald Dixon, and Albert G. Hodges, to discuss recruitment of African American soldiers in the state of Kentucky. In a letter dated April 4, 1864, Lincoln summarized his stance on slavery, at Hodges' request.

[ 280 ] References ^ "Size of the Union Army in the American Civil War" .

Archived from the original on January 30, 2016.

Of which 131,000 were in the Navy and Marines, 140,000 were garrison troops and home defense militia, and 427,000 were in the field army ^ a b c d e "Facts" . National Park Service.

^ "The war of the rebellion: a compilation of the official records of the Union and Confederate armies; Series 4 – Volume 2" . United States War Dept. 1900. Archived from the original on July 25, 2017.

^ Long 1971 , p. 705.

^ a b c d e Fox, William F. (1889).

Regimental losses in the American Civil War . Archived from the original on May 25, 2017.

^ a b c d "US Military Casualties: Principal Wars 1775–1991" .

Defence Casuality Analysis System (DCAS) .

^ Chambers & Anderson 1999 , p. 849.

^ a b Rhodes, James Ford (1893).

History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 . New York: Harper & Bros. pp.

507– 508.

^ a b c Nofi, Al (June 13, 2001).

"Statistics on the War's Costs" . Louisiana State University. Archived from the original on July 11, 2007 . Retrieved October 14, 2007 .

^ Downs 2012 . "The rough 19th century estimate was that 60,000 former slaves died from the epidemic, but doctors treating black patients often claimed that they were unable to keep accurate records due to demands on their time and the lack of manpower and resources. The surviving records only include the number of black patients whom doctors encountered; tens of thousands of other slaves had no contact with army doctors, leaving no records of their deaths." ^ Toward a Social History of the American Civil War Exploratory Essays, Cambridge University Press, 1990, p. 4.

^ a b c Hacker, J. David (September 20, 2011).

"Recounting the Dead" .

The New York Times .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2011 . Retrieved September 22, 2011 .

^ Downs 2012 . "An 2 April 2012 New York Times article, 'New Estimate Raises Civil War Death Toll', reports that a new study ratchets up the death toll from an estimated 650,000 to a staggering 850,000 people. As horrific as this new number is, it fails to reflect the mortality of former slaves during the war. If former slaves were included in this figure, the Civil War death toll would likely be over a million casualties ...".

^ Woods, Michael E. (August 20, 2012). "What Twenty-First-Century Historians Have Said about the Causes of Disunion: A Civil War Sesquicentennial Review of the Recent Literature".

Journal of American History .

99 (2): 415– 439.

doi : 10.1093/jahist/jas272 .

ISSN 0021-8723 .

^ Woods, M. E. (August 20, 2012).

"What Twenty-First-Century Historians Have Said about the Causes of Disunion: A Civil War Sesquicentennial Review of the Recent Literature" .

Journal of American History .

99 (2): 415– 439.

doi : 10.1093/jahist/jas272 .

ISSN 0021-8723 .

^ Aaron Sheehan-Dean, "A Book for Every Perspective: Current Civil War and Reconstruction Textbooks", Civil War History (2005) 51#3 pp. 317–324 ^ Loewen, James W. (2011). "Using Confederate Documents to Teach About Secession, Slavery, and the Origins of the Civil War".

OAH Magazine of History . Vol. 25, no. 2. pp.

35– 44.

doi : 10.1093/oahmag/oar002 .

ISSN 0882-228X .

JSTOR 23210244 .

Confederate leaders themselves made it plain that slavery was the key issue sparking secession.

^ Coates, Ta-Nehisi (June 23, 2015).

"What This Cruel War Was Over" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on October 31, 2017.

^ "A Declaration of the Immediate Causes which Induce and Justify the Secession of the State of Mississippi from the Federal Union" .

The Declaration of Causes of Seceding States . 1861 . Retrieved September 12, 2024 – via American Battlefield Trust.

^ Patrick Karl O'Brien (2002).

Atlas of World History . Oxford University Press. p. 184.

ISBN 978-0-19-521921-0 .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2015 . Retrieved October 25, 2015 .

^ John McCardell, The Idea of a Southern Nation: Southern Nationalists and Southern Nationalism, 1830–1860 (1981) ^ Susan-Mary Grant, North Over South: Northern Nationalism and American Identity in the Antebellum Era (2000) ^ Elizabeth R. Varon , Bruce Levine, Marc Egnal, and Michael Holt at a plenary session of the organization of American Historians, March 17, 2011, reported by David A. Walsh "Highlights from the 2011 Annual Meeting of the Organization of American Historians in Houston, Texas" HNN online Archived December 4, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ Potter & Fehrenbacher 1976 , p. 485.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 254–255.

^ a b "1861 Time Line" .

Civil War Glass Negatives and Related Prints . Library of Congress . Retrieved January 22, 2022 .

^ Jaffa, Harry V. (2004).

A New Birth of Freedom: Abraham Lincoln and the Coming of the Civil War . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-8476-9953-7 .

^ "Ordinances of Secession of the 13 Confederate States of America" . Archived from the original on June 11, 2004 . Retrieved November 28, 2012 .

^ "Confederate States of America – Declaration of the Immediate Causes which Induce and Justify the Secession of South Carolina from the Federal Union" .

The Avalon Project .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2019 . Retrieved November 28, 2012 .

^ "A Declaration of the Immediate Causes which Induce and Justify the Secession of the State of Mississippi from the Federal Union" .

The Avalon Project .

Archived from the original on October 10, 2014 . Retrieved November 28, 2012 .

^ "Confederate States of America – Georgia Secession" .

The Avalon Project .

Archived from the original on July 14, 2011 . Retrieved November 28, 2012 .

^ "Confederate States of America – A Declaration of the Causes which Impel the State of Texas to Secede from the Federal Union" .

The Avalon Project .

Archived from the original on August 11, 2011 . Retrieved November 28, 2012 .

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 24.

^ Buchanan, James (December 3, 1860).

"Fourth Annual Message" .

Archived from the original on December 20, 2008 . Retrieved November 28, 2012 – via The American Presidency Project.

^ Winters 1963 , p. 28.

^ "Profile Showing the Grades upon the Different Routes Surveyed for the Union Pacific Rail Road Between the Missouri River and the Valley of the Platte River" .

World Digital Library . 1865 . Retrieved July 16, 2013 .

^ "Emancipation in the Federal Territories, June 19, 1862" .

^ "Abraham Lincoln imposes first federal income tax" .

History.com . November 16, 2009 . Retrieved June 12, 2021 .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 252–254.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 253.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 234–266.

^ a b c Abraham Lincoln, First Inaugural Address, Monday, March 4, 1861.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 262.

^ a b Potter & Fehrenbacher 1976 , pp. 572–573.

^ Harris, William C. (Winter 2000).

"The Hampton Roads Peace Conference: A Final Test of Lincoln's Presidential Leadership" .

Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association .

21 (1): 30– 61.

doi : 10.5406/19457987.21.1.04 .

hdl : 2027/spo.2629860.0021.104 .

ISSN 1945-7987 .

^ Hardyman, Robyn (2016).

What Caused the Civil War?

. Gareth Stevens. p. 27.

ISBN 978-1-4824-5180-1 .

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 264.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 265.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 266.

^ a b McPherson 1988 , p. 267.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 268.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 272.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 273.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 273–274.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 274.

^ "Abraham Lincoln: Proclamation 83 – Increasing the Size of the Army and Navy" . Presidency.ucsb.edu . Retrieved November 3, 2011 .

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 278.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 276–307.

^ Jones 2011 , pp. 203–204.

^ Jones 2011 , p. 21.

^ "Civil War and the Maryland General Assembly" .

Maryland State Archives . Retrieved May 28, 2017 .

^ a b "Teaching American History in Maryland – Documents for the Classroom: Arrest of the Maryland Legislature, 1861 " . Maryland State Archives. 2005. Archived from the original on January 11, 2008 . Retrieved February 6, 2008 .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 284–287.

^ Harris, William C. (2011).

Lincoln and the Border States: Preserving the Union . University Press of Kansas. p. 71.

^ White, Jonathan W. (2011).

Abraham Lincoln and Treason in the Civil War: The Trials of John Merryman . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. pp.

38– 39.

^ Vladeck, Stephen I.

(Summer 2007).

"The Field Theory: Martial Law, The Suspension Power, and The Insurrection Act" .

Temple Law Review . Vol. 80, no. 2. p. 391, n. 2.

Archived from the original on September 27, 2022.

^ Howard, F. K. (1863).

Fourteen Months in American Bastiles . London: H. F. Mackintosh . Retrieved August 18, 2014 .

^ Nevins, The War for the Union (1959), 1:119–129.

^ Nevins, The War for the Union (1959), 1:129–136.

^ "A State of Convenience, The Creation of West Virginia" . West Virginia Archives & History. Archived from the original on May 18, 2012 . Retrieved April 20, 2012 .

^ Curry, Richard Orr (1964), A House Divided: A Study of the Statehood Politics and the Copperhead Movement in West Virginia , University of Pittsburgh Press, map on p. 49.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 303.

^ Weigley 2004 , p. 55.

^ Snell, Mark A. (2011), West Virginia and the Civil War , History Press, Charleston, SC, p. 28.

^ Neely 1993 , pp. 10–11.

^ Keegan 2009 , p. 73. "Over 10,000 military engagements took place during the war, 40 percent of them in Virginia and Tennessee." ^ Gabor Boritt (ed.).

War Comes Again (1995), p. 247.

^ "The Civil War, 1861" (PDF) .

American Military History . pp.

199– 221.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 17, 2012.

With an actual strength of 1,080 officers and 14,926 enlisted men on June 30, 1860, the Regular Army...

^ Nicolay, John George; Hay, John (1890).

Abraham Lincoln: A History . Century. p. 264.

^ Coulter 1950 , p. 308.

^ Faust, Albert Bernhardt (1909).

The German Element in the United States: With Special Reference to Its Political, Moral, Social, and Educational Influence . Houghton Mifflin.

^ Reid, Richard M. (2014).

African Canadians in Union Blue: Volunteering for the Cause in the Civil War . Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press. pp.

4– 5, 40.

ISBN 978-0-7748-2745-4 .

^ Schecter 2007 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Eugene Murdock, One Million Men: the Civil War draft in the North (1971).

^ Hallock, Judith Lee (1983).

"The Role of the Community in Civil War Desertion" (PDF) .

Civil War History .

29 (2): 123– 134.

doi : 10.1353/cwh.1983.0013 .

^ Bearman, Peter S. (1991). "Desertion as Localism: Army Unit Solidarity and Group Norms in the U.S. Civil War".

Social Forces .

70 (2): 321– 342.

doi : 10.1093/sf/70.2.321 .

JSTOR 2580242 .

^ Robert Fantina, Desertion and the American Soldier, 1776–2006 (2006), p. 74.

^ Nadeau, Ryan (January 5, 2015).

"A Prussian Observes the American Civil War" .

The Gettysburg Compiler . Retrieved January 6, 2022 .

^ Keegan 2009 , p. 57.

^ Scott, E. Carole.

Southerner vs. Southerner: Union Supporters Below the Mason-Dixon Line .

Warfare History Network . Retrieved November 11, 2024.

^ Pickenpaugh, Roger (2013).

Captives in Blue: The Civil War Prisons of the Confederacy . University of Alabama Press. pp.

57– 73.

ISBN 978-0-8173-1783-6 .

^ Tucker, Pierpaoli & White 2010 , p. 1466.

^ Leonard 1999 , pp. 165, 310–311.

^ Leonard 1999 , p. 240.

^ "Highlights in the History of Military Women" .

Women In Military Service For America Memorial . Archived from the original on April 3, 2013 . Retrieved June 22, 2013 .

^ Pennington, Reina (2003).

Amazons to Fighter Pilots: A Biographical Dictionary of Military Women . Vol. 2. Greenwood. pp.

474– 475.

ISBN 0-313-32708-4 .

^ "The Case of Dr. Walker, Only Woman to Win (and Lose) the Medal of Honor" .

The New York Times . June 4, 1977 . Retrieved January 6, 2018 .

^ Blanton, DeAnne, "A Life on His Own Terns: Albert D. J. Cashier, 95th Illinois Infantry", in Brian Matthew Jordan and Jonathan W. White, eds., Final Resting Places: Reflections on the Meaning of Civil War Graves . Athen, Georgia: The University of Georgia Press, 2023, pp. 47-53.

^ Welles, Gideon (January 1865).

"Secretary of the Navy's Report" .

The Sailors' Magazine and Seamen's Friend . Vol. 37, no. 5. American Seamen's Friend Society. p. 152.

^ Tucker, Pierpaoli & White 2010 , p. 462.

^ Canney 1998 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ "American Civil War: The naval war" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved January 24, 2022 .

^ Nelson 2005 , p. 92.

^ a b Anderson 1989 , p. 300.

^ Myron J. Smith, Tinclads in the Civil War: Union Light-Draught Gunboat Operations on Western Waters, 1862–1865 (2009).

^ Gerald F. Teaster and Linda and James Treaster Ambrose, The Confederate Submarine H. L. Hunley (1989).

^ Nelson 2005 , p. 345.

^ Fuller 2008 , p. 36.

^ Richter 2009 , p. 49.

^ Johnson 1998 , p. 228.

^ Anderson 1989 , pp. 288–289, 296–298.

^ Wise 1991 , p. 49.

^ Mendelsohn 2012 , pp. 43–44.

^ Stern 1962 , pp. 224–225.

^ Neely, Mark E. (June 1986). "The Perils of Running the Blockade: The Influence of International Law in an Era of Total War".

Civil War History .

32 (2): 101– 118.

doi : 10.1353/cwh.1986.0012 .

^ a b Wise 1991 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Surdam, David G. (1998). "The Union Navy's blockade reconsidered".

Naval War College Review .

51 (4): 85– 107.

^ Surdam, David G. (2001).

Northern Naval Superiority and the Economics of the American Civil War . University of South Carolina Press.

^ Keys, David (June 24, 2014).

"Historians reveal secrets of UK gun-running which lengthened the American civil war by two years" .

The Independent .

^ Kevin Dougherty (2010).

Weapons of Mississippi .

University Press of Mississippi . p. 87.

ISBN 978-1-60473-452-2 .

^ Jones 2002 , p. 225.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 546–557.

^ Herring 2011 , p. 237.

^ a b McPherson 1988 , p. 386.

^ a b Allan Nevins , War for the Union 1862–1863 , pp. 263–264.

^ Doyle 2015 , pp. 69–70.

^ Doyle 2015 , p. 8.

^ Doyle 2015 , pp. 70–74.

^ Richard Huzzeym, Freedom Burning: Anti-Slavery and Empire in Victorian Britain (2013).

^ a b Stephen B. Oates , The Approaching Fury: Voices of the Storm 1820–1861 , p. 125.

^ "The Trent Affair: Diplomacy, Britain, and the American Civil War – National Museum of American Diplomacy" . January 5, 2022 . Retrieved January 18, 2022 .

^ Shawcross, Edward (2021).

The Last Emperor of Mexico: The Dramatic Story of the Habsburg Archduke Who Created a Kingdom in the New World . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-1541-674196 . Also titled The Last Emperor of Mexico: A Disaster in the New World . London: Faber & Faber, 2022.

^ Herring 2011 , p. 261.

^ Norman E. Saul, Richard D. McKinzie, eds.

Russian-American Dialogue on Cultural Relations, 1776–1914 . Columbia, Missouri, and London, UK: University of Missouri Press, p. 95.

ISBN 978-0826210975 .

^ "Eastern Theater of the Civil War" .

Legends of America . Retrieved April 22, 2024 .

^ Anderson 1989 , p. 91.

^ Freeman, Douglas Southall (1934).

R. E. Lee: A Biography . Vol. II. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 78 and footnote 6.

^ Foote 1974 , pp. 464–519.

^ Bruce Catton , Terrible Swift Sword , pp. 263–296.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 424–427.

^ a b McPherson 1988 , pp. 538–544.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 528–533.

^ "Overview of the Battle" .

history.army.mil . Archived from the original on December 17, 2007 . Retrieved September 13, 2024 .

On 3 August, General Halleck directed General McClellan to begin his final withdrawal from the Peninsula and to return to Northern Virginia to support Pope. McClellan protested and did not begin his redeployment until 14 August. The situation created an opportunity for General Lee. The removal of the Army of the Potomac as a threat meant that there would be a short period when he could turn on Pope's force and actually outnumber it before the merger of the two Federal armies.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 543–545.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 557–558.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 571–574.

^ Matteson, John , A Worse Place Than Hell: How the Civil War Battle of Fredericksburg Changed a Nation , New York: W. W. Norton, 2021.

^ Jones, Wilmer L. (2006).

Generals in Blue and Gray: Lincoln's Generals . Stackpole. pp.

237– 238.

ISBN 978-1-4617-5106-9 .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 639–645.

^ Noyalas, Jonathan A. (2010).

Stonewall Jackson's 1862 Valley Campaign . Arcadia. p. 93.

ISBN 978-1-61423-040-3 .

^ Thomas, Emory M. (1997).

Robert E. Lee: A Biography . W. W. Norton. p. 287.

ISBN 978-0-393-31631-5 .

^ "Salem Church" .

National Park Service . October 5, 2021 . Retrieved March 30, 2022 .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 653–663.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 664.

^ "Gettysburg" .

American Battlefield Trust . Retrieved May 5, 2025 .

^ a b Bowery, Charles R. (2014).

The Civil War in the Western Theater, 1862 . Washington, D.C.: Center of Military History. pp.

58– 72.

ISBN 978-0-16-092316-6 .

^ a b "Vicksburg" . American Battlefield Trust . Retrieved September 27, 2022 .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 405–413.

^ Whitsell, Robert D. (1963). "Military and Naval Activity between Cairo and Columbus".

Register of the Kentucky Historical Society .

62 (2): 107– 121.

^ Frank & Reaves 2003 , p. 170.

^ "Death of Albert Sidney Johnston – Tour Stop #17" . National Park Service . Retrieved March 12, 2022 .

^ a b McPherson 1988 , pp. 418–420.

^ Kennedy, p. 58.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Symonds & Clipson 2001 , p. 92.

^ "10 Facts: The Vicksburg Campaign" . American Battlefield Trust. January 31, 2013 . Retrieved September 13, 2022 .

^ Brown, Kent Masterson (2000).

The Civil War in Kentucky: Battle for the Bluegrass State . Mason City, IA: Savas. p. 95.

ISBN 978-1-882810-47-5 .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 419–420.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 480–483.

^ Mangum, Ronald Scott (1991).

"The Vicksburg Campaign: A Study In Joint Operations" (PDF) .

Parameters: U.S. Army War College .

21 (3): 74– 86. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 27, 2012.

^ Miller, Donald L.

Vicksburg: Grant's Campaign that Broke the Confederacy . New York: Simon & Schuster, 2019.

ISBN 978-1-4516-4137-0 .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 677–680.

^ "Sherman's March to the Sea" . American Battlefield Trust. September 17, 2014.

^ Jones 2011 , p. 1476.

^ Keegan 2009 , p. 100.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 404–405.

^ Martin, James B. (2012).

Third War: Irregular Warfare on the Western Border 1861–1865 . Leavenworth papers. Vol. 23. Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press.

OCLC 1029877004 .

^ Fellman, Michael (1989).

Inside War: The Guerrilla Conflict in Missouri during the Civil War . New York: Oxford University Press.

Missouri alone was the scene of over 1,000 engagements between regular units, and uncounted numbers of guerrilla attacks and raids by informal pro-Confederate bands, especially in the recently settled western counties.

^ Bohl, Sarah (2004). "A War on Civilians: Order Number 11 and the Evacuation of Western Missouri".

Prologue .

36 (1): 44– 51.

^ Keegan 2009 , p. 270.

^ Graves, William H. (1991). "Indian Soldiers for the Gray Army: Confederate Recruitment in Indian Territory".

Chronicles of Oklahoma .

69 (2): 134– 145.

^ Neet, J. Frederick Jr. (1996). "Stand Watie: Confederate General in the Cherokee Nation".

Great Plains Journal .

6 (1): 36– 51.

^ Keegan 2009 , pp. 220–221.

^ "Red River Campaign" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on March 27, 2022.

^ Symonds, Craig L. (2012).

The Civil War at Sea . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 110.

ISBN 978-0-19-993168-2 .

^ "Second Battle of Fort Wagner" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved January 25, 2022 .

^ Lattimore, Ralston B.

"Battle for Fort Pulaski – Fort Pulaski National Monument" .

National Park Service . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ Trefousse, Hans L.

(1957).

Ben Butler: The South Called Him Beast!

. New York: Twayne.

OCLC 371213 .

^ "War in the West · Civil War · Digital Exhibits" .

digitalexhibits.wsulibs.wsu.edu . Retrieved March 7, 2022 .

^ Neely, Mark E. (December 2004). "Was the Civil War a Total War?".

Civil War History .

50 (4): 434– 458.

doi : 10.1353/cwh.2004.0073 .

^ Grant, Ulysses S. (1990).

Personal Memoirs of U.S. Grant; Selected Letters . Library of America. p.

247 .

ISBN 978-0-940450-58-5 .

^ Field, Ron (2013).

Petersburg 1864–65: The Longest Siege . Osprey. p. 6.

ISBN 978-1-4728-0305-4 .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 724–735.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 728.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 724–742.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 778–779.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 773–776.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 812–815.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 825–830.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 846–847.

^ "Union / Victory! / Peace! / Surrender of General Lee and His Whole Army" .

The New York Times . April 10, 1865. p. 1.

^ "Most Glorious News of the War / Lee Has Surrendered to Grant ! / All Lee's Officers and Men Are Paroled" .

Savannah Daily Herald . Savannah, GA. April 16, 1865. pp. 1, 4.

^ Simpson, Brooks D. (1991).

Let Us Have Peace: Ulysses S. Grant and the Politics of War and Reconstruction, 1861–1868 . Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. p. 84.

^ William Marvel (2002) Lee's Last Retreat: The Flight to Appomattox , pp. 158–181.

^ Winik, Jay (2001).

April 1865: the month that saved America . New York: HarperCollins. pp.

188– 189.

ISBN 0-06-018723-9 .

^ Long 1971 , p. 685.

^ Arnold, James R.; Wiener, Roberta (2016).

Understanding U.S. Military Conflicts through Primary Sources [4 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. p. 15.

ISBN 978-1-61069-934-1 .

^ Long 1971 , p. 688.

^ Bradley 2015 , p. 68.

^ Hunt 2015 , p. 5.

^ Long 1971 , p. 690.

^ Dunkerly 2015 , p. 117.

^ Long 1971 , p. 692.

^ "Ulysses S. Grant: The Myth of 'Unconditional Surrender' Begins at Fort Donelson" . American Battlefield Trust. April 17, 2009. Archived from the original on February 7, 2016.

^ Morris, John Wesley (1977).

Ghost Towns of Oklahoma . University of Oklahoma Press. p. 68.

ISBN 978-0-8061-1420-0 .

^ Bradley 2015 , p. 69. "The 58-year-old Cherokee chieftain was the last Confederate general to lay down his arms. The last Confederate-affiliated tribe to surrender was the Chickasaw nation, which capitulated on 14 July." ^ Conner, Robert C.

General Gordon Granger: The Savior of Chickamauga and the Man Behind "Juneteenth" . Havertown, PA: Casemate Publishers, 2013.

ISBN 978-1-61200-186-9 . p. 177.

^ Gates, Henry Louis Jr.

(January 16, 2013).

"What Is Juneteenth?" .

PBS . Retrieved June 12, 2020 .

^ Neff 2010 , p. 205.

^ Lincoln, Abraham (April 11, 1865).

"Proclamation 128—Claiming Equality of Rights with All Maritime Nations" .

The American Presidency Project . Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley. University of California, Santa Barbara.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2022 . Retrieved July 25, 2022 .

The proclamation did not use the term "belligerent rights".

^ Johnson, Andrew (May 10, 1865).

"Proclamation 132—Ordering the Arrest of Insurgent Cruisers" .

The American Presidency Project . Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley. University of California, Santa Barbara.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2022 . Retrieved July 25, 2022 .

The proclamation did not use the term "belligerent rights".

^ "Withdrawal of Belligerent Rights by Great Britain" .

Army and Navy Journal .

2 (44). New York: American News Company: 695. June 24, 1865 . Retrieved July 25, 2022 .

^ "England and the Termination of the Rebellion" .

Army and Navy Journal .

2 (48). New York: American News Company: 763. July 22, 1865 . Retrieved July 25, 2022 .

^ "Withdrawal of British Restrictions Upon American Naval Vessels" .

Army and Navy Journal .

3 (11). New York: American News Company: 172. November 4, 1865 . Retrieved July 25, 2022 .

^ Heidler, Heidler & Coles 2002 , pp. 703–706.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 851.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 855.

^ a b Gabor S. Boritt (ed.).

Why the Confederacy Lost .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 771–772.

^ "Manufactures of the United States in 1860; Compiled from the original returns of the Eight Census" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 17, 2017.

^ Carter, Susan B. (ed.).

The Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition (5 vols), 2006.

^ Martis, Kenneth C. (1994).

The Historical Atlas of the Congresses of the Confederate States of America: 1861–1865 . Simon & Schuster. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-13-389115-7 .

At the beginning of 1865, the Confederacy controlled one third of its congressional districts, which were apportioned by population. The major slave populations found in Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee, and Alabama were effectively under Union control by the end of 1864.

^ Depew, Chauncey , ed. (1968).

One Hundred Years of American Commerce 1795–1895 . New York: Greenwood. p. 111.

^ "U.S. Railroad Construction, 1860–1880" .

Digital History Reader . Virginia Tech.

Archived from the original on June 11, 2016 . Retrieved August 21, 2012 .

^ Murray, Bernstein & Knox 1996 , p. 235.

^ Heidler, Heidler & Coles 2002 , pp. 1207–1210.

^ Ward 1990 , p. 272.

^ Coulter 1950 , p. 566.

^ Beringer, Richard E.; Hattaway, Herman; Jones, Archer; Still, William N. Jr. (1991).

Why the South Lost the Civil War . ch. 1.

^ Farmer, Alan (2005).

"Why was the Confederacy Defeated?" .

History Review . pp.

15– 20. Archived from the original on March 23, 2014 – via History Today.

^ McPherson 1997 , pp. 169–172.

^ Gallagher, Gary W.

(1999).

The Confederate War . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 57.

ISBN 978-0-674-16056-9 .

^ Fehrenbacher, Don (2004).

"Lincoln's Wartime Leadership: The First Hundred Days" .

Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association .

9 (1). University of Illinois . Retrieved October 16, 2007 .

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 382–388.

^ Doyle 2015 .

^ Bordewich, Fergus M. (February 6, 2015).

"The World Was Watching: America's Civil War slowly came to be seen as part of a global struggle against oppressive privilege" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on February 21, 2017.

^ a b c Dupont, Brandon; Rosenbloom, Joshua L. (2018).

"The Economic Origins of the Postwar Southern Elite" .

Explorations in Economic History .

68 : 119– 131.

doi : 10.1016/j.eeh.2017.09.002 .

^ "U.S. Civil War Took Bigger Toll Than Previously Estimated, New Analysis Suggests" .

Science Daily . September 22, 2011 . Retrieved September 22, 2011 .

^ "Civil War Toll Much Worse in Confederate States, New Estimates Show" .

archive.ph . November 19, 2024. Archived from the original on November 19, 2024 . Retrieved November 27, 2024 .

^ a b Barceló, Joan; Jensen, Jeffrey L.; Peisakhin, Leonid; Zhai, Haoyu (November 26, 2024).

"New Estimates of US Civil War mortality from full-census records" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

121 (48): e2414919121.

Bibcode : 2024PNAS..12114919B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2414919121 .

PMC 11621511 .

PMID 39556740 .

^ Vinovskis 1990 , p. 7.

^ Richard Wightman Fox (2008). " National Life After Death ".

Slate .

^ Yancey Hall (July 1, 2003).

"US Civil War Prison Camps Claimed Thousands" .

National Geographic News . Archived from the original on July 7, 2003.

^ Riordan, Teresa (March 8, 2004).

"When Necessity Meets Ingenuity: Art of Restoring What's Missing" .

The New York Times .

Associated Press . Retrieved December 23, 2013 .

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 854.

^ Aptheker, Herbert (January 1947). "Negro Casualties in the Civil War".

The Journal of Negro History .

32 (1). University of Chicago Press: 10– 80.

doi : 10.2307/2715291 .

ISSN 0022-2992 .

JSTOR 2715291 .

^ "American Civil War Fortifications" .

Osprey .

^ Jim Downs, Sick from Freedom: African-American Illness and Suffering during the Civil War and Reconstruction , Oxford University Press, 2012.

^ "The Battle of Gettysburg & the History of the Civil War Horse" . June 25, 2013 . Retrieved January 2, 2024 .

^ Jones, J. William (ed.).

"1.37: Confederate States' flags" .

Southern Historical Society Papers . Vol. 32 . Retrieved January 9, 2024 – via Perseus Digital Library.

^ "Returned Flags Booklet, 1905" . Retrieved January 9, 2024 – via PBS LearningMedia.

^ a b c McPherson 1988 , pp. vii–viii.

^ Foner 2010 , p. 74.

^ Foner 1981 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ a b McPherson 1988 , pp. 506–508.

^ McPherson 1988 , p. 686.

^ Cathey, Libby (June 17, 2021).

"Biden signs bill making Juneteenth, marking the end of slavery, a federal holiday" .

ABC News . Retrieved June 17, 2021 .

^ Claudia Goldin , "The economics of emancipation." The Journal of Economic History 33#1 (1973): 66–85.

^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 831–837.

^ a b Donald 1995 , pp. 417–419.

^ Baker 2003 .

^ McPherson, James M., "Lincoln and the Strategy of Unconditional Surrender", in Boritt, Gabor S.

(ed.).

Lincoln, the War President , pp. 52–54; also in McPherson, James M., Abraham Lincoln and the Second American Revolution , pp. 83–85.

^ Oates, Stephen B.

, Abraham Lincoln: The Man Behind the Myths , p. 106.

^ Stahr, Walter, Stanton: Lincoln's War Secretary , New York: Simon & Schuster, 2017, p. 226.

^ "Horace Greeley (1811–1872). "The Prayer of Twenty Millions". Stedman and Hutchinson, eds. 1891. A Library of American Literature: An Anthology in 11 Volumes" .

www.bartleby.com . June 14, 2022.

^ Lincoln's letter was published first in the Washington National Intelligencer on August 23, 1862.

Holzer, Harold , Lincoln and the Power of the Press: The War for Public Opinion , New York: Simon & Schuster, 2014, p. 401.

^ Abraham Lincoln (August 24, 1862).

"A LETTER FROM PRESIDENT LINCOLN.; Reply to Horace Greeley. Slavery and the Union The Restoration of the Union the Paramount Object" .

The New York Times .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Wikidata Q116965145 .

^ White, Jonathan W., A House Built by Slaves: African American Visitors to the Lincoln White House , Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2022, ch. 3.

^ Pulling, Sr. Anne Frances, Altoona: Images of America , Arcadia Publishing, 2001, 10.

^ Lincoln's Letter to A. G. Hodges, April 4, 1864.

^ "Lincoln Lore – Albert G. Hodges" .

Kentucky Legislature . Retrieved January 20, 2022 .

^ "Andrew Johnson and Emancipation in Tennessee – Andrew Johnson National Historic Site" .

National Park Service .

^ Harper, Douglas (2003).

"Slavery in Delaware" .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2007 . Retrieved October 16, 2007 .

^ McPherson, James (March 1990).

"A War that Never Goes Away" .

American Heritage Magazine . Vol. 41, no. 2.

^ Asante & Mazama 2004 , p. 82.

^ Holzer & Gabbard 2007 , pp. 172–174.

^ Rhodes-Pitts, Sharifa (October 9, 2014).

"The Worth of Black Men, From Slavery to Ferguson" .

The New York Times Magazine .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 25, 2023 .

^ "Finally Passing" .

The Economist . March 31, 2011. pp.

23– 25.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2011.

^ Hans L. Trefousse , Historical Dictionary of Reconstruction (Greenwood, 1991) covers all the main events and leaders.

^ Eric Foner's A Short History of Reconstruction (1990) is a brief survey—an abridgement of his Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877 (1988).

^ C. Vann Woodward , Reunion and Reaction: The Compromise of 1877 and the End of Reconstruction (2nd ed. 1991).

^ Williams, Susan Millar; Hoffius, Stephen G. (2011).

Upheaval in Charleston: Earthquake and Murder on the Eve of Jim Crow . University of Georgia Press.

ISBN 978-0-8203-3715-9 .

JSTOR j.ctt46nc9q .

^ "Presidents Who Were Civil War Veterans" .

Essential Civil War Curriculum .

^ Joan Waugh and Gary W. Gallagher , eds. (2009), Wars within a War: Controversy and Conflict over the American Civil War (University of North Carolina Press).

^ Gordon, Lesley J.

(2024).

Dread Danger: Cowardice and Combat in the American Civil War . Cambridge University Press.

^ David W. Blight (2001) Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory .

^ Woodworth 1996 , p. 208.

^ Cushman, Stephen (2014).

Belligerent Muse: Five Northern Writers and How They Shaped Our Understanding of the Civil War . University of North Carolina Press. pp.

5– 6.

ISBN 978-1-4696-1878-4 .

^ Oscar Handlin ; Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr.

; Samuel Eliot Morison ; Frederick Merk ; Arthur M. Schlesinger ; Paul Herman Buck (1954), Harvard Guide to American History , Belknap Press, pp.

385– 398, Wikidata Q118746838 ^ Gaines M. Foster (1988), Ghosts of the Confederacy: Defeat, the Lost Cause and the Emergence of the New South, 1865–1913 .

^ Nolan 2000 , pp. 14–19.

^ Nolan 2000 , pp. 28–29.

^ Charles A. Beard and Mary R. Beard, The Rise of American Civilization (1927), 2:54.

^ Hofstadter, Richard (2012) [1968].

Progressive Historians . Knopf Doubleday. p. 304.

ISBN 978-0-307-80960-5 .

^ West, Mike (April 27, 2007).

"Hazen's Monument a rare, historic treasure" .

Murfreesboro Post . Archived from the original on November 18, 2018 . Retrieved May 30, 2018 .

^ Timothy B. Smith, "The Golden Age of Battlefield Preservation" (2008; The University of Tennessee Press).

^ Bob Zeller, "Fighting the Second Civil War: A History of Battlefield Preservation and the Emergence of the Civil War Trust", (2017: Knox Press) ^ "Saved Land" . American Battlefield Trust. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019 . Retrieved May 30, 2018 .

^ McWhirter, Cameron (May 25, 2019).

"Civil War Battlefields Lose Ground as Tourist Draws" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on October 10, 2019.

^ Gary Gallagher, Causes Won, Lost, and Forgotten: How Hollywood and Popular Art Shape What We Know about the Civil War (Univ of North Carolina Press, 2008).

^ "Debate over Ken Burns Civil War doc continues over decades" .

The Spokesman-Review . November 4, 2017 . Retrieved May 4, 2020 .

^ Merritt, Keri Leigh.

"Why We Need a New Civil War Documentary" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved May 4, 2020 .

^ Bailey, Thomas; Kennedy, David (1987).

The American Pageant . p. 434.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Dome, Steam (1974). "A Civil War Iron Clad Car".

Railroad History .

130 (Spring 1974). The Railway & Locomotive Historical Society: 51– 53.

^ William Rattle Plum, The Military Telegraph During the Civil War in the United States , Christopher H. Sterling (ed.) (New York: Arno Press, 1974) vol. 1 p. 63.

^ Buckley, John (2006).

Air Power in the Age of Total War . Routledge. pp. 6, 24.

ISBN 978-1-135-36275-1 .

^ Sondhaus, Naval Warfare 1815–1914 p. 77.

^ Keegan 2009 , p. 75.

^ Hutchison, Coleman (2015).

A History of American Civil War Literature . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-316-43241-9 .

Bibliography Main articles: Bibliography of the American Civil War and Bibliography of American Civil War naval history Sources referenced Anderson, Bern (1989).

By Sea and By River: The naval history of the Civil War . Hachette.

ISBN 978-0-306-80367-3 .

Asante, Molefi Kete; Mazama, Ama (2004).

Encyclopedia of Black Studies . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

ISBN 978-0-7619-2762-4 .

Baker, Kevin (February–March 2003).

"Violent City" .

American Heritage Magazine . Vol. 54, no. 1. Archived from the original on October 19, 2010 . Retrieved July 29, 2010 .

Blair, William A. (2015). "Finding the Ending of America's Civil War".

The American Historical Review .

120 (5). Oxford University Press: 1753– 1766.

doi : 10.1093/ahr/120.5.1753 .

ISSN 0002-8762 .

JSTOR 43697075 .

Bradley, Mark L. (2015).

The Civil War Ends (PDF) . US Army, Center of Military History. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 26, 2022 . Retrieved May 26, 2022 .

Canney, Donald L. (1998).

Lincoln's Navy: The Ships, Men and Organization, 1861–65 . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-519-4 .

Chambers, John W.; Anderson, Fred (1999).

The Oxford Companion to American Military History . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-507198-6 .

Catton, Bruce (1965).

The Centennial History of the Civil War . Vol. 3: Never Call Retreat. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

Coulter, E. Merton (1950).

The Confederate States of America, 1861–1865: A History of the South . Louisiana State University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8071-0007-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Davis, Jefferson (1881).

The Rise And Fall Of The Confederate Government . Vol. II. New York: D. Appleton & Co.

OCLC 1249017603 .

Dinçaslan, M. Bahadırhan (2022).

Amerikan İç Savaşı El Kitabı [ American Civil War Handbook ] (in Turkish). Ankara: Altınordu Yayınları Press.

ISBN 978-6-257-61066-7 .

Donald, David Herbert (1995).

Lincoln . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-80846-8 .

Doyle, Don H. (2015).

The Cause of All Nations: An International History of the American Civil War . New York: Basic.

Draper, John William (1870).

History of the American Civil War . Vol. 3. New York: Harper & Brothers.

OCLC 830251756 . Retrieved July 28, 2022 .

Dunkerly, Robert M. (2015).

To the Bitter End: Appomattox, Bennett Place and the Surrenders of the Confederacy . El Dorado Hills, CA: Savas Beatie.

ISBN 978-1-61121-252-5 .

Dyer, Frederick H.

(1908).

A compendium of the War of the Rebellion . Des Moines, IA: Dyer.

OCLC 8697590 .

Foner, Eric (1981).

Politics and Ideology in the Age of the Civil War . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-502926-0 . Retrieved April 20, 2012 .

Foner, Eric (2010).

The Fiery Trial: Abraham Lincoln and American Slavery . New York: W. W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-34066-2 .

Foote, Shelby (1974).

The Civil War: A Narrative . Vol. 1: Fort Sumter to Perryville. New York: Vintage.

ISBN 978-0-394-74623-4 .

Frank, Joseph Allan; Reaves, George A. (2003).

Seeing the Elephant: Raw Recruits at the Battle of Shiloh . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 978-0-252-07126-3 .

Fuller, Howard J. (2008).

Clad in Iron: The American Civil War and the Challenge of British Naval Power . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-59114-297-3 .

Gallagher, Gary W.; Engle, Stephen D.; Krick, Robert K.; Glatthaar, Joseph T. (2003).

The American Civil War: This Mighty Scourge of War . New York: Osprey.

ISBN 978-1-84176-736-9 .

Grant, Ulysses S.

(1886).

Personal Memoirs of US Grant . Vol. 2. New York: Charles L. Webster & Co.

OCLC 255136538 .

Greeley, Horace (1866).

The American Conflict: A History of the Great Rebellion in the United States, 1860–'65 . Vol. II. Hartford: O. D. Case & Co.

OCLC 936872302 .

Heidler, David S.; Heidler, Jeanne T.; Coles, David J. (2002).

Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political, Social, and Military History . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-57607-382-7 .

Herring, George C. (2011).

From Colony to Superpower: US Foreign Relations since 1776 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-976553-9 .

Holzer, Harold ; Gabbard, Sara Vaughn, eds. (2007).

Lincoln and Freedom: Slavery, Emancipation, and the Thirteenth Amendment . Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8093-2764-5 .

Hunt, Jeffrey William (2015).

The Last Battle of the Civil War: Palmetto Ranch . Austin: University of Texas Press.

ISBN 978-0-292-73461-6 .

Johnson, Timothy D. (1998).

Winfield Scott: The Quest for Military Glory . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0-7006-0914-7 .

Jones, Howard (2002).

Crucible of Power: A History of American Foreign Relations to 1913 . Wilmington, DE: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8420-2916-2 .

Jones, Terry L. (2011).

Historical Dictionary of the Civil War . Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7953-9 .

Keegan, John (2009).

The American Civil War: A Military History . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-307-26343-8 .

Keller, Christian B. (January 2009). "Flying Dutchmen and Drunken Irishmen: The Myths and Realities of Ethnic Civil War Soldiers".

Journal of Military History .

73 (1): 117– 145.

doi : 10.1353/jmh.0.0194 .

Leonard, Elizabeth D. (1999).

All the Daring of the Soldier: Women of the Civil War Armies . W.W. Norton & Co.

ISBN 0-393-04712-1 .

Long, E. B. (1971).

The Civil War Day by Day: An Almanac, 1861–1865 . Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

OCLC 68283123 .

McPherson, James M. (1988).

Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-503863-7 .

McPherson, James M. (1997).

For Cause and Comrades: Why Men Fought in the Civil War . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-974105-2 .

Mendelsohn, Adam (2012).

"Samuel and Saul Isaac: International Jewish Arms Dealers, Blockade Runners, and Civil War Profiteers" (PDF) .

Journal of the Southern Jewish Historical Society .

15 . Southern Jewish Historical Society: 41– 79.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

Murray, Robert B. (Autumn 1967).

The End of the Rebellion . The North Carolina Historical Review.

Murray, Williamson; Bernstein, Alvin; Knox, MacGregor (1996).

The Making of Strategy: Rulers, States, and War . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-56627-8 .

Neely, Mark E.

(1993).

Confederate Bastille: Jefferson Davis and Civil Liberties . Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press.

ISBN 978-0-87462-325-3 .

Neff, Stephen C. (2010).

Justice in Blue and Gray: A Legal History of the Civil War . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-1-61121-252-5 .

Nelson, James L. (2005).

Reign of Iron: The Story of the First Battling Ironclads, the Monitor and the Merrimack . New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-052404-3 .

Nolan, Alan T. (2000). Gallagher, Gary W.; Nolan, Alan T. (eds.).

The Myth of the Lost Cause and Civil War History .

Potter, David M.; Fehrenbacher, Don E. (1976).

The Impending Crisis, 1848–1861 . New York: Harper & Row.

ISBN 978-0-06-013403-7 .

Richter, William L. (2009).

The A to Z of the Civil War and Reconstruction . Lanham: Scarecrow.

ISBN 978-0-8108-6336-1 .

Robertson, James I. Jr.

(1963).

The Civil War . Washington, DC: Civil War Centennial Commission .

OCLC 299955768 .

Schecter, Barnet (2007).

The Devil's Own Work: The Civil War Draft Riots and the Fight to Reconstruct America .

Stephenson, Nathaniel W. (1919).

The Day of the Confederacy . Vol. 30, A Chronicle of the Embattled South . The Chronicles Of America Series. New Haven: Yale University Press; Toronto: Glasgow, Brook & Co.; London: Oxford University Press.

Stern, Phillip Van Doren (1962).

The Confederate Navy . Doubleday.

Symonds, Craig L.

; Clipson, William J. (2001).

The Naval Institute Historical Atlas of the US Navy . Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-984-0 .

Trudeau, Noah Andre (1994).

Out of the Storm: The End of the Civil War, April–June 1865 . Boston: Little, Brown & Co.

ISBN 978-0-316-85328-6 .

Tucker, Spencer C.; Pierpaoli, Paul G.; White, William E. (2010).

The Civil War Naval Encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-59884-338-5 .

Vinovskis, Maris (1990).

Toward a Social History of the American Civil War: Exploratory Essays . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-39559-5 .

Ward, Geoffrey R. (1990).

The Civil War: An Illustrated History . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-394-56285-8 .

Weigley, Frank Russell (2004).

A Great Civil War: A Military and Political History, 1861–1865 . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-33738-2 .

Winters, John D. (1963).

The Civil War in Louisiana . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8071-0834-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Wise, Stephen R. (1991).

Lifeline of the Confederacy: Blockade Running During the Civil War . University of South Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-87249-799-3 .

Wittke, Carl (1952).

Refugees of Revolution . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-1-5128-0874-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Woodworth, Steven E. (1996).

The American Civil War: A Handbook of Literature and Research . Wesport, CT: Greenwood.

ISBN 978-0-313-29019-0 .

Web sources Downs, James (April 13, 2012).

"Colorblindness in the demographic death toll of the Civil War" .

Oxford University Press blog .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2018.

Further reading Ahlstrom, Sydney E. (1972).

A Religious History of the American People . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-01762-5 .

Beringer, Richard E.; Hattaway, Herman; Jones, Archer; Still, William N. Jr. (1986).

Why the South Lost the Civil War . Athens: University of Georgia Press.

ISBN 978-0-8203-0815-9 .

Influential analysis of factors; an abridged version is Beringer, Richard E. (1988).

The Elements of Confederate Defeat: Nationalism, War Aims, and Religion . Athens: University of Georgia Press.

ISBN 978-0-8203-1077-0 .

Bestor, Arthur (1964). "The American Civil War as a Constitutional Crisis".

American Historical Review .

69 (2): 327– 352.

doi : 10.2307/1844986 .

JSTOR 1844986 .

Gallagher, Gary W. (2011).

The Union War . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-06608-3 .

Gallagher, Gary W.

; Varon, Elizabeth R.

, eds. (2019).

New Perspectives on the Union War . New York: Fordham University Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctvh1dnpx .

ISBN 978-0-8232-8456-6 .

JSTOR j.ctvh1dnpx .

Gara, Larry (1964). "The Fugitive Slave Law: A Double Paradox". In Unger, Irwin (ed.).

Essays on the Civil War and Reconstruction . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston (published 1970).

ISBN 978-0-03-079640-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) (originally published in Civil War History , Vol. 10, No. 3, September 1964, pp. 229–240).

Hofstadter, Richard (1938). "The Tariff Issue on the Eve of the Civil War".

American Historical Review .

44 (1): 50– 55.

doi : 10.2307/1840850 .

JSTOR 1840850 .

Johannsen, Robert W. (1973).

Stephen A. Douglas . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-501620-8 .

Krannawitter, Thomas L. (2008).

Vindicating Lincoln: defending the politics of our greatest president . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5972-1 .

McPherson, James M.

(2007).

This Mighty Scourge: Perspectives on the Civil War . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-539242-5 .

Nevins, Allan .

Ordeal of the Union , an 8-volume set (1947–1971); the most detailed political, economic and military narrative; by Pulitzer Prize-winner.

Ordeal of the Union: Fruits of Manifest Destiny, 1847–1852 ; online ; Ordeal of the Union: A House Dividing, 1852–1857 ; The Emergence of Lincoln: Douglas, Buchanan, and Party Chaos, 1857–1859 ; The Emergence of Lincoln: Prologue to Civil War, 1859–1861 ; War for the Union: The Improvised War, 1861–1862 ; War for the Union: War Becomes Revolution, 1862–1863 ; online ; War for the Union: The Organized War, 1863–1864 ; War for the Union: The Organized War to Victory, 1864–1865 Olsen, Christopher J. (2002).

Political Culture and Secession in Mississippi: Masculinity, Honor, and the Antiparty Tradition, 1830–1860 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-516097-0 .

Potter, David M. (1962). "The Historian's Use of Nationalism and Vice Versa".

American Historical Review .

67 (4): 924– 950.

doi : 10.2307/1845246 .

JSTOR 1845246 .

Ritter, Charles F.; Wakelyn, Jon L., eds. (1998).

Leaders of the American Civil War: A Biographical and Historiographical Dictionary .

Provides short biographies and historiographical summaries.

Russell, Robert R. (1966). "Constitutional Doctrines with Regard to Slavery in Territories".

Journal of Southern History .

32 (4): 466– 486.

doi : 10.2307/2204926 .

JSTOR 2204926 .

Sheehan-Dean, Aaron (April 2014).

A Companion to the US Civil War . 2-Volume Set. New York: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-4443-5131-6 .

1232 pp; 64 Topical chapters by scholars and experts; emphasis on historiography.

Stampp, Kenneth M.

(1990).

America in 1857: A Nation on the Brink . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-503902-3 .

Thornton, Mark; Ekelund, Robert Burton (2004).

Tariffs, Blockades, and Inflation: The Economics of the Civil War . Wilmington, DE: SR.

ISBN 978-0-8420-2961-2 .

Varon, Elizabeth R.

(2008).

Disunion!: The Coming of the American Civil War, 1789–1859 . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-8078-3232-5 .

Weeks, William E. (2013).

The New Cambridge History of American Foreign Relations . Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-00590-7 .

Soldier life: North and South Carmichael, Peter S.

(2018).

The War for the Common Soldier: How Men Thought, Fought, and Survived in Civil War Armies . The Littlefield history of the Civil War era. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press .

ISBN 978-1-4696-4309-0 .

Frank, Joseph Allan; Reaves, George A. (2003) [1989].

'Seeing the Elephant': Raw Recruits at the Battle of Shiloh . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 978-0-252-07126-3 .

Hesseltine, William B., ed. (1972).

Civil War Prisons . Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press .

ISBN 978-0-87338-131-4 .

Linderman, Gerald (1989).

Embattled Courage: The Experience of Combat in the American Civil War . New York: Free Press .

ISBN 978-1-4391-1857-3 .

Livermore, Thomas L. (1901).

Numbers and Losses in the Civil War in America, 1861–65 . Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company .

McPherson, James M. (1997).

For Cause and Comrades: Why Men Fought in the Civil War . New York ; Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-509023-9 .

Manning, Chandra (2007).

What This Cruel War Was Over: Soldiers, Slavery, and the Civil War . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-307-26482-4 .

OCLC 72989064 .

Uses letters, diaries, and regimental newspapers to probe the world view of soldiers—black and white, Yankee and Rebel.

Interview with author Mitchell, Reid (1988).

Civil War Soldiers: Their Expectations and Their Experiences . New York: Viking .

ISBN 978-0-670-81742-9 .

Robertson, James I. (1988).

Soldiers Blue and Gray . American military history. Columbia, S.C: University of South Carolina Press .

ISBN 978-0-87249-572-2 .

Meier, Kathryn (2013).

Nature's Civil War: Common Soldiers and the Environment in 1862 Virginia . Civil War America. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press .

ISBN 978-1-4696-1076-4 .

Wiley, Bell I.

(1994).

The Life of Johnny Reb and The Life of Billy Yank . New York: Book-of-the-Month Club.

Two standard scholarly histories combined, originals: —— (1943).

The Life of Johnny Reb: The Common Soldier of the Confederacy . Indianopolis ; New York: Bobbs-Merrill Company .

—— (1952).

The Life of Billy Yank: The Common Soldier of the Union . Indianopolis ; New York: Bobbs-Merrill Company .

External links American Civil War at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage West Point Atlas of Civil War Battles Civil War photos at the National Archives View images from the Civil War Photographs Collection at the Library of Congress The short film A House Divided (1960) is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive .

"American Civil World" maps at the Persuasive Cartography, The PJ Mode Collection , Cornell University Library Statements of each state as to why they were seceding , battlefields.org National Park Service Civil War Places Civil War Battlefield Places from the National Park Service American Battlefield Trust – A non-profit land preservation and educational organization with two divisions, the Civil War Trust and the Revolutionary War Trust, dedicated to preserving America's battlefields through land acquisitions.

Civil War Era Digital Collection at Gettysburg College – This collection contains digital images of political cartoons, personal papers, pamphlets, maps, paintings and photographs from the Civil War Era held in Special Collections at Gettysburg College.

The Civil War – site with 7,000 pages, including the complete run of Harper's Weekly newspapers from the Civil War v t e American Civil War Origins Origins Timeline leading to the War Bleeding Kansas Border states Compromise of 1850 John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry Kansas-Nebraska Act Lincoln–Douglas debates Missouri Compromise Nullification crisis Panic of 1857 Popular sovereignty Secession South Carolina Declaration of Secession States' rights Proclamation 80 Slavery African Americans Cornerstone Speech Crittenden Compromise Dred Scott v. Sandford Emancipation Proclamation Fire-Eaters Fugitive slave laws Plantations in the American South Positive good Slave Power Treatment of slaves in the United States Uncle Tom's Cabin Abolitionism Abolitionism in the United States Susan B. Anthony James G. Birney John Brown Frederick Douglass William Lloyd Garrison Lane Debates on Slavery Elijah Parish Lovejoy J. Sella Martin Lysander Spooner George Luther Stearns Thaddeus Stevens Charles Sumner Caning Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Combatants Theaters Campaigns Battles States Combatants Union Army Navy Marine Corps Revenue Cutter Service Confederacy Army Navy Marine Corps Theaters Eastern Western Lower Seaboard Trans-Mississippi Pacific Coast Union naval blockade Major campaigns Anaconda Plan Blockade runners New Mexico Jackson's Valley Peninsula Northern Virginia Maryland Stones River Vicksburg Tullahoma Gettysburg Morgan's Raid Bristoe Knoxville Red River Overland Atlanta Valley 1864 Bermuda Hundred Richmond-Petersburg Franklin–Nashville Price's Missouri Expedition Sherman's March Carolinas Mobile Appomattox Major battles Fort Sumter 1st Bull Run Wilson's Creek Fort Donelson Pea Ridge Hampton Roads Shiloh New Orleans Corinth Seven Pines Seven Days 2nd Bull Run Antietam Perryville Fredericksburg Stones River Chancellorsville Gettysburg Vicksburg Chickamauga Chattanooga Wilderness Fort Pillow Spotsylvania Cold Harbor Atlanta Crater Mobile Bay Franklin Nashville Five Forks Involvement States and territories Alabama Arkansas Arizona California Colorado Connecticut Dakota Territory District of Columbia Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indian Territory Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina Ohio Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Cities Atlanta Charleston Chattanooga New Orleans Richmond Washington, D.C.

Winchester Leaders Confederate Military R. H. Anderson Beauregard Bragg Buchanan Cooper Early Ewell Forrest Gorgas Hill Hood Jackson A. S. Johnston J. E. Johnston Lee Longstreet Morgan Mosby Polk Price Semmes E. K. Smith Stuart Taylor Wheeler Civilian Benjamin Bocock Breckinridge Davis Hunter Mallory Memminger Seddon Stephens Union Military Anderson Buell Burnside Butler Du Pont Farragut Foote Frémont Grant Halleck Hooker Hunt McClellan McDowell Meade Meigs Ord Pope D. D. Porter Rosecrans Scott Sheridan Sherman Thomas Civilian Adams Chase Ericsson Hamlin Lincoln Pinkerton Seward Stanton Stevens Wade Welles Aftermath Constitution Reconstruction Amendments 13th Amendment 14th Amendment 15th Amendment Reconstruction Alabama Claims Brooks–Baxter War Carpetbaggers Colfax riot of 1873 Compromise of 1877 Confederate refugees Confederados Eufaula riot of 1874 Freedmen's Bureau Freedman's Savings Bank Homestead Acts Southern Homestead Act of 1866 Timber Culture Act of 1873 Impeachment of Andrew Johnson trial efforts timeline first inquiry second inquiry impeachment managers investigation Kirk–Holden war Knights of the White Camelia Ku Klux Klan Ethnic violence Memphis riots of 1866 Meridian riot of 1871 New Orleans riot of 1866 Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867 South Carolina riots of 1876 Reconstruction acts Habeas Corpus Act of 1867 Enforcement Act of 1870 Enforcement Act of February 1871 Enforcement Act of April 1871 Reconstruction era Reconstruction military districts Reconstruction Treaties Indian Council at Fort Smith Red Shirts Redeemers Scalawags South Carolina riots of 1876 Southern Claims Commission White League Post- Reconstruction Commemoration Centennial Civil War Discovery Trail Civil War Roundtables Civil War Trails Program Civil War Trust Confederate History Month Confederate Memorial Day Decoration Day Historical reenactment Robert E. Lee Day Confederate Memorial Hall Disenfranchisement Black Codes Jim Crow Historiographic issues Lost Cause mythology Modern display of the Confederate flag Red Shirts Sons of Confederate Veterans Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War Daughters of Union Veterans of the Civil War National Society Daughters of the Union 1861-1865 Southern Historical Society United Confederate Veterans United Daughters of the Confederacy Children of the Confederacy Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Monuments and memorials Union List Grand Army of the Republic memorials to Lincoln Confederate List artworks in Capitol memorials to Davis memorials to Lee Removal Cemeteries Ladies' Memorial Associations U.S. national cemeteries Veterans 1913 Gettysburg reunion 1938 Gettysburg reunion Confederate Memorial Hall Confederate Veteran Grand Army of the Republic Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.

Old soldiers' homes Southern Cross of Honor United Confederate Veterans Related topics Military Arms Armies Campaign Medal Cavalry Confederate Home Guard Confederate railroads Confederate revolving cannon Field artillery Infantry Medal of Honor recipients Medicine Naval battles Official Records Partisan rangers POW camps Rations Signal Corps Turning point Union corps badges U.S. Balloon Corps U.S. Home Guard U.S. Military Railroad Political Committee on the Conduct of the War Confederate States presidential election of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1862 Copperheads Diplomacy Emancipation Proclamation Habeas Corpus Act of 1863 Hampton Roads Conference National Union Party Politicians killed Radical Republicans Trent Affair Union Leagues U.S. Presidential Election of 1864 War Democrats Music Battle Hymn of the Republic Dixie John Brown's Body A Lincoln Portrait Marching Through Georgia Maryland, My Maryland Names from the War When Johnny Comes Marching Home Daar kom die Alibama By ethnicity African Americans German Americans Irish Americans Italian Americans Native Americans Catawba Cherokee Choctaw Seminole Other topics Baltimore riot of 1861 Battlefield preservation Bibliography Confederate war finance Confederate States dollar Espionage Confederate Secret Service Great Hanging at Gainesville Great Revival of 1863 Gender issues Juneteenth Naming the war New York City Gold Hoax of 1864 New York City riots of 1863 Photographers Richmond riots of 1863 Salt Supreme Court cases Tokens U.S. Sanitary Commission Women soldiers Related List of films and television shows about the American Civil War Category Portal v t e International response to the American Civil War Australia Bahamas Canada France Hawaii Prussia Spain United Kingdom Foreign enlistment Native Americans v t e Armed conflicts involving the Armed Forces of the United States Listed chronologically Domestic Shays' Rebellion Whiskey Rebellion Fries's Rebellion 1811 German Coast uprising Turner's Rebellion Dorr Rebellion Bleeding Kansas Utah War Harpers Ferry raid American Civil War New York City draft riots New Orleans Massacre of 1866 American Indian Wars Meridian race riot of 1871 Colfax Riot Brooks–Baxter War Battle of Liberty Place Vicksburg riot Range War Hamburg riot Great Railroad Strike of 1877 Lincoln County War Rock Springs Riot Seattle riot of 1886 Johnson County War Coal Creek War 1892 Coeur d'Alene labor strike Homestead strike Pullman Strike 1899 Coeur d'Alene labor confrontation Colorado Coalfield War Red Summer Denver streetcar strike of 1920 Battle of Blair Mountain Tulsa riot Bonus Army Puerto Rican revolts Ole Miss riot of 1962 1960s ghetto rebellions 1969 Greensboro uprising Kent State shootings Wounded Knee Occupation 1992 Los Angeles riots 2020 racial unrest 2021 U.S. Capitol attack 2025 Los Angeles protests Foreign American Revolutionary War American–Algerian War (1785–1795) Quasi-War First Barbary War War of 1812 Second Barbary War First Sumatran expedition Second Sumatran expedition 1840 Fiji expedition Ivory Coast expedition Mexican–American War 1855 Fiji expedition Second Opium War 1858 Fiji expedition Formosa Expedition Korean Expedition Spanish–American War Philippine–American War Boxer Rebellion Banana Wars Border War World War I Russian Civil War World War II Korean War Bay of Pigs Invasion Vietnam War Dominican Civil War Iranian Revolution ( Operation Eagle Claw ) Invasion of Grenada Lebanese Civil War ( 1983 Beirut barracks bombings ) Invasion of Panama Gulf War Somali Civil War ( Operation Gothic Serpent ) Intervention in Haiti Bosnian War Kosovo War War in Afghanistan Iraq War War in North-West Pakistan First Libyan Civil War War against the Islamic State Iraq Syria Cameroon Libya Yemeni civil war Related Conflicts in the U.S.

Wars involving the U.S.

Timeline of U.S. military operations Length of U.S. participation in major wars Territorial evolution Military history History of the Central Intelligence Agency Casualties of war Peace movement List of anti-war organizations Conscientious objector Cold War War on terror War crimes Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Sweden Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Civil_War&oldid=1306480615 " Categories : American Civil War Abraham Lincoln Jefferson Davis Ulysses S. Grant Robert E. Lee Civil wars in the United States Conflicts in 1861 Conflicts in 1862 Conflicts in 1863 Conflicts in 1864 Conflicts in 1865 1860s in the United States 1860s conflicts Presidency of Abraham Lincoln Rebellions against the United States Separatist rebellion-based civil wars Wars involving the United States Wars of independence Andrew Johnson Wars involving the Confederate States Hidden categories: All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from May 2025 CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from August 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from April 2025 Use American English from March 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from July 2023 CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 23:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American Civil War 149 languages Add topic

