Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Current usage in the United Kingdom 3 Current usage in the United States 4 Other extant usage 5 References Toggle the table of contents Master (form of address) 5 languages Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Українська ייִדיש Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English honorific for young men and boys Master is an English honorific for boys and young men. It is usually abbreviated to MSTR or Mstr.

Etymology [ edit ] Master was used in England for men of some rank, especially "free masters" of a trade guild and by any manual worker or servant employee addressing his employer (his master), but also generally by those lower in status to gentlemen , priests, or scholars. In the Elizabethan period, it was used between equals, especially to a group ("My masters"), mainly by urban artisans and tradespeople. It was later extended to all respectable men and was the forerunner of Mister . The proper title of William Shakespeare's First Folio is pronounced Master William Shakespeare's Comedies, Histories, & Tragedies .

[ 1 ] After its replacement in common speech by Mister , Master was retained as a form of address only for boys who had not yet entered society. By the late 19th century, etiquette dictated that men be addressed as Mister , and boys as Master .

Current usage in the United Kingdom [ edit ] The use of Master as a prefixed title is, according to Leslie Dunkling , "a way of addressing politely a boy ... too young to be called 'Mister'." [ 2 ] It can be used as a title and form of address for any boy.

[ 3 ] Master was used sometimes, especially up to the late 19th century, to describe the male head of a large estate or household who employed domestic workers .

[ citation needed ] The heir to a Scottish peerage may use the style or dignity [ 4 ] " Master of " followed by the name associated with the peerage. For instance, the heir of Lord Elphinstone is known as the Master of Elphinstone.

Current usage in the United States [ edit ] Nancy Tuckerman, in the Amy Vanderbilt Complete Book of Etiquette , writes that in the United States, unlike the UK, a boy can be addressed as Master only until age 12, then is addressed only by his name with no title until he turns 18, when he takes the title of Mr.

, [ 5 ] : 662 although it is not improper to use Mr.

if he is slightly younger.

Other extant usage [ edit ] In the 21st century, Master as an honorific or more often master as a professional term still has some use in reference to advanced workers (not always male) in the trades , and sometimes also to academics and educators.  However, it is more frequently used as an adjective for this purpose (e.g. "master bricklayer"), or with an adjective ("school master", "headmaster").

Master is also frequently used (along with feminine Mistress or Domina ) in the BDSM community [ 6 ] as a self-identifier by dominants, and by submissives in addressing them, especially in master/slave -roleplay relationships.

References [ edit ] ^ "The Making of Shakespeare's First Folio, Revised Edition" .

bodleianshop.co.uk . April 2023.

^ Dunkling, Leslie (2012).

Dictionary of Epithets and Terms of Address .

^ Bonner, Mehera (24 June 2021).

"Here's Why Meghan and Harry's Son, Archie Harrison, Isn't a Prince, Despite the Couple's Wishes" .

Cosmopolitan . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

^ Heywood, Valentine (1953).

British Titles (2nd ed.). pp.

103– 108.

^ Dunnan, Nancy; Tuckerman, Nancy (1995).

The Amy Vanderbilt Complete Book of Etiquette (50th Anniversary ed.).

^ Guy Baldwin (2002).

SlaveCraft: Roadmaps for Erotic Servitude – Principles, Skills and Tools.

Daedelus Publishing Co. pp. 57–62.

ISBN 1-881943-14-3 .

v t e English social honorific titles Feminine Gentlewoman Goodwife Mrs Miss Ms Mistress Madam Noblewoman Dame Lady Masculine Gentleman Goodman Mr Esquire Master Sir Sire Lord Fr Neutral Mx Dr Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Master_(form_of_address)&oldid=1269563552 " Categories : Men's social titles Honorifics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 This page was last edited on 15 January 2025, at 08:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Master (form of address) 5 languages Add topic

