Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Mainland New Confucianism 2 Terminology 3 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 3.1 First Generation 3.1.1 Xiong Shili 3.2 Second Generation 3.2.1 Mou Zongsan 4 New Confucian Manifesto 5 Harmonious Society 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents New Confucianism 11 languages العربية فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Português ไทย 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 20th–21st century Confucianist revival movement This article is about the 20th century movement. For the Song and Ming dynasty schools, see Neo-Confucianism . For Han dynasty group, see Current Texts Confucianism .

Part of a series on Confucianism Early history Spring and Autumn period Confucius Warring States period Mencius Xunzi Western Han Dong Zhongshu Gongsun Hong Fundamental concepts Tian Ganying Zhengming Xiao Sangang Wuchang Li Ren Xin Yi Schools Neo-Confucianism Han Learning Taigu school Lingnan Confucianism New Confucianism Progressive Confucianism Hermeneutic schools Old Text New Text Confucianism by country Korea Japan Vietnam Indonesia United States Confucian texts Ruzang Five Classics Classic of Poetry Book of Documents Book of Rites Book of Changes Spring and Autumn Annals Four Books Analects Mencius Doctrine of the Mean Great Learning Other texts Three Commentaries Rites of Zhou Ceremonial Rites Classic of Filial Piety Erya Organization Religious Confucianism Confucian ritual religion Confucian royal ancestral shrine Temple of Confucius Confucian churches and sects Holy Confucian Church Indonesian Confucian Church Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue Phoenix churches Xuanyuanism Shengdao Nanyang Confucian Association v t e New Confucianism ( Chinese : 新儒家 ; pinyin : Xīn Rújiā ; lit.

'New Confucianism') is an intellectual movement of Confucianism that began in the early 20th century in Republican China , and further developed in post- Mao era contemporary China . It primarily developed during the May Fourth Movement .

[ 1 ] It is deeply influenced by, but not identical to, the neo-Confucianism of the Song and Ming dynasties.

[ 2 ] It is a neo-conservative movement of various Chinese traditions and has been regarded as containing religious overtones; it advocates for certain Confucianist elements of society – such as social, ecological, and political harmony [ 1 ] – to be applied in a contemporary context in synthesis with Western philosophies such as rationalism and humanism .

[ 2 ] Its philosophies have emerged as a focal point of discussion between Confucian scholars in mainland China , Taiwan , Hong Kong , and the United States .

History [ edit ] New Culture Movement Background Aftermath of the 1911 Revolution Second Revolution Coronation of Yuan Shikai National Protection War Manchu Restoration Constitutional Protection Movement Warlord Era Eastward spread of Western learning Scientific Revolution Boxer Indemnity Scholarship French Revolution Russian Revolution May Fourth Movement Ideologies Democracy Science Scientism Anti-Confucianism Social Darwinism Anarchism Modernism Liberalism Socialism Communism New humanism Practice Westernization East-west cultural debate Total Westernization Democratization Simplification of Chinese characters Romanization of Chinese languages Writing with vernacular Chinese National Language Movement Translation of foreign literature Sorting out national heritages Feminist movement Education reforms Schools of thought Doubting Antiquity School Xueheng School Chinese Communist Party Creation Society New Confucianism Crescent Moon Society League of Left-Wing Writers Major publications New Youth The Critical Review A Madman's Diary The Tiger Notable people Ba Jin Chen Duxiu Guo Moruo Hu Shih Lao She Li Dazhao Lu Xun Mao Dun Qian Xuantong Shen Congwen Yu Dafu Zhu Ziqing Kang Youwei Qian Xuantong v t e The first generation of new Confucians (1921–1949) came about as a response to the May Fourth movement and its iconoclastic stance against Confucianism . Confucianism was attacked as unscientific and contrary to the progress of a modern China. One notable figure during this time was Xiong Shili , who studied Buddhism in depth in his youth but later sought a reformation of the Confucian philosophical framework.

[ citation needed ] Borrowing from the school of Wang Yangming , Xiong developed a metaphysical system for the new Confucian movement and believed Chinese learning was superior to Western learning . Another figure, Feng Youlan , following the neo-Confucian school of Zhu Xi , sought a revival of Chinese philosophy as challenged and influenced by the questions and techniques of modern Western philosophy.

[ citation needed ] After the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, many of the leading intellectuals left the mainland to Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the United States. Notable figures of this second-generation (1950–1979) include individuals like Tang Junyi , Mou Zongsan , and Xu Fuguan ; all three are students of Xiong Shili . Mou, in particular, was grounded in classic Chinese philosophical traditions and argued that Immanuel Kant was, in many ways, a Western Confucius. These three worked with the Qian Mu to found New Asia College in Hong Kong. One of New Asia's most prominent graduates was Yu Yingshi . Together with Zhang Junmai , in 1958 they issued the New Confucian Manifesto consolidating their beliefs and drawing attention to their philosophical movement.

[ citation needed ] In the early 21st century, the most prominent representatives of the new Confucian movement outside of China have been the students of Mou Zongsan . One of the most prominent, Tu Wei-ming , promoted the idea that Confucianism saw three epochs: the classical pre- Han Confucianism, Song - Ming neo-Confucianism, and new Confucianism. This third generation has been instrumental in grounding Confucianism in non-Asian contexts, such as Boston Confucianism and Western scholars such as Wm. Theodore de Bary .

[ 3 ] Mainland New Confucianism [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in China Ideologies Authoritarian Capitalism Party-state Chiangism Communitarianism Cultural Dai Jitao Thought Monarchism Nationalist Han Neo Ultra Neoauthoritarianism Social Traditionalist Confucianism Neo New Legalism Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Asian values Authority Bureaucracy Civilization state Chinese culture Genealogy book Great Unity Duty Elitism Meritocracy Exceptionalism Familialism Filial piety Mandate of Heaven Hierarchy Humaneness Irredentism Law and order Rectification of names Respect Sinicization Sinocentrism Social order Sovereignty Tradition Technocracy Zhonghua minzu History 1992 Consensus Boluan Fanzheng Boxer Rebellion Chinese Civil War Chinese Cultural Renaissance Dang Guo Dynasties of China Han Empire of China (1915–1916) History of the Kuomintang Nationalist government Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Imperial China Imperial examination Tributary system Manchu Restoration Nanjing decade Martial law in Taiwan Language policy New Life Movement Project National Glory Reform and opening up Republic of China (1912–1949) Shanghai massacre Strike Hard Against Crime Campaign Tongzhi Restoration Self-Strengthening Movement White Terror in Taiwan Xueheng School Intellectuals Bell Chang (Ya-chung) Chen (Yuan) Chao Confucius Dai Dong Gan Gu Hu (Hanmin) Hu (Xijin) Jaw Jiang (Qing) Jiang (Shigong) Jin Kang Li (Ao) Li (Hongzhi) Li (Zehou) Liang Liu Pan Liu Shang Tam Tan Wang Wu Xiao Xiong Zhang (Weiwei) Zheng (Yongnian) Zhu Zou Politicians Imperial China Chao Duke Shao Wen Emperor Wu (Han) Yang Yongle Yuan Zhang Duke Zhou Republic of China (before 1949) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Dai (Jitao) Dai (Li) Hu (Hanmin) Li Lin Soong Yuan People's Republic of China (Mainland) Hu Huang Jiang Wang Xi Hong Kong Chan (Gary) Chan (Joephy) Chow Fok Ho Ip (Kwok-him) Ip (Regina) Kwok Lam Lee (Dominic) Lee (John) Lee (Starry) Leung Liao Quat Tsang (Donald) Tsang (Yok-sing) Tung Yung Macau Chui Ho (Edmund) Ho (Iat Seng) Sam Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wan-an) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Chiu Chu Gou Han Hau (Lung-pin) Hau (Pei-tsun) Hung Jaw Lee Lien Lin Ma Soong (James) Soong (Mei-ling) Sun Yu Extant parties Mainland China Chinese Communist Party ( factions ) Hong Kong Business and Professionals Alliance Civil Force Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress Federation of Public Housing Estates Hong Kong Federation of Education Workers Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions Kowloon West New Dynamic Liberal Party New Century Forum New People's Party New Prospect New Territories Association of Societies Politihk Social Strategic Roundtable Silent Majority Macau Alliance for Change Macau-Guangdong Union New Macau Development Union United Citizens Association Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese New Party Chinese Unification Promotion Party For Public Good Party Patriot Alliance Association People First Party Young China Party Overseas Malaysian Chinese Association Historical parties Progressive Party Republican Party Royalist Party Unity Party Hong Kong Co-operative Resources Centre Federation for the Stability Hong Kong Alliance of Chinese and Expatriates Hong Kong Progressive Alliance Liberal Democratic Federation New Hong Kong Alliance Professional Forum Progressive Hong Kong Society Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Congress Party Alliance Republican Party The Motorists' Party of ROC Overseas Ryukyu Guomindang Tibet Improvement Party Alliances Pro-Kuomintang camp Republic of China mainland China Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Hong Kong Macau Literature America Against America Analects Classic of Filial Piety The China Wave Farewell to Revolution Organisations Active China Youth Service & Recreation Center Institute of Revolutionary Practice Defunct Blue Shirts Society Group of 89 National Revolutionary Army Tsotanhui Clique Western Hills Group Media Mainland China Economic Daily Global Times Guancha Hong Kong Headline Daily Hong Kong Economic Times Oriental Daily News Sing Tao Daily The Standard Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chung T'ien Television China Television China Times Commercial Times TVBS United Daily News Overseas The Epoch Times Former Central Daily News Shen Bao By region Hong Kong Taiwan (Republic of China) Variants and movements Anti-communism Conservative localism in Hong Kong Hanfu Movement Related ideologies Authoritarian capitalism Fascism Han chauvinism Hui pan-nationalism Imperialism State nationalism Related topics Anti-national sentiments Japanese Taiwanese Tibetan Baizuo Falun Gong Four big families of Hong Kong Liberalism in China (opposing) Pro-ROC sentiment " Straight man cancer " Taishang Taiwanese nationalism (opposing) World League for Freedom and Democracy Conservatism portal China portal Hong Kong portal Taiwan portal v t e Following the period of reform and opening-up under Deng Xiaoping after 1978, Confucian thought experienced a revival in mainland China. An emerging current of "Mainland New Confucians", led initially by Jiang Qing , sharply demarcated themselves from the "Overseas New Confucianism" developed by Mou and others. Unlike the reformist views of Overseas New Confucian intellectuals, Mainland New Confucians viewed Confucianism as a national religion supported by doctrinal, political, and spiritual systems.

[ 4 ] : 175 According to Jiang, Confucian thought can be divided into two currents, "Mind Confucianism" and "Political Confucianism".

[ 5 ] Confucianism, he posits, has for over a millennium been confined to Mind Confucianism at the expense of Political Confucianism, leaving the true thought of Confucius "mutilated". Jiang argues for the restoration of political legitimacy as a core focus of Confucian thought, for renewed attention to Confucian constitutional structures, and for the establishment of Confucianism as an official state religion .

[ 6 ] Other Mainland New Confucians debated a more liberal political attitude to Confucianism.

Chen Ming , an academic at the Institute for World Religions in Beijing, took a leading role.

[ 7 ] Chen wrote that Confucianism faced the task of providing solutions to three major problems of contemporary Chinese society: political reconstruction, cultural identity, and religious faith.

[ 8 ] While agreeing with Jiang's rejection of the metaphysical emphasis of "Overseas New Confucianism", Chen argues that Confucianism is best seen as a civil religion on American lines, compatible with democracy, and that political life can express a religious aspect without a formal state religion.

[ 9 ] Chen distanced himself from several rivals: Mou Zongsan's Confucianism as the "perfect teaching" seemed too informed by emotion; Jiang Qing's notion that China should be a Confucian state that unified the political and religious was too simplistic; Kang Xiaoguang 's program to transform Confucianism into a state religion was "hardly applicable".

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Factors influencing the Confucian revival since the early 1990s include the tendency of Chinese intellectuals to oppose the iconoclasm of the May Fourth legacy, an increase in "national learning", and an increasingly anti-Western national mood.

[ 4 ] : 175 Terminology [ edit ] Whereas the English rendering of the movement is generally new Confucianism , there is a variety of translations in the Chinese. Many Taiwan-based writers will tend to use the term contemporary new Confucianism ( simplified Chinese : 当代新儒家 ; traditional Chinese : 當代新儒家 ; pinyin : dāng dài xīn rú jiā or simplified Chinese : 当代新儒学 ; traditional Chinese : 當代新儒學 ; pinyin : dāng dài xīn rú xué ) to emphasize the movement's continuity with the Song - Ming neo-Confucianism .

[ 2 ] Many within Mainland China prefer the term modern new Confucianism ( simplified Chinese : 现代新儒家 ; traditional Chinese : 現代新儒家 ; pinyin : xiàn dài xīn rú jiā or simplified Chinese : 现代新儒学 ; traditional Chinese : 現代新儒學 ; pinyin : xiàn dài xīn rú xué ) with an emphasis on the period of modernization after May Fourth .

[ 2 ] Philosophy [ edit ] New Confucianism is a school of Chinese philosophy influenced by Confucianism . After the events of the May Fourth Movement in 1919, in which Confucianism was blamed for China’s weakness and decline in the face of Western aggression, a major Chinese philosopher of the time, Xiong Shili (1885–1968), established and re-constructed Confucianism as a response.

[ 11 ] New Confucianism is a political, ethical, and social philosophy using metaphysical ideas from both Western and Eastern philosophy. It is categorized into three generations, starting with Xiong Shili and Feng Youlan as the first generation philosophers who set the basis. The second generation consists of Xiong's students, Mou Zongsan , Tang Junyi , and Xu Fuguan . The third generation is not determined via figures unlike previous generations, but new Confucianism from 1980. Xiong and his follower's attempts to reconstruct Confucianism gave new Confucianism its Chinese name, xīn rú jiā.

First Generation [ edit ] Xiong Shili [ edit ] Main article: Xiong Shili Xiong Shili (1885–1968) is widely regarded as the thinker who laid down the basis for the revival of Confucianism as new Confucianism in the twentieth century.

[ 11 ] Much of the basis of new Confucianism comes from Xiong's New Doctrine. Proficient in Buddhist classics, [ 11 ] Xiong argued that classics of Eastern Philosophy must be integrated in contemporary Chinese philosophy for more solidity.

[ 11 ] Xiong recognized Buddhism's dark view of human nature, but also recognized that there are brighter sides to human nature. For this reason, he rejected the Buddhist learning of "daily decrease" which dictated that the practice to suppress one's dark nature was necessary.

[ 11 ] He arrived at such conclusion after his examination of Classic Confucianism. While Confucianism also examines the negative aspect of human nature, thus the necessity to habituate oneself with ritual, the purpose of the practice of ritual and attainment of ren is not focused on restricting the darker aspects of human nature but developing the "fundamental goodness", i.e., the duan of human beings that Mencius writes of.

In order to incorporate Buddhism with Confucianism as a part of his contemporary Chinese philosophy encompassing various Eastern philosophies, Xiong proposed a correction of Buddhist learning of daily decrease. Xiong understood the basis behind "daily decrease" to be Buddhism's metaphysical belief of the "unbridgeable split between an absolute unchanging reality (Dharma-nature or fa-xing), and a constantly changing and conditional phenomenal world (Dharma-characters or fa-xing) (Xiong, 1994, pp. 69–77, 84–5, 111–12).

[ 11 ] Jiyuan Yu , in his examination of Xiong, describes this as the "Separation theory". Meanwhile, Xiong's theory behind correcting the "daily decrease" rested heavily upon what Yu describes as the "Sameness Thesis".

[ 11 ] Xiong, in his New Doctrine, calls this Dharma-nature ti and Dharma-characters yong . Xiong argues that unlike how Buddhism perceives these two worlds, these two worlds are a unity. Xiong's reasoning is shown in his 1985 version of New Doctrine: If they are separable, function will differ from original reality and exist independently, and in that way function will have its own original reality. We should not seek for some entity outside function and name it original reality. Furthermore, if original reality exists independent of function, it is a useless reality. In that case, if it is not a dead thing, it must be a dispensable thing. Thinking back and forth, I believe that original reality and function are not separable. (Xiong, 1985, p. 434) His view on this unity can be seen in his earlier works such as New Treatise on the Uniqueness of Consciousness. In New Treatise, he argues that the Reality is equal to the Mind. This Mind does not refer to one's individual mind but the universal presence in which there is a universality of mind amongst all beings, thus being the reality. Xiong incorporates the Confucian and Buddhist concept of self-mastery of one's desires, by arguing that failing to control one's desires and individual mind, one will be "a heap of dead matter". Xiong's view is that one should perceive objects of the world internally, since what is external is ultimately also internal and that they are one as both Mind and Reality.

Second Generation [ edit ] Mou Zongsan [ edit ] Main article: Mou Zongsan Mou Zongsan is considered to be one of the more influential second generation philosophers. Mou's general philosophy on metaphysics stays in line with Xiong's. He embellishes upon Xiong's theories on Mind and Reality to apply it to a more socio-political aspect. Mou claims universality exists in all philosophical truth. Which suggests that political and social theories of the world can be connected in essence. Mou argues in his lectures that particularity exists because of the different systems that are established in different cultures.

These different systems, after a series of philosophical reasoning and interpretation, arrive at a same philosophical truth. He believes that our physical limitations, i.e., our physical being, create these different systems and different cultures. Being that our mind, i.e., form, is still manifested and exists within this physical world, we should not let these limitations prevent us from practicing philosophical reasoning.

Mou's political philosophy is more clearly showed as he discusses the historical necessity that follows the particularity of human beings. Different nations and different systems' existence can be explained mainly because of this historical necessity. Mou asserts that historical necessity exists neither because of logical necessity or metaphysical necessity but because of what he calls a development of the spirit, what he labels as dialectical necessity.

He claims that history should be perceived and interpreted as something that has both historical necessity i.e., also dialectical necessity, and moral necessity. For there are two types of judgment: moral and historical. Mou states, that Greek or Chinese, these basic necessities behind history and fundamental human character are the same, and therefore universality in philosophical truth exists even behind politics and history.

New Confucian Manifesto [ edit ] Main article: A Manifesto for a Re-appraisal of Sinology and Reconstruction of Chinese Culture The term itself was first used as early as 1963, in two articles in the Hong Kong journal Rensheng . It did not come into common use until the late 1970s. New Confucianism is often associated with the essay, "A Manifesto on Chinese Culture to the World," which was published in 1958 by Tang Junyi , Mou Zongsan , Xu Fuguan and Zhang Junmai . This work is often referred to as the "New Confucian Manifesto", although that phrase never occurs in it.

[ 3 ] The Manifesto presents a vision of Chinese culture as having a fundamental unity throughout history, of which Confucianism is the highest expression. The particular interpretation of Confucianism given by the Manifesto is deeply influenced by neo-Confucianism, and in particular the version of neo-Confucianism most associated with Lu Xiangshan and Wang Yangming , as opposed to that associated with Zhu Xi . The Manifesto argues that while China must learn from the West modern science and democracy, the West must learn from China, and the Confucian tradition in particular, "a more all-encompassing wisdom." [ 3 ] Harmonious Society [ edit ] Main article: Harmonious Society The concept of a harmonious society ( simplified Chinese : 和谐社会 ; traditional Chinese : 和諧社會 ; pinyin : héxié shèhuì ) dates back to the time of Confucius. As a result, the philosophy has been characterized as deriving from new Confucianism.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] In modern times, it developed into a key feature of former Communist Party general secretary Hu Jintao 's signature ideology of the Scientific Development Concept , developed in the mid-2000s, re-introduced by the Hu–Wen Administration during the 2005 National People's Congress .

The philosophy is recognized as a response to the increasing social injustice and inequality emerging in mainland Chinese society as a result of unchecked economic growth, which has led to social conflict. The governing philosophy was therefore shifted around economic growth to overall societal balance and harmony.

[ 18 ] Along with a moderately prosperous society , it was set to be one of the national goals for the ruling communist party .

The promotion of "Harmonious Society" demonstrated that Hu Jintao's ruling philosophy had departed from that of his predecessors.

[ 19 ] Near the end of his tenure in 2011, Hu appeared to extend the ideology to an international dimension, with a focus on the international peace and cooperation, which is said to lead to a "harmonious world". The administration of Hu's successor, Xi Jinping , has used the philosophy more sparingly.

Some scholars, notably Yan Xuetong and Daniel A. Bell , advocate the restoration of meritocratic Confucian institutions such as the censorate in China and elsewhere as part of a new Confucian political program. Others (e.g., Jana S. Rošker ) emphasize that Confucianism is by no means a monolithic or static scope of traditional thought, but rather implies different currents that can be used quite arbitrarily and selectively by modern ideologies, which are marked by their function of legitimizing the state power. Considering the historical development of the concept of harmony we need to ask ourselves to what extent are the philosophical traditions based on historic assumptions, and to what extent are they merely a product of the ideological and political demands of the current period.

See also [ edit ] Conservatism in China References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Solé-Farràs, Jesús. "Harmony in Contemporary New Confucianism and in Socialism with Chinese Characteristics".

China Media Research : 3.

^ a b c d Makeham, John, ed. (2003).

New Confucianism: A Critical Examination . New York: Palgrave.

ISBN 978-1-4039-6140-2 .

^ a b c Bresciani, Umberto (2001).

Reinventing Confucianism: The New Confucian Movement . Taipei: Taipei Ricci Institute.

ISBN 978-957-9390-07-1 .

^ a b Tu, Hang (2025).

Sentimental Republic: Chinese Intellectuals and the Maoist Past .

Harvard University Asia Center .

ISBN 9780674297579 .

^ Fan, Ruiping (2011). "The Rise of Political Confucianism in Contemporary China". In Fan, Ruiping (ed.).

The Renaissance of Confucianism in Contemporary China . Dordrecht: Springer. pp.

36 –38.

^ Fan, Ruiping (2011). "The Rise of Political Confucianism in Contemporary China". In Fan, Ruiping (ed.).

The Renaissance of Confucianism in Contemporary China . Dordrecht: Springer. pp.

36 –38.

^ Makeham (2008) , p.

Chapter 9 .

^ Chen, Ming (2009). "Modernity and Confucian Political Philosophy in a Globalizing World".

Diogenes .

56 : 94.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.944.4487 .

doi : 10.1177/0392192109102159 .

S2CID 220786168 .

^ a b Billioud, Sébastien; Thoraval, Joël (2008). "The Contemporary Revival of Confucianism: Anshen liming or the Religious Dimension of Confucianism".

China Perspectives (3): 104.

ISSN 1996-4617 .

^ For Kang's program see Ownby, David (April 2009), "Kang Xiaoguang: Social Science, Civil Society, and Confucian Religion" , China Perspectives , 2009 (4), doi : 10.4000/chinaperspectives.4928 ^ a b c d e f g Yu, Jiyuan (2002).

Contemporary Chinese Philosophy . Oxford: Blackwell. pp.

127– 146.

ISBN 0631217258 .

^ Guo And Guo (15 August 2008).

China in Search of a Harmonious Society . Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-0-7391-3042-1 .

^ Ruiping Fan (11 March 2010).

Reconstructionist Confucianism: Rethinking Morality after the West . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-90-481-3156-3 .

^ Daniel A. Bell, China's Leaders Rediscover Confucianism " The New York Times , 14 September 2006.

^ "Confucian concept of harmonious society" .

The Korea Times . 18 September 2011.

^ Rosker, Jana.

"Modern Confucianism and the Concept of Harmony" .

academia.edu .

^ Arnold, Perris. “Music as Propaganda: Art at the Command of Doctrine in the People's Republic of China”. Ethnomusicology 27, no. 1 (1983): 1–28.

^ "China's Party Leadership Declares New Priority: 'Harmonious Society' " .

The Washington Post . 12 October 2006 . Retrieved 20 January 2011 .

^ Zhong, Wu.

“China yearns for Hu's 'harmonious society'” .

Asia Times . Last modified 11 October 2006.

Sources [ edit ] Cheng, Chung-Ying; Bunnin, Nicholas, eds. (2002).

Contemporary Chinese Philosophy . Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-21725-1 .

Makeham, John (2008).

Lost Soul: "Confucianism" in Contemporary Chinese Academic Discourse . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Asia Center for the Harvard-Yenching Institute; Distributed by Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674028111 .

"Manifesto For A Reappraisal Of Sinology And The Reconstruction Of Chinese Culture", in De Bary, Wm. Theodore; Lufrano, Richard (2000).

Sources of Chinese Tradition . Vol. 2. Columbia University Press. pp.

550– 555.

ISBN 978-0-231-11271-0 .

Rošker, Jana S. (2016). The Rebirth of the Moral Self: the Second Generation of Modern Confucians and their Modernization Discourses. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, ISBN 978-962-996-688-1 .

Rošker, Jana S. “The Concept of Harmony in Contemporary P. R. China and in Taiwanese Modern Confucianism”. Asian studies, ISSN 2232-5131, vol. 1 (17), issue 2.

https://revije.ff.uni-lj.si/as/article/view/398 External links [ edit ] "Modern Confucianism" entry  by David Elstein in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9m2md
Cached time: 20250816105351
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.674 seconds
Real time usage: 0.907 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4014/1000000
Revision size: 23496/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 285117/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4178/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 118103/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.332/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8984829/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  634.522      1 -total
 24.00%  152.301      1 Template:Reflist
 20.40%  129.467      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.78%   81.091      4 Template:Cite_journal
 11.33%   71.867      1 Template:Confucianism
 10.20%   64.729      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
  9.95%   63.163      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.49%   60.220      1 Template:Short_description
  9.21%   58.449      1 Template:Conservatism_in_China
  8.95%   56.814     11 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:345081:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816105351 and revision id 1305621708. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Confucianism&oldid=1305621708 " Categories : New Confucianism Chinese Confucianists Contemporary Chinese philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from March 2020 Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles with Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 04:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents New Confucianism 11 languages Add topic

