Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Beliefs 3 Impact 4 Criticisms 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Nkrumaism 2 languages Hausa 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia African socialist political ideology Kwame Nkrumah , after whom Nkrumaism is named Part of a series on Pan-Africanism Symbols African art Western collections Black Star of Africa Pan-African colours Pan-African flag Ideologies African anarchism African communalism African nationalism African philosophy African socialism Afrocentrism Black nationalism Garveyism Négritude Nkrumaism Rastafari Sankarism Third International Theory Ujamaa Organizations African Union Conscious Community Organisation of African Unity People Akumu Amin Ben-Jochannan Cham Joof Diop Diouf Du Bois Fanon Gaddafi Garvey Houphouët-Boigny James Kenyatta Mak'Anyengo Malcolm X Malema (Julius) Mbah Mboya Mugabe Ngum Nkrumah Nyerere (Julius) Padmore Rodney Sankara Selassie Small Sékou Touré Thiaw Yeshitela Wilson Williams Dynamics Ethnic groups of Africa Languages of Africa Religion in Africa Conflicts in Africa Related Africa African and Black Topics Afro-Asian Afro-Latino Anti-imperialism Anti-Western sentiment Black people Reparations for slavery Pan-Africanism portal Africa portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Nkrumaism (sometimes Consciencism ) is an African socialist political ideology based on the thinking and writing of Kwame Nkrumah . A pan-Africanist and socialist , Nkrumah served as Prime Minister of the Gold Coast (later Ghana ) from 1952 until 1960 and subsequently as President of Ghana before being deposed by the National Liberation Council in 1966.

[ 1 ] Definition [ edit ] Nkrumaism is a pan-African socialist theory which aims to adapt Marxist–Leninist theory to the social context of the African continent . Nkrumah defined his belief system as "the ideology of a New Africa, independent and absolutely free from imperialism , organized on a continental scale, founded upon the conception of one and united Africa , drawing its strength from modern science and technology and from the traditional African belief that the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all." [ 2 ] The Convention People's Party (CPP), founded by Nkrumah in 1949, writes "Nkrumaism simply means Self Reliance, African is capable of managing his own affairs. The values CPP stands for or the guiding principles of Nkrumaism today are those which have guided it throughout its existence. Social justice, Pan-Africanism, Self Determination, African Personality, Anti-Imperialism." [ 3 ] Nkrumaism is a syncretic ideology which blends different sources together while not necessarily borrowing their entire frameworks. In his work, Nkrumah blended different sources from within Africa, the canon of Western philosophy , [ 4 ] and black intellectuals in North America and Europe, like Marcus Garvey and George Padmore . Particularly important in founding this ideology were his study and meetings with C. L. R. James , W. E. B. Du Bois and Father Divine .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Aside from the Marxist–Leninist framework, this blending of ideas largely only took bits and pieces of other philosophical systems and even its use of traditional African cultural concepts were often stretched to fit into the larger theory.

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] While a major focus of the ideology was ending colonial relationships on the African continent, many of the ideas were utopian , diverting the scientific nature of the Marxist political analysis which it claims to support.

[ 6 ] Beliefs [ edit ] Like other African political ideologies at the time, the central focus of Nkrumaism was on decolonization across Africa. The central contention of Nkrumaism was that African countries, united with one another, needed to adopt socialist political structures which were consistent with the traditional African values of egalitarianism . Nkrumah rejected the idealized view of pre-colonial African societies that were classless or non-hierarchical, but accepted that Africa had a spirit of communalism and humanism. While colonial structures had damaged these communal, egalitarian values, they had not fully supplanted them. Nkrumaism then argued that a return to these values through socialist political structures would both heal the disruption caused by colonial structures and allow further development of African societies.

[ 5 ] The pan-African aspects of Nkrumah's ideology were justified by a claim that all African societies had a community of economic life and that in contradiction to the neocolonial structures that replaced formal colonies, only African unity would create real autonomy.

[ 9 ] [ 4 ] In Nkrumah's argument, four basic pillars formed the applied aspects of this theory: state ownership of the means of production, a one-party democracy , fostering a classless economic system, and pan-African unity.

[ 5 ] While embracing much of Marxist–Leninist philosophy and Soviet political structures at the time, the ideology differed in some key respects. First, while Marxism–Leninism saw revolution as the only way to replace class structures with a socialist egalitarian system, Nkrumah saw reform as the more appropriate case for Africa. He argued that Ghana, and most of the rest of Africa, had never developed the class distinctions which Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin saw in Europe and thus reform could reestablish preexisting egalitarianism suited to a post-colonial context.

[ 9 ] Nkrumah wrote that: From the ancestral lines of communalism, the  passage  to  socialism  lies  in  reform,  because  the  underlying  principles  are  the  same.  But  when  this  passage  carries  one  through  colonialism  the  reform  is  revolutionary  since  the  passage  from  colonialism  to  genuine  independence  is  an  act  of  revolution.  But  because  of  the  continuity  of  communalism  with  socialism,  in  communalistic society, socialism is not a revolutionary creed, but a restatement in  contemporary idiom of the principles underlying communalism.

[ 10 ] He would change this idea after the 1966 coup seeing revolution as increasingly necessary.

[ 11 ] Second, while Nkrumah believed in the materialism and economic determinism of Marxism, he argued that focusing on the economic system was only appropriate after achieving independence throughout Africa and that the political struggle was the first order in colonial and neocolonial contexts.

[ 12 ] Impact [ edit ] The ideology of Nkrumaism formed a key part of the personality cult around Nkrumah and the party-building efforts of his political party, the CPP. This was in part achieved through Nkrumah's use of democratic centralism in the CPP and government.

[ 1 ] His arguments were widely published and these had an impact within the Gold Coast colony, independent Ghana, and other parts of Africa in the 1950s and 1960s. The CPP, founded by Nkrumah in 1949, became a vocal proponent for the teaching and application of Nkrumaism. When he became president in the 1960s, his Minister for Presidential Affairs, Tawia Adamafio , established study groups on Nkrumaism which many civil servants joined to advance their careers.

[ 13 ] At the same time, the CPP established Ghana Young Pioneers groups for school age children where Nkrumaism was taught.

[ 14 ] While the tenets were promoted through these various party efforts, applying all aspects of the ideology proved to be difficult for Nkrumah while President of the country.

[ 9 ] Because of this, some consider Nkrumaism to be "first of all a cultural phenomenon" in Ghana with little impact on the actual politics of the country.

[ 15 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Henry Bretton argues that Nkrumaism was not a coherent ideology, but a vague framework supporting the cult of personality and the centralized rule of Nkrumah. He writes: Nkrumaism was a verbalization of the requirements of the personal political machine. Professional scribes and amateurs, along with the Ghanaian Left, were set to the task of providing the coherence and internal consistency required to give a semblance of philosophy to the chaotic assemblage of ideas and fantasies borrowed from all parts of the world and from all periods of history, frequently out of context.

[ 16 ] In contrast, Yuri Smertin criticized early works by Nkrumah from a Marxist perspective for distorting scientific socialism by combining religious and traditional elements.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] African Review African socialism Black Power Garveyism Lumumbism Mobutism Sankarism References [ edit ] ^ a b Wilczynski 1981 , p. 394, Nkrumah, Kwame.

^ Smith 1991 , p. 31.

^ Convention People's Party 2016 .

^ a b Wilczynski 1981 , p. 240, Imperialism.

^ a b c Simms 2003 , p. 470.

^ a b c Smith 1991 , p. 33.

^ Rahman 2007 , p. 73.

^ Rahman 2007 , p. 59.

^ a b c Smith 1991 , p. 34.

^ Biney 2011 , pp. 125–126.

^ Gyan 1976 , p. 199.

^ Gyan 1976 , p. 214.

^ Omari 1972 , p. 85.

^ Austin 1964 , p. 408.

^ Rahman 2007 , p. 14.

^ Bretton 1964 , p. 87.

^ Agyeman 1988 , p. 374.

Bibliography [ edit ] Agyeman, Opoku (1988). "Of Friends and Foes of Nkrumaism".

The Journal of Modern African Studies .

26 (2): 373– 376.

doi : 10.1017/s0022278x00010648 .

S2CID 251058460 .

Austin, Dennis (1964).

Politics in Ghana: 1946-1960 . London: Oxford University Press .

Biney, Ama (2011).

The Political and Social Thought of Kwame Nkrumah . New York: Palgrave Macmillan .

Bretton, Henry L. (1964).

The Rise and Fall of Kwame Nkrumah: A Study of Personal Rule in Africa . New York: Frederick A. Praeger.

Convention People's Party (2016).

"Nkrumaism" . CPP . Retrieved 3 September 2016 .

Gyan, Afari (1976).

The Political Ideas of Kwame Nkrumah . New York: African Heritage Studies Publishers.

Omari, T. Peter (1972).

Kwame Nkrumah: The Anatomy of an African Dictatorship . New York: Africana Publishing Corporation.

Rahman, Ahmad A. (2007).

The Regime Change of Kwame Nkrumah: Epic Heroism in Africa and the Diaspora . New York: Palgrave Macmillan .

Simms, Rupe (2003). " 'I am a Non-Denominational Christian and a Marxist Socialist:' A Gramscian Analysis of the Convention People's Party and Kwame Nkrumah's Use of Religion".

Sociology of Religion .

64 (4): 463– 477.

doi : 10.2307/3712336 .

JSTOR 3712336 .

Smith, Curtis C. (1991). "Nkrumaism as Utopianism".

Utopian Studies .

1 (3): 31– 36.

Wilczynski, Jozef, ed. (1981).

An Encyclopedic Dictionary of Marxism, Socialism and Communism . The Macmillan Press .

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-05806-8 .

ISBN 978-1-349-05806-8 .

External links [ edit ] Azikiwe, Abayomi (16 March 2007).

"Nkrumaism: The Quest For A Pan-African Ideology" .

Pan-African News Wire . Retrieved 31 August 2016 .

Forson, Prempeh (1 October 2016).

"What is Nkrumaism?" .

GhanaWeb . Retrieved 31 August 2016 .

v t e Pan-Africanism Ideology Variants African nationalism African socialism Afrocentrism Anti-imperialism Anti-Western sentiment Black nationalism Garveyism Nkrumaism Sankarism Uhuru Movement Zikism Concepts African century Black power Négritude Ubuntu Ujamaa United States of Africa Proponents Politicians Dennis Akumu Idi Amin Nnamdi Azikiwe Amílcar Cabral David Comissiong Jean-Jacques Dessalines Anténor Firmin Muammar Gaddafi Marcus Garvey Alieu Ebrima Cham Joof Kenneth Kaunda Modibo Keïta Jomo Kenyatta Toussaint Louverture Patrice Lumumba Samora Machel Ochola Ogaye Mak'Anyengo Thabo Mbeki Tom Mboya Robert Mugabe Abdias do Nascimento Gamal Abdel Nasser Kwame Nkrumah Julius Nyerere John Nyathi Pokela Thomas Sankara Ahmed Sékou Touré Haile Selassie Robert Sobukwe I. T. A. Wallace-Johnson Others Marimba Ani Molefi Kete Asante Steve Biko Edward Wilmot Blyden Stokely Carmichael Aimé Césaire John Henrik Clarke Martin R. Delany Cheikh Anta Diop W. E. B. Du Bois Frantz Fanon Amy Ashwood Garvey John G. Jackson Leonard Jeffries Yosef Ben-Jochannan Maulana Karenga Alice Kinloch Fela Kuti Malcolm X Archie Mafeje Ali Mazrui Zephania Mothopeng George Padmore Motsoko Pheko Runoko Rashidi Paul Robeson Randall Robinson Walter Rodney Burning Spear Issa Laye Thiaw Frances Cress Welsing Henry Sylvester Williams Amos N. Wilson Omali Yeshitela Organizations Educational African Leadership Academy African Leadership University Political African Unification Front African Union All-African People's Revolutionary Party All-African Trade Union Federation Conseil de l'Entente Convention People's Party East African Community Economic Freedom Fighters First Pan-African Conference International African Service Bureau Organisation of African Trade Union Unity Organisation of African Unity Pan African Association Pan-African Freedom Movement for East and Central Africa Pan-African Congress Pan Africanist Congress of Azania Popular and Social League of the Great Sahara Tribes Rassemblement Démocratique Africain Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League ZANU–PF Symbols Black Star of Africa Le Marron Inconnu Lion of Judah Pan-African colours Pan-African flag Dynamics Ethnic groups of Africa Languages of Africa Religion in Africa Conflicts in Africa Related African philosophy African-American leftism Africanization All-African Peoples' Conference East African Federation Kwanzaa Union of African States United States of Africa United States of Latin Africa Year of Africa Pan-Africanism category Africa category Pan-Africanism portal Africa portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nkrumaism&oldid=1289788752 " Categories : Nkrumaism Kwame Nkrumah Eponymous political ideologies Politics of Ghana Political movements in Ghana Socialism in Africa Socialism in Ghana Types of socialism Pan-Africanism Pan-nationalism Marxism Marxist schools of thought Leninism African and Black nationalism Authoritarianism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 21:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nkrumaism 2 languages Add topic

