Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Force and flavor 2 Formal semantics 3 Grammatical expression of modality Toggle Grammatical expression of modality subsection 3.1 Verbal morphology 3.2 Auxiliaries 3.3 Lexical expression 3.4 Other 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Modality (semantics) 23 languages Башҡортса Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Română Русский Саха тыла Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Татарча / tatarça Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Modality (natural language) ) Phenomenon whereby language is used to discuss possible situations For the closely related grammatical category, see Grammatical mood .

Grammatical features Related to nouns Animacy Case Dative construction Dative shift Quirky subject Nominative Comitative Instrumental Classifier Measure word Construct state Countability Count noun Mass noun Collective noun Definiteness Gender Genitive construction Possession Suffixaufnahme (case stacking) Noun class Number Singular Dual Plural Singulative-Collective-Plurative Specificity Universal grinder Related to verbs Associated motion Clusivity Conjugation Evidentiality Modality Person Telicity Mirativity Tense–aspect–mood Grammatical aspect Lexical aspect (Aktionsart) Mood Tense Voice General features Affect Boundedness Comparison (degree) Egophoricity Pluractionality (verbal number) Honorifics (politeness) Polarity Reciprocity Reflexive pronoun Reflexive verb Syntax relationships Argument Transitivity Valency Branching Serial verb construction Traditional grammar Predicate Subject Object Adjunct Predicative Semantics Contrast Mirativity Thematic relation Agent Patient Topic and Comment Focus Volition Veridicality Phenomena Agreement Polypersonal agreement Declension Empty category Incorporation Inflection Markedness v t e In linguistics and philosophy , modality refers to the ways language can express various relationships to reality or truth. For instance, a modal expression may convey that something is likely, desirable, or permissible. Quintessential modal expressions include modal auxiliaries such as "could", "should", or "must"; modal adverbs such as "possibly" or "necessarily"; and modal adjectives such as "conceivable" or "probable". However, modal components have been identified in the meanings of countless natural language expressions, including counterfactuals , propositional attitudes , evidentials , habituals , and generics.

Modality has been intensely studied from a variety of perspectives. Within linguistics, typological studies have traced crosslinguistic variation in the strategies used to mark modality, with a particular focus on its interaction with tense–aspect–mood marking . Theoretical linguists have sought to analyze both the propositional content and discourse effects of modal expressions using formal tools derived from modal logic . Within philosophy, linguistic modality is often seen as a window into broader metaphysical notions of necessity and possibility.

Force and flavor [ edit ] Modal expressions come in different categories called flavors . Flavors differ in how the possibilities they discuss relate to reality. For instance, an expression like "might" is said to have epistemic flavor , since it discusses possibilities compatible with some body of knowledge. An expression like "obligatory" is said to have deontic flavor , since it discusses possibilities which are required given the laws or norms obeyed in reality.

[ 1 ] : 47 (1) Agatha must be the murderer. (expressing epistemic modality) (2) Agatha must go to jail. (expressing deontic modality) The sentence in (1) might be spoken by someone who has decided that all of the relevant facts in a particular murder investigation point to the conclusion that Agatha was the murderer, even though it may or may not actually be the case. The 'must' in this sentence thus expresses epistemic modality: "'for all we know', Agatha must be the murderer", where 'for all we know' is relative to some knowledge the speakers possess. In contrast, (2) might be spoken by someone who has decided that, according to some standard of conduct, Agatha has committed a vile crime, and therefore the correct course of action is to jail Agatha.

In classic formal approaches to linguistic modality , an utterance expressing modality is one that can always roughly be paraphrased to fit the following template: (3) According to [a set of rules, wishes, beliefs,...] it is [necessary, possible] that [the main proposition] is the case.

The set of propositions which forms the basis of evaluation is called the modal base . The result of the evaluation is called the modal force .

[ 2 ] : 649 For example, the utterance in (4) expresses that, according to what the speaker has observed, it is necessary to conclude that John has a rather high income: (4) John must be earning a lot of money.

The modal base here is the knowledge of the speaker, the modal force is necessity. By contrast, (5) could be paraphrased as 'Given his abilities, the strength of his teeth, etc., it is possible for John to open a beer bottle with his teeth'. Here, the modal base is defined by a subset of John's abilities, the modal force is possibility.

(5) John can open a beer bottle with his teeth.

Formal semantics [ edit ] Linguistic modality has been one of the central concerns in formal semantics and philosophical logic . Research in these fields has led to a variety of accounts of the propositional content and conventional discourse effects of modal expressions. The predominant approaches in these fields are based on modal logic . In these approaches, modal expressions such as must and can are analyzed as quantifiers over a set of possible worlds. In classical modal logic, this set is identified as the set of worlds accessible from the world of evaluation. Since the seminal work of Angelika Kratzer , formal semanticists have adopted a more finely grained notion of this set as determined by two conversational background functions called the modal base and ordering source respectively.

[ 3 ] : 79–90 For an epistemic modal like English must or might , this set is understood to contain exactly those worlds compatible with the knowledge that the speaker has in the actual world. Assume for example that the speaker of sentence (4) above knows that John just bought a new luxury car and has rented a huge apartment. The speaker also knows that John is an honest person with a humble family background and doesn't play the lottery. The set of accessible worlds is then the set of worlds in which all these propositions which the speaker knows about John are true. The notions of necessity and possibility are then defined along the following lines: A proposition P follows necessarily from the set of accessible worlds, if all accessible worlds are part of P (that is, if p is true in all of these worlds).

[ 3 ] : 80 Applied to the example in (4) this would mean that in all the worlds which are defined by the speaker's knowledge about John, it is the case that John earns a lot of money (assuming there is no other explanation for John's wealth). In a similar way a proposition p is possible according to the set of accessible worlds (i.e. the modal base), if some of these worlds are part of P .

Recent work has departed from this picture in a variety of ways. In dynamic semantics , modals are analyzed as tests which check whether their prejacent is compatible with (or follows from) the information in the conversational common ground. Probabilistic approaches motivated by gradable modal expressions provide a semantics which appeals to speaker credence in the prejacent. Illocutionary approaches assume a sparser view of modals' propositional content and look to conventional discourse effects to explain some of the nuances of modals' use.

Grammatical expression of modality [ edit ] Verbal morphology [ edit ] Main article: Grammatical mood In many languages modal categories are expressed by verbal morphology – that is, by alterations in the form of the verb. If these verbal markers of modality are obligatory in a language, they are called mood markers. Well-known examples of moods in some European languages are referred to as subjunctive , conditional , and indicative as illustrated below with examples from French , all three with the verb avoir 'to have'. As in most Standard European languages, the shape of the verb conveys not only information about modality, but also about other categories such as person and number of the subject .

(6) Je 1SG doute doubt que that vous 2PL ayez have.

2PL .

SJV raison.

right Je doute que vous ayez raison.

1SG doubt that 2PL have.2PL.SJV right 'I doubt that you're right.' (7) Si If c'était this-was vrai, true on one l' aurait it-have.

SG .

COND vu seen sur on CNN CNN‍ Si c'était vrai, on l' aurait vu sur CNN If this-was true one it-have.SG.COND seen on CNN‍ 'If this were true, one would have seen it on CNN.' (8) Il 3SG a have.

3SG .

IND raison right Il a raison 3SG have.3SG.IND right 'He's right.' An example for a non-European language with a similar encoding of modality is Manam . Here, a verb is prefixed by a morpheme which encodes number and person of the subject. These prefixes come in two versions, realis and irrealis . Which one is chosen depends on whether the verb refers to an actual past or present event (realis), or merely to a possible or imagined event (irrealis).

[ 4 ] Auxiliaries [ edit ] Main article: Modal verb Modal auxiliary verbs , such as the English words may, can, must, ought, will, shall, need, dare, might, could, would, and should , are often used to express modality, especially in the Germanic languages .

Ability, desirability, permission, obligation, and probability can all be exemplified by the usage of auxiliary modal verbs in English: Ability : I can ride a bicycle (in the present); I could ride a bicycle (in the past) Desirability : I should go; I ought to go Permission : I may go Obligation : I must go Likelihood : He might be there; He may be there; He must be there Lexical expression [ edit ] Verbs such as "want," "need," or "belong" can be used to express modality lexically , as can adverbs .

(9) It belongs in a museum!

Other [ edit ] Complementizers (e.g. Russian) and conjunctions (e.g.

Central Pomo [ 5 ] ) can be used to convey modality.

See also [ edit ] Angelika Kratzer Counterfactuals Dynamic semantics Evidentiality Frank R. Palmer Free choice inference Modal logic Modal subordination Modality (semiotics) Possible world Tense–aspect–mood English modal adverbs at Wiktionary References [ edit ] ^ Portner, Paul (2009).

Modality . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-929242-4 .

^ Kratzer, A. (1991). Modality. In: von Stechow, A. & Wunderlich, D. (Eds.) Semantics: An International Handbook of Contemporary Research. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

^ a b Kaufmann, S.; Condoravdi, C. & Harizanov, V. (2006) Formal approaches to modality . Formal approaches to modality. In: Frawley, W. (Ed.). The Expression of Modality. Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter ^ see: Elliott, Jennifer R. (2000). Realis and irrealis: Forms and concepts of the grammaticalisation of reality. In: Linguistic Typology (Vol. 4, pp. 55-90).

^ Mithun, M. (1995). On the Relativity of Irreality. In: Bybee, J. & Fleischman, S. (Eds.) Modality in Grammar and Discourse John Benjamins Further reading [ edit ] Asher, R. E. (ed.), The Encyclopedia of language and linguistics (pp. 2535–2540). Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Blakemore, D. (1994).

Evidence and modality . In R. E. Asher (Ed.), The Encyclopedia of language and linguistics (pp. 1183–1186). Oxford: Pergamon Press.

ISBN 0-08-035943-4 .

Bybee, Joan; Perkins, Revere, & Pagliuca, William (1994).

The evolution of grammar: Tense, aspect, and modality in the languages of the world . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Calbert, J. P. (1975).

Toward the semantics of modality . In J. P. Calbert & H. Vater (Eds.), Aspekte der Modalität . Tübingen: Gunter Narr.

Callaham, Scott N. (2010).

Modality and the Biblical Hebrew Infinitive Absolute . Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 71. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.

Chung, Sandra; & Timberlake, Alan (1985).

Tense, aspect and mood . In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language typology and syntactic description: Grammatical categories and the lexicon (Vol. 3, pp. 202-258). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kratzer, A. (1981).

The notional category of modality . In H.-J. Eikmeyer & H. Rieser (Eds.), Words, worlds, and contexts: New approaches in word semantics . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

Palmer, F. R.

(1979).

Modality and the English modals . London: Longman.

Palmer, F. R. (1994).

Mood and modality . Cambridge Univ. Press. Second edition 2001.

Saeed, John I. (2003).

Sentence semantics 1: Situations: Modality and evidentiality . In J. I Saeed, Semantics (2nd. ed) (Sec. 5.3, pp. 135–143). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 0-631-22692-3 , ISBN 0-631-22693-1 .

Sweetser, E. E. (1982).

Root and epistemic modality: Causality in two worlds .

Berkeley Linguistic Papers , 8 , 484–507.

External links [ edit ] Modality and Evidentiality What is mood and modality?

SIL International, Glossary of linguistic terms .

v t e Linguistic modalities and grammatical moods Realis (what is) Indicative/declarative Aggressive Energetic Evidential ( Sensory ) Generic/gnomic Mirative Irrealis Deontic (what should be) Benedictive Commissive (promises, threats) Directive (commands, requests, requirements) Debitive Deliberative Dynamic Hortative (+ subtypes) Imperative Injunctive Jussive Necessitative Permissive Precative Prohibitive Propositive Volitive (hopes, wishes, fears) Desiderative Imprecative Optative Epistemic (what may be) (inferences, possibilities, questions, etc.) Alethic Assumptive Deductive Dubitative Hypothetical Inferential/renarrative/oblique Interrogative Potential Speculative Subjunctive Dependent circumstances (what would be) Conditional Eventive v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐lkwbp
Cached time: 20250814231706
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.470 seconds
Real time usage: 0.593 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2572/1000000
Revision size: 13428/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 129044/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1789/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 59037/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.298/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19944192/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  477.224      1 -total
 16.87%   80.487      1 Template:Grammatical_categories
 16.68%   79.624      1 Template:Lang
 16.56%   79.017      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.31%   73.059     10 Template:Navbox
 15.02%   71.669      1 Template:Reflist
 13.02%   62.125      1 Template:Cite_book
 11.54%   55.076      1 Template:Short_description
  8.03%   38.312      1 Template:Authority_control
  7.11%   33.948      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2783063:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814231706 and revision id 1305065667. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Modality_(semantics)&oldid=1305065667 " Categories : Semantics Linguistic modality Philosophy of language Formal semantics (natural language) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 21:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Modality (semantics) 23 languages Add topic

