Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Origins of the Regal period 3 Roman Republic Toggle Roman Republic subsection 3.1 Election and number 3.2 Extraordinary appointment of dictators 3.2.1 Duties 4 The Roman Empire Toggle The Roman Empire subsection 4.1 Late Antiquity 4.1.1 Pontifex inclytus 5 Middle Ages 6 Catholic Church use of the title 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Pontifex maximus 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pontifex Maximus ) Chief high priest in ancient Rome Augustus as pontifex maximus ( Via Labicana Augustus ) The pontifex maximus ( Latin for 'supreme pontiff ') [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] was the chief high priest of the College of Pontiffs ( Collegium Pontificum ) in ancient Rome . This was the most important position in the ancient Roman religion , open only to patricians until 254 BC, when a plebeian first held this position. Although in fact the most powerful office in the Roman priesthood, the pontifex maximus was officially ranked fifth in the ranking of the highest Roman priests ( Ordo Sacerdotum ), behind the Rex Sacrorum and the flamines maiores ( Flamen Dialis , Flamen Martialis , Flamen Quirinalis ).

[ 4 ] A distinctly religious office under the early Roman Republic , it gradually became politicized until, beginning with Augustus , it was subsumed into the position of emperor in the Roman imperial period . Subsequent emperors were styled pontifex maximus well into Late Antiquity , including Gratian ( r.

367–383 ), but during Gratian's reign the phrase was replaced in imperial titulature with the Latin phrase: pontifex inclytus ("honourable pontiff"), an example followed by Gratian's junior co-emperor Theodosius the Great and which was used by emperors thereafter including the co - augusti Valentinian III ( r.

425–455 ), Marcian ( r.

450–457 ) and the augustus Anastasius Dicorus ( r.

491–518 ). The first to adopt the inclytus alternative to maximus may have been the rebel augustus Magnus Maximus ( r.

383–388 ).

The word pontifex and its derivative " pontiff " became terms used for Christian bishops , [ 5 ] including the Bishop of Rome .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The title of pontifex maximus was adopted by the Catholic Church for the pope as its chief bishop and appears on buildings, monuments and coins of popes of Renaissance and modern times. The official list of titles of the pope given in the Annuario Pontificio includes "supreme pontiff" ( Latin : summus pontifex ) as the fourth title, the first being "bishop of Rome".

[ 8 ] Etymology [ edit ] Part of a series on the Priesthoods of ancient Rome Flamen (AD 250–260) Major colleges Pontifices Augures Vestales Flamines Septemviri epulonum Quindecimviri sacris faciundis Other colleges or sodalities Fetiales Fratres Arvales Salii Titii Luperci Sodales Augustales Priests Pontifex maximus Rex Sacrorum Flamen Dialis Flamen Martialis Flamen Quirinalis Rex Nemorensis Curio maximus Priestesses Virgo Vestalis Maxima Flaminica Dialis Regina sacrorum Related topics Religion in ancient Rome Imperial cult Gallo-Roman religion Glossary of ancient Roman religion v t e The etymology of "pontifex" is uncertain, but the word has been used since Roman times. The word appears to consist of the Latin word for "bridge" and the suffix for "maker"  ( pons + facere )". However, there is a possibility that this definition is a folk etymology for an Etruscan term, [ 9 ] since Roman religion was heavily influenced by Etruscan religion, and little is known about the Etruscan language , which is a non-Indo-European and poorly attested language.

According to the common interpretation whereby the term pontifex means "bridge-builder", this could have been originally meant in a literal sense: the position of bridge-builder was indeed an important one in Rome, where the major bridges were over the Tiber , the sacred river (and a deity): only prestigious authorities with sacral functions could be allowed to "disturb" it with mechanical additions. However, it was always understood in its symbolic sense as well: the pontifices were the ones who smoothed the "bridge" between gods and men.

[ 10 ] The interpretation of the word pontifex as "bridge-builder" was that of Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Marcus Terentius Varro .

Plutarch pointed out that the term existed before there were any bridges in Rome and derived the word from Old Latin pontis [ sic ] meaning a powerful or absolute master, while others derived it from potis facere in the sense of "able to sacrifice".

[ 11 ] The last derivation is mentioned also by Varro, who rejected it, [ 12 ] but it was the view of pontifex maximus Quintus Scaevola .

[ 13 ] Others have held that the word was originally pompifex (leader of public processions).

[ 13 ] The word pons originally meant "way" and pontifex would thus mean "maker of roads and bridges." [ 13 ] Another opinion is that the word is a corruption of a similar-sounding but etymologically unrelated Etruscan word.

[ 14 ] Yet another hypothesis [ 15 ] considers the word as a loan from the Sabine language , in which it would mean a member of a college of five, from Osco-Umbrian ponte , five.

[ 16 ] This explanation takes into account that the college was established by Sabine king Numa Pompilius and the institution is Italic: the expressions pontis and pomperias found in the Iguvine Tablets may denote a group or division of five or by five. The pontifex would thence be a member of a sacrificial college known as pomperia (Latin quinio ).

[ 17 ] The Roman title pontifex maximus was rendered in Greek inscriptions and literature of the time as Koine Greek : ἀρχιερεύς , romanized: archiereús , lit.

'Archpriest' [ 18 ] or by a more literal translation and order of words as Koine Greek : ἀρχιερεὺς μέγιστος , romanized: archireús mégistos , lit.

'greatest archpriest'.

[ 19 ] The term ἀρχιερεύς is used in the Greek Septuagint text of the Old Testament and in the New Testament to refer to the High Priest of Israel , including in 2 Maccabees ( 2 Maccabees 4:7 ).

The word pontifex , Latin for " pontiff ," was used in ancient Rome to designate a member of the College of Pontiffs . In the Latin Vulgate translation of the New Testament , it is sometimes used to designate the Jewish high priest, as in the Gospel of John and Epistle to the Hebrews ( John 11:49 ; Hebrews 5:1 ). From perhaps as early as the 3rd century, it has been used to denote a Christian bishop. In the Vulgate , the term summus pontifex was originally applied to the High Priest of Israel , as in the Book of Judith ( Judith 15:19 ), whose place, each in his own diocese , the Christian bishops were regarded as holding, based on an interpretation from the 1912 edition of the Catholic encyclopedia of the First Epistle of Clement (I Clement 40).

[ 20 ] Origins of the Regal period [ edit ] The Collegium Pontificum (College of Pontiffs) was the most important priesthood of ancient Rome. The foundation of this sacred college and the office of pontifex maximus is attributed to the second king of Rome , Numa Pompilius .

[ 21 ] Much of what is known about the Regal period in Roman history is semi-legendary or mythical. The Collegium presumably acted as advisers to the rex (king) in religious matters. The collegium was headed by the pontifex maximus , and all the pontifices held their office for life. But the pontifical records of early Rome were most likely destroyed when the city was sacked by the Gauls in 387 BC, and the earliest accounts of Archaic Rome come from the literature of the Republic , most of it from the 1st century BC and later.

[ citation needed ] According to the Augustan -era historian Livy , Numa Pompilius , a Sabine , devised Rome's system of religious rites, including the manner and timing of sacrifices, the supervision of religious funds, authority over all public and private religious institutions, instruction of the populace in the celestial and funerary rites including appeasing the dead, and expiation of prodigies. Numa is said to have founded Roman religion after dedicating an altar on the Aventine Hill to Jupiter Elicius and consulting the gods by means of augury .

[ 21 ] Numa wrote down and sealed these religious instructions, and gave them to the first pontifex maximus , Numa Marcius .

[ citation needed ] Roman Republic [ edit ] See also: List of Pontifices Maximi and College of Pontiffs In the Roman Republic , the pontifex maximus was the highest office in the state religion of ancient Rome and directed the College of Pontiffs . According to Livy, after the overthrow of the monarchy, the Romans created the priesthood of the rex sacrorum , or "king of sacred rites," to carry out certain religious duties and rituals previously performed by the king. The rex sacrorum was explicitly deprived of military and political power, but the pontifices were permitted to hold both magistracies and military commands.

[ 22 ] The official residence of the pontifex maximus was the Domus Publica ("State House") which stood between the House of the Vestal Virgins and the Via Sacra , close to the Regia , in the Roman Forum . His religious duties were carried out from the Regia. Unless the pontifex maximus was also a magistrate, he was not allowed to wear the toga praetexta , i.e. toga with the purple border. In artistic representations, he can be recognized by his holding an iron knife ( secespita ) [ 9 ] or the patera , [ 23 ] and the distinctive robes or toga with part of the mantle covering the head ( capite velato ) , in keeping with Roman practice.

In practice, particularly during the late Republic, the office of pontifex maximus was generally held by a member of a politically prominent family. It was a coveted position mainly for the great prestige it conferred on the holder.

Julius Caesar became pontifex in 73 BC and pontifex maximus in 63 BC.

The major Republican source on the pontiffs would have been the theological writings of Varro , which survive only in fragments preserved by later authors such as Aulus Gellius and Nonius Marcellus . Other sources are Cicero , Livy , Dionysius of Halicarnassus , Valerius Maximus , Plutarch 's Life of Numa Pompilius , Festus 's summaries of Verrius Flaccus , and in later writers, including several of the Church Fathers . Some of these sources present an extensive list of everyday prohibitions for the pontifex maximus ; it seems difficult to reconcile these lists with evidence that many pontifices maximi were prominent members of society who lived normal lives.

Election and number [ edit ] The number of Pontifices, elected by co-optatio (i.e. the remaining members nominate their new colleague) for life, was originally five, including the pontifex maximus .

[ 24 ] [ 9 ] The pontifices , moreover, could only come from the old nobility. In effect, this was only members of the patrician class. However, in 300–299 BC the lex Ogulnia opened the office of pontifex maximus to public election and permitted the plebs (plebeians) to be co-opted as priests, so that part of the exclusivity of the title was lost. But it was only in 254 BC that Tiberius Coruncanius became the first plebeian pontifex maximus .

[ 25 ] The lex Ogulnia also increased the number of pontiffs to nine (the pontifex maximus included). In 104 BC the lex Domitia prescribed that the election of all pontiffs would henceforward be voted by the comitia tributa (an assembly of the people divided into voting districts); by the same law only 17 tribes, chosen by lot from the 35 tribes of the city, could vote. The law's promulgator, L[ucius] Domitius Ahenobarbus, was shortly afterwards elected pontifex maximus after the death of the incumbent Metellus Dalmaticus : Something of a personal revenge because, the previous year, he had expected to be co-opted as a pontiff to replace his late father, but the pontifical college had appointed another candidate in his place. The office's next holder, Q[uintus] Mucius Scaevola , was also elected under the same law, though without controversy or opposition since he was a former consul and long-serving pontiff.

This law was abolished in 81 BC by Sulla in his dictatorship, in the lex Cornelia de Sacerdotiis , which restored to the great priestly colleges their full right of co-optatio .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Also under Sulla, the number of pontifices was increased to fifteen, the pontifex maximus included, and Sulla appointed Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius as the next holder of the office – the only truly unelected pontifex maximus in history, since even the other pontiffs did not get a vote in the matter.

In 63 BC, the law of Sulla was abolished by the tribune Titus Labienus , and a modified form of the lex Domitia was reinstated providing for election by comitia tributa once again: Gaius Julius Caesar followed Ahenobarbus's precedent by being elected by public vote, although Caesar at least had previously been a pontiff. Marcus Antonius later restored the right of co-optatio to the college, [ 29 ] in time for the election of Marcus Aemilius Lepidus . Also under Julius Caesar , the number of pontifices were increased to sixteen, the pontifex maximus included. (Possibly because Caesar's own long absences from Rome necessitated the appointment of a deputy pontiff for those occasions when fifteen needed to be present.) The number of pontifices varied during the Empire but is believed to have been regular at fifteen.

[ 24 ] Extraordinary appointment of dictators [ edit ] The office came into its own with the abolition of the monarchy, when most sacral powers previously vested in the King were transferred either to the pontifex maximus or to the Rex Sacrorum , though traditionally a (non-political) dictator [ 30 ] was formally mandated by the Senate for one day, to perform a specific rite.

According to Livy in his "History of Rome," an ancient instruction written in archaic letters commands: "Let him who is the Praetor Maximus fasten a nail on the Ides of September." This notice was fastened on the right side of the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus, next to the chapel of Minerva. This nail is said to have marked the number of the year.

It was in accordance with this direction that the consul Horatius dedicated the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus in the year following the expulsion of the kings; from the Consuls the ceremony of fastening the nails passed to the Dictators, because they possessed greater authority. As the custom had been subsequently dropped, it was felt to be of sufficient importance to require the appointment of a dictator. L[ucius] Manlius was accordingly nominated but his appointment was due to political rather than religious reasons. He was eager to command in the war with the Hernici. He caused an anger among the men liable to serve by the inconsiderate way in which he conducted the enrolment. In consequence of the unanimous resistance offered by the tribunes of the plebs, he gave way, either voluntarily or through compulsion, and laid down his dictatorship. Since then, this rite was performed by the Rex Sacrorum.

[ 31 ] Duties [ edit ] The main duty of the Pontifices was to maintain the pax deorum or "peace of the gods." [ 32 ] The immense authority of the sacred college of pontiffs was centered on the pontifex maximus , the other pontifices forming his consilium or advising body. His functions were partly sacrificial or ritualistic, but these were the least important. His real power lay in the administration of ius divinum or divine law; [ 33 ] the information collected by the pontifices related to the Roman religious tradition was bound in a corpus which summarized dogma and other concepts.

Denarius depicting Julius Caesar as pontifex maximus The chief departments of jus divinum may be described as follows: The regulation of all expiatory ceremonials needed as a result of pestilence, lightning, etc.

The consecration of all temples and other sacred places and objects dedicated to the gods.

The regulation of the calendar; both astronomically and in detailed application to the public life of the state.

The administration of the law relating to burials and burying-places, and the worship of the manes or dead ancestors.

The superintendence of all marriages by confarreatio , i.e. originally of all legal patrician marriages.

The administration of the law of adoption and of testamentary succession.

The regulation of the public morals, and fining and punishing offending parties.

The selection of Vestal Virgins .

[ 34 ] The pontifices had many relevant and prestigious functions such as being in charge of caring for the state archives, the keeping the official minutes of elected magistrates, [ 35 ] the list of magistrates, and they kept the records of their own decisions ( commentarii ) and of the chief events of each year, the so-called "public diaries", the Annales maximi .

[ 36 ] The pontifex maximus was also subject to several taboos . Among them was the prohibition to leave Italy. Plutarch described Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica Serapio (141–132 BC) as the first to leave Italy, after being forced by the Senate to do so, and thus break the sacred taboo.

Publius Licinius Crassus Dives Mucianus (132–130 BC) was the first to leave Italy voluntarily. Afterwards it became common and no longer against the law for the pontifex maximus to leave Italy. Among the most notable of those who did was Julius Caesar (63–44 BC).

The Pontifices were in charge of the lunisolar Roman calendar and determined when intercalary months needed to be added to synchronize the calendar to the seasons. Since the Pontifices were often politicians, and because a Roman magistrate's term of office corresponded with a calendar year, this power was prone to abuse: a Pontifex could lengthen a year in which he or one of his political allies was in office, or refuse to lengthen one in which his opponents were in power. A Pontifex with other political responsibilities, especially away from Rome, might also have been simply distracted from his calendrical duties as chief priest. This caused the calendar to become out of step with the seasons; for example, Caesar's crossing of the Rubicon in January 49 BC actually took place in mid-autumn.

Under his authority as pontifex maximus , Julius Caesar introduced the calendar reform that created the entirely solar Julian calendar , with a fault of less than a day per century. This calendar remained the standard calendar of the Roman Empire until its collapse, and was used by the state church of the Roman Empire after the adoption of Christianity as the Roman state religion. The Julian calendar, established by Caesar in his capacity as pontifex maximus , thus became the standard calendar in all of Europe, and continued in use in Western Europe until the Gregorian reform in the 16th century.

Pontifex maximus and Augustus Marcus Aurelius ( r.

161–180 ) performing sacrifice in a relief from the Arch of Marcus Aurelius ( Capitoline Museums ) The Roman Empire [ edit ] After Julius Caesar's assassination in 44 BC, his ally Marcus Aemilius Lepidus was selected as pontifex maximus . Though Lepidus eventually fell out of political favor and was sent into exile as Augustus consolidated power, he retained the priestly office until his death in 13/12 BC, at which point Augustus was selected to succeed him and given the right to appoint other pontifices. Thus, from the time of Augustus, the election of pontifices ended and membership in the sacred college was deemed a sign of imperial favour.

[ 9 ] Augustus took the title of pontifex maximus for political gain, in an attempt to restore traditional Roman values. With this attribution, the new office of Emperor was given a religious dignity and the responsibility for the entire Roman state cult. Most authors contend that the power of naming the Pontifices was not really used as an instrumentum regni , an enforcing power.

[ citation needed ] From this point on, pontifex maximus was one of the many titles of the Emperor, slowly losing its specific and historical powers and becoming simply a referent for the sacral aspect of imperial duties and powers. During the Imperial period, a promagister (vice-master) performed the duties of the pontifex maximus in lieu of the emperors whenever they were absent.

[ 10 ] In post-Severan times (after 235 AD), the small number of pagan senators interested in becoming pontiffs led to a change in the pattern of office holding. In Republican and Imperial times no more than one family member of a gens was member of the College of Pontiffs , nor did one person hold more than one priesthood in this collegium. However, these rules were loosened in the later part of the 3rd century A.D. In periods of joint rule, at first only one of the emperors bore this title, as it occurred for the first time during the joint reign of Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus (161–169 AD), when only Marcus Aurelius was pontifex maximus , but later two pontifices maximi could serve together, as Pupienus and Balbinus did in 238 AD—a situation unthinkable in Republican times.

[ 37 ] Late Antiquity [ edit ] When Tertullian , a Montanist , furiously applied the term to a bishop with whom he was at odds (either Pope Callixtus I or Agrippinus of Carthage), [ 38 ] [ 39 ] ca. 220, over a relaxation of the Church's penitential discipline allowing repentant adulterers and fornicators back into the Church, it was in bitter irony: In opposition to this [modesty], could I not have acted the dissembler? I hear that there has even been an edict sent forth, and a peremptory one too. The "Pontifex Maximus," that is the "bishop of bishops," issues an edict: "I remit, to such as have discharged [the requirements of] repentance, the sins both of adultery and of fornication." O edict, on which cannot be inscribed, "Good deed!"... Far, far from Christ's betrothed be such a proclamation!

— Tertullian, On Modesty ch. 1 In the Crisis of the Third Century , emperors continued to assume the title pontifex maximus . The early Christian emperors, including Constantine the Great ( r.

306–337 ) and the rest of the Constantinian dynasty , continued to use it; it was only relinquished by Gratian , possibly in 376 at the time of his visit to Rome, [ 10 ] or more probably in 383 when a delegation of pagan senators implored him to restore the Altar of Victory in the Roman Senate 's Curia Julia .

[ 40 ] Its last use with reference to the emperors is in inscriptions of Gratian.

[ 41 ] [ 24 ] [ 9 ] The Edict of Thessalonica of 27 February 380 was enacted in Thessalonica ( Thessaloniki ) and published in Constantinople ( Istanbul ) for the whole empire. By it, Theodosius I established Nicene Christianity as the state church of the Roman Empire . The Latin text refers to the bishop of Rome, Damasus , as a pontifex , and the bishop of Alexandria, Peter , as an episcopus : [ 42 ] ... the profession of that religion which was delivered to the Romans by the divine Apostle Peter, as it has been preserved by faithful tradition and which is now professed by the Pontiff Damasus and by Peter, Bishop of Alexandria ... We authorize the followers of this law to assume the title Catholic Christians ...

[ 43 ] Various forms of summus pontifex ('highest pontiff' or bishop) were for centuries used not only of the Bishop of Rome but of other bishops also.

[ 20 ] Hilary of Arles (d. 449) is styled summus pontifex by Eucherius of Lyon ( P. L.

, vol. L, col. 773).

Pontifex inclytus [ edit ] During Gratian's reign or immediately afterwards the phrase pontifex maximus – which had unwelcome associations with traditional Roman religion during the Christianization of the Roman Empire – was replaced in imperial titulature with the phrase: pontifex inclytus .

[ 44 ] The first to adopt the inclytus alternative to maximus may have been the rebel augustus and devout Christian close to bishop Martin of Tours , Magnus Maximus ( r.

383–388 ), who killed Gratian in August 383.

[ 44 ] This practice was followed by Gratian's junior co-emperor Theodosius the Great and was used by emperors thereafter, including the co - augusti Valentinian III ( r.

425–455 ), Marcian ( r.

450–457 ) and the augustus Anastasius Dicorus ( r.

491–518 ), for whom examples of official usage survive.

[ 44 ] Another inscription dedicated to Justin II ( r.

565–574 ) and naming him pontifex has long been recognized as a forgery, though there is no evidence to suggest the title could not have been used by Justinian the Great ( r.

527–565 ) or even by Constantine IV ( r.

654–685 ).

[ 44 ] Middle Ages [ edit ] Lanfranc is termed primas et pontifex summus by his biographer, Milo Crispin ( P. L.

, vol. CL, 10), but from the 11th century it appears to be applied only to the Pope.

[ 20 ] Engraving by Christoph Weigel the Elder of Pope Clement XI , giving him the title pontifex maximus Catholic Church use of the title [ edit ] See also: Pontiff § Catholicism In the 15th century, when the Renaissance drove new interest in ancient Rome, pontifex maximus became a regular title of honour for Popes.

[ 45 ] After the Fall of the Eastern Roman Empire with the Fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire and the death of the final Roman emperor Constantine XI in 1453, pontifex maximus became part of the papacy 's official titulature of the Bishop of Rome.

[ 46 ] The name given to the book containing the liturgical rites to be performed by any bishop, the Roman Pontifical , and to the form of liturgy known as Pontifical High Mass witness to the continued use of pontifex to refer to bishops in general.

[ citation needed ] Tertullian ( c.

155 – c.

220 AD ), in his work "De Pudicitia" (On Modesty), criticized Pope Callixtus I for allowing repentant adulterers and fornicators back into the Church, even if they were repeat offenders, sarcastically referring to him as "Pontifex Maximus." [ 47 ] [ 48 ] The Pontifex Maximus — that is, the bishop of bishops — issues an edict: "I remit, to such as have discharged (the requirements of) repentance, the sins both of adultery and of fornication." O edict, on which cannot be inscribed, Good deed!

— Tertullian, On Modesty, Chapter I While the title pontifex maximus has for some centuries been used in inscriptions referring to the Popes, it has never been included in the official list of papal titles published in the Annuario Pontificio . The official list of titles of the Pope given in the Annuario Pontificio includes "Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church" (in Latin, Summus Pontifex Ecclesiae Universalis ) as the fourth title, the first being "Bishop of Rome." The title pontifex maximus appears in inscriptions on buildings and on coins and medallions.

[ citation needed ] In December 2012, Pope Benedict XVI adopted @pontifex as his X (formerly known as Twitter) handle , [ 49 ] prompting users to pose questions with the #askpontifex hashtag .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] This has been maintained by his successors Pope Francis , and Pope Leo XIV .

[ 52 ] See also [ edit ] Ancient Rome portal List of pontifices maximi Katechon Papal titles References [ edit ] ^ Peck, Harry Thurston (1896).

"s. v. Pontifex" .

Harper's Dictionary of Classical Antiquities . New York: Harper & Brothers . p. 1299.

^ Lewis, Chartlon T.

; Short, Charles (1879).

"s. v. pontifex" .

A Latin Dictionary . Oxford: Clarendon Press – via Perseus Project .

^ "s. v. pontifex" .

American Heritage Dictionary (5th ed.).

Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company . 2019.

^ Forsythe, Gary (2006).

A Critical History of Early Rome: From Prehistory to the First Punic War .

University of California Press . p. 136.

ISBN 978-0-520-24991-2 . Retrieved September 2, 2016 .

^ Pascal, Paul (February 1966). "Medieval Uses of Antiquity".

The Classical Journal .

61 (5).

The Classical Association of the Middle West and South , Inc.: 193– 197.

JSTOR 3294702 .

In the matter of hierarchical nomenclature, one of the most striking instances is the adoption of the term pontifex for a bishop ^ Edictum Gratiani, Valentiani et Theodosii de fide catholica . The Roman Law Library. February 27, 380.

Archived from the original on April 27, 2014 . Retrieved January 6, 2018 .

^ "Pontiff: 1a. The pope. b. A bishop. 2. A pontifex." .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (4th ed.).

Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company . 2000 . Retrieved June 27, 2019 .

^ Annuario Pontificio .

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2012. p. 23.

ISBN 978-88-209-8722-0 .

^ a b c d e Lendering, Jona .

"Pontifex Maximus" .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2012 . Retrieved August 21, 2011 – via Livius.org .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b c Van Haeperen, Françoise (2003).

"Des pontifes païens aux pontifes chrétiens" .

Revue belge de Philologie et d'Histoire .

81 (1): 137– 159.

doi : 10.3406/rbph.2003.4718 .

hdl : 2078.1/69346 . Retrieved 3 March 2020 .

^ Hooke, Nathaniel (1830).

The Roman History, from the Building of Rome to the Ruin of the Commonwealth . Vol. 5. London: Thomas Davison. p. 81.

^ Beard, Mary; North, John; Price, Simon, eds. (1998).

Religions of Rome . Vol. 2. Cambridge University Press. p. 195.

ISBN 978-0-52145646-3 .

^ a b c Lanciani, Rodolfo (2005).

New Tales of Ancient Rome (reprint ed.). Kessinger Publishing. p. 54.

ISBN 978-1-41790821-9 .

^ Douglas Harper (2020).

"Pontifex (n.)" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved February 17, 2023 .

^ First proposed by F. Ribezzo in "Pontifices 'quinionalis sacrificii effectores'", Rivista Indo-Greco-Italica di Filologia-Lingua-Antichità 15 1931 p. 56.

^ Cf. Greek πέντε ^ For a review of the proposed hypotheses cfr. J. P. Hallet "Over Troubled Waters: The Meaning of the Title Pontifex" in Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association 101 1970 p. 219 ff.

^ Polybius 23.1.2 and 32.22.5; Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum 3.43, 3.428 und 3.458 ^ Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum 2.2696 and 3.346; Plutarch Numa 9.4 ^ a b c Joyce, George Hayward (1911).

"Pope § Titles" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b Livy , Ab urbe condita , 1:20 ^ Roman Public Religion Archived March 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Roman Civilization, bates.edu retrieved August 17, 2006 ^ "Panel Relief of Marcus Aurelius and Roman Imperial Iconography" .

College at Oneonta . State University of New York . Retrieved February 17, 2023 .

^ a b c Smith, William (1875).

"Pontifex Maximus" .

A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities . London: John Murray . pp.

939– 942 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 – via LacusCurtius .

^ Titus Livius.

Ex Libro XVIII Archived August 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine Periochae, from livius.org retrieved August 16, 2006 ^ Liv. Epit. 89 ^ Pseudo-Ascon. in Divinat. p 102, ed. Orelli ^ Dion Cass. xxxvii. 37 ^ Dion Cass. xliv. 53 ^ see also: basileus , interrex ^ Livy (Titus Livius) .

"History of Rome" .

Ancient History Sourcebook: Accounts of Roman State Religion, c. 200 BC – 250 AD . Paul Halsall © August 1998 (public domain), Fordham University; halsall@murray.fordham.edu . Retrieved August 23, 2006 .

^ "Roman Mythology" Archived May 21, 2006, at the Wayback Machine , Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2006. Retrieved August 17, 2006 ^ "Definition of JUS DIVINUM" .

Merriam–Webster Online Dictionary . Retrieved February 17, 2023 .

^ Kroppenberg, Inge (2010). "Law, Religion and Constitution of the Vestal Virgins".

Law and Literature .

22 (3): 426– 427.

doi : 10.1525/lal.2010.22.3.418 .

S2CID 144805147 .

^ Ovid , Fasti ^ Fowler, William Warde (1911).

"Pontifex" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 22 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 66.

^ Christer Bruun, J. C. Edmondson (2015).

The Oxford Handbook of Roman Epigraphy . Oxford University Press. p. 191.

ISBN 978-0-19-533646-7 .

^ Francis Aloysius Sullivan, From Apostles to Bishops (Paulist Press 2001 ISBN 978-0-8091-0534-2 ), p. 165 ^ David E. Wilhite, Tertullian the African (De Gruyter, Walter 2007 ISBN 978-3-11-019453-1 ), p. 174 ^ A. Cameron, A. (1969). Gratian's repudiation of the pontifical robe.

The Journal of Roman Studies , 58: 96–102. The confusion in dates arises from Zosimus, who writes that it was repudiated at Gratian's accession, impossible from epigraphic and literary references ^ Tikkanen, Amy (February 3, 2008).

"Gratian" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

Retrieved June 27, 2019 – via Encyclopædia Britannica Online .

^ Unlike episcopus (from Greek ἐπίσκοπος ), the word used for the bishop from the Greek-speaking East, pontifex is a word of purely Latin derivation.

^ Theodosian Code XVI.1.2; and Sozomen, "Ecclesiastical History", VII, iv.

Emperor Theodosius I.

"IMPERATORIS THEODOSIANI CODEX Liber Decimus Sextus" (web) . ancientrome.ru . Retrieved December 4, 2006 .

^ a b c d Cameron, Alan (2007).

"The Imperial Pontifex" .

Harvard Studies in Classical Philology .

103 : 341– 384.

ISSN 0073-0688 .

JSTOR 30032227 .

^ Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford University Press 2005 ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 ), article Pontifex Maximus ^ Nicholson, Oliver; Gwynn, David (2018), Nicholson, Oliver (ed.), "Pontifex Maximus" , The Oxford Dictionary of Late Antiquity , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780198662778.001.0001 , ISBN 978-0-19-866277-8 , retrieved November 1, 2020 ^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: The Pope" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ "CHURCH FATHERS: On Modesty (Tertullian)" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ "Pope joins tweeting masses with Pontifex handle" .

New York Post . December 3, 2012 . Retrieved December 3, 2012 .

^ Boorstein, Michelle (December 4, 2012).

"Ask the pope @pontifex: With Twitter account, Benedict XVI just a tweet away" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved February 17, 2023 .

^ Pope Benedict to launch new Twitter account , Vatican Radio , December 3, 2012.

^ Barone, Camillo; Grosso, John (May 13, 2025).

"Pope Leo XIV is staying on social media" .

National Catholic Reporter . Retrieved May 15, 2025 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Cameron, Alan (2016).

"Pontifex Maximus: from Augustus to Gratian – and Beyond" (PDF) .

Collegium : 139– 159.

Dijkstra, Roald; Espelo, Dorine Van (2017).

"Anchoring Pontifical Authority: A Reconsideration of the Papal Employment of the Title Pontifex Maximus" .

Journal of Religious History .

41 (3): 312– 325.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9809.12400 .

hdl : 2066/160382 .

External links [ edit ] article Pontifex in Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities Annotated pontifex maximus list List of roman consuls ( Fasti consulares ) 300 BC – 60 AD at http://www.tyndale.cam.ac.uk/Egypt/ptolemies/chron/chronology.htm Archived December 27, 2011, at the Wayback Machine – in the list of consuls the column on the right (pontifex maximus) lists those that are known in the period.

Joyce, George Hayward (1911).

"Pope § V. Primacy of Honour: Titles and Insignia" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities ( Dii Consentes ) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Aurora Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Lares Familiares Liber Libertas Luna Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Nox Ops Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Summanus Venus Veritas Vesta Vertumnus Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Bonus Eventus Caelus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pax Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Terra Victoria Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Kings of Alba Longa Hersilia Legendary beings She-wolf Barnacle goose Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Fasti Metamorphoses Propertius Varro Res divinae Sibylline Books Apuleius The Golden Ass Concepts and practices Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Charity Palladium Theology of victory Pomerium Temples Capitolium Cella Celtic Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism Events Golden Bough Founding of Rome Natale di Roma Rape of the Sabine Women Battle of Lacus Curtius Objects Gubernaculum Parabiago Plate Pignora imperii Variations Gallo-Roman Mysteries Cybele Isis Mithraism See also Classical mythology Decline Persecution Etruscan religion Glossary Greek mythology Myth and ritual v t e Ancient Rome topics Outline Timeline Index History Foundation Kingdom overthrow Republic Empire History Pax Romana Principate Dominate Western Empire fall historiography of the fall Byzantine Empire decline fall Later Roman Empire History Constitution History Kingdom Republic Empire Late Empire Senate Legislative assemblies Curiate Centuriate Tribal Plebeian Executive magistrates SPQR Law Twelve Tables Mos maiorum Citizenship Auctoritas Imperium Status Litigation Government Curia Forum Cursus honorum Collegiality Emperor Legatus Dux Officium Praefectus Vicarius Vigintisexviri Lictor Magister militum Imperator Princeps senatus Pontifex maximus Augustus Caesar Tetrarch Optimates and populares Province Magistrates Ordinary Consul Censor Praetor Tribune Tribune of the plebs Military tribune Quaestor Aedile Promagistrate Governor Extraordinary Rex Interrex Dictator Magister equitum Decemviri Consular tribune Triumvir Military History Borders Establishment Structure Campaigns Political control Strategy Engineering Frontiers and fortifications castra Technology Army Legion Infantry tactics Personal equipment Siege engines Siege in Ancient Rome Navy Auxiliaries Decorations and punishments Hippika gymnasia Economy Agriculture Deforestation Commerce Finance Currency Republican currency Imperial currency Culture Architecture Art Bathing Calendar Clothing Cosmetics Cuisine Education Family Pater familias Folklore Hairstyles Literature Music Mythology Religion Deities Romanization Romans Sexuality Spectacles Theatre Toys and games Wine Society Patricians Plebs Conflict of the Orders Secessio plebis Equites Gens Tribes Assembly Patronage Naming conventions Demography Women Marriage Adoption Slavery Bagaudae Technology Amphitheatres Aqueducts Bridges Circuses Civil engineering Concrete Domes Metallurgy Numerals Roads Sanitation Ships Temples Theatres Thermae Latin History Alphabet Versions Old Classical Vulgar Late Medieval Renaissance Neo-Latin Contemporary Ecclesiastical Romance languages Writers Latin Aelius Donatus Ammianus Marcellinus Appuleius Asconius Pedianus Augustine Aurelius Victor Ausonius Boëthius Caesar Catullus Cassiodorus Censorinus Cicero Claudian Columella Cornelius Nepos Ennius Eutropius Fabius Pictor Sextus Pompeius Festus Rufus Festus Florus Frontinus Fronto Fulgentius Gellius Horace Hydatius Hyginus Jerome Jordanes Julius Paulus Justin Juvenal Lactantius Livy Lucan Lucretius Macrobius Marcellus Empiricus Marcus Aurelius Manilius Martial Nicolaus Damascenus Nonius Marcellus Obsequens Orosius Ovid Petronius Phaedrus Plautus Pliny the Elder Pliny the Younger Pomponius Mela Priscian Propertius Quadrigarius Quintilian Quintus Curtius Rufus Sallust Seneca the Elder Seneca the Younger Servius Sidonius Apollinaris Silius Italicus Statius Suetonius Symmachus Tacitus Terence Tertullian Tibullus Valerius Antias Valerius Maximus Varro Velleius Paterculus Verrius Flaccus Vergil Vitruvius Greek Aelian Aëtius of Amida Appian Arrian Cassius Dio Diodorus Siculus Diogenes Laërtius Dionysius of Halicarnassus Dioscorides Eusebius of Caesaria Galen Herodian Josephus Julian Libanius Lucian Pausanias Philostratus Phlegon of Tralles Photius Plutarch Polyaenus Polybius Porphyrius Priscus Procopius Simplicius of Cilicia Sozomen Stephanus Byzantinus Strabo Themistius Theodoret Zonaras Zosimus Major cities Alexandria Antioch Aquileia Berytus Bononia Carthage Constantinopolis Eboracum Leptis Magna Londinium Lugdunum Lutetia Mediolanum Pompeii Ravenna Roma Smyrna Vindobona Volubilis Lists and other topics Cities and towns Climate Consuls Dictators Distinguished women Dynasties Emperors Empresses Fiction Film Generals Gentes Geographers Institutions Laws Legacy Legions Magistri equitum Nomina Pontifices maximi Praetors Quaestors Tribunes Roman–Iranian relations External wars and battles Civil wars and revolts Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐7n2zw
Cached time: 20250814220149
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.853 seconds
Real time usage: 1.039 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6974/1000000
Revision size: 42946/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 191755/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6135/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 168965/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.498/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26119174/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  839.333      1 -total
 36.18%  303.675      1 Template:Reflist
 11.17%   93.767      5 Template:Cite_dictionary
 10.75%   90.226      1 Template:Langnf
  8.93%   74.984      1 Template:Priesthoods_of_ancient_Rome
  8.73%   73.257      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.08%   59.410      1 Template:Short_description
  6.06%   50.865      5 Template:Citation_needed
  5.49%   46.070      8 Template:Cite_web
  5.32%   44.676      7 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:81677:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220149 and revision id 1305739359. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pontifex_maximus&oldid=1305739359 " Categories : Pontifices maximi of the Roman Republic Ancient Roman religious titles Latin religious words and phrases Papal titles Christian terminology Superlatives in religion Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2013 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Koine Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 20:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pontifex maximus 45 languages Add topic

