Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Academic career Toggle Academic career subsection 2.1 Linguistics 2.2 Philosophy 2.3 Psychology 2.4 Other works 3 Social reform 4 Later life and death 5 Bibliography 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Alexander Bain (philosopher) 28 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Italiano Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scottish philosopher and educationalist Alexander Bain Born ( 1818-06-11 ) 11 June 1818 Aberdeen , Scotland Died 18 September 1903 (1903-09-18) (aged 85) Aberdeen , Scotland Nationality Scottish Education Marischal College ( MA (Hons) ) Known for The Senses and the Intellect The Emotions and the Will Mental and Moral Science Education as a Science Mind Scientific career Fields Moral philosophy Philosophy of mind Psychology Logic Linguistics Education Institutions University of Aberdeen University of London University of Glasgow Anderson's University Marischal College Alexander Bain (11 June 1818 – 18 September 1903) was a Scottish philosopher and educationalist in the British school of empiricism and a prominent and innovative figure in the fields of psychology , linguistics , logic , moral philosophy and education reform . He founded Mind , the first ever journal of psychology and analytical philosophy, and was the leading figure in establishing and applying the scientific method to psychology . Bain was the inaugural Regius Chair in Logic and Professor of Logic at the University of Aberdeen , where he also held Professorships in Moral Philosophy and English Literature and was twice elected Lord Rector of the University of Aberdeen .

Early life and education [ edit ] Alexander Bain was born in Aberdeen , north Scotland, to George Bain, a weaver and veteran soldier, and Margaret Paul. At age eleven he left school to work as a weaver [ 1 ] hence the description of him as Weevir, rex philosophorum . He also attended lectures at the Mechanics' Institutes of Aberdeen and the Aberdeen Public Library .

In 1836 he entered Marischal College where he came under the influence of Professor of Mathematics John Cruickshank, Professor of Chemistry Thomas Clark and Professor of Natural Philosophy William Knight. Towards the end of his undergraduate degree he became a contributor to the Westminster Review with his first article entitled "Electrotype and Daguerreotype," published in September 1840. This was the beginning of his connection with John Stuart Mill , which led to a lifelong friendship. He was awarded the Blue Ribbon and also the Gray Mathematical Bursary. His college career and studies were distinguished especially in mental philosophy , mathematics and physics and he graduated with a Master of Arts with Highest Honours .

In 1841, Bain substituted for Dr. Glennie the Professor of Moral Philosophy , who, due to ill-health , was unable to discharge his academic duties. He continued to do this three successive terms, during which he continued writing for the Westminster , and also helped John Stuart Mill with the revision of the manuscript of his System of Logic (1842). In 1843 he contributed the first review of the book to the London and Westminster .

Academic career [ edit ] Cover page of Bain's biography of James Mill , 1882 In 1845 he was appointed Professor of Mathematics and Natural philosophy at Anderson's University in Glasgow. A year later, preferring a wider field, he resigned the position and devoted himself to writing. In 1848 he moved to London to fill a post in the Board of Health under Sir Edwin Chadwick where he worked for social reform and became a prominent member of the intellectual circle which included George Grote and John Stuart Mill . In 1855 he published his first major work, The Senses and the Intellect , followed in 1859 by The Emotions and the Will . These treatises won him a position among independent thinkers. Bain was also Examiner in Logic and Moral Philosophy from 1857 to 1862 and 1864–1869 for the University of London and also an instructor in moral science for the Indian Civil Service examinations.

In 1860 he was appointed by the British Crown to the inaugural Regius Chair of Logic and the Regius Chair of English Literature at the University of Aberdeen , which was newly formed after the amalgamation of King's College, Aberdeen and Marischal College by the Scottish Universities Commission of 1858.

Linguistics [ edit ] Until 1858, neither logic nor English had received adequate attention in Aberdeen , and Bain devoted himself to supplying these deficiencies. He succeeded not only in raising the Standard of Education generally in the North of Scotland , but also in establishing a School of Philosophy at the University of Aberdeen , and in widely influencing the teaching of English grammar and composition in the United Kingdom. His efforts were first directed to the preparation of textbooks: Higher English Grammar [ 2 ] and An English Grammar [ 3 ] were both published in 1863, followed in 1866 by the Manual of Rhetoric , in 1872 by A First English Grammar , and in 1874 by the Companion to the Higher Grammar . These works were wide-ranging and their original views and methods met with wide acceptance.

Philosophy [ edit ] Bain's philosophical writings already published, especially The Senses and the Intellect to which was added in 1861 The On the Study of Character including an Estimate of Phrenology , were too large for effective use in the classroom. Accordingly, in 1868, he published his Manual of Mental and Moral Science , mainly a condensed form of his treatises, with the doctrines re-stated, and in many instances freshly illustrated, and with many important additions. The year 1870 saw the publication of the Logic .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] This, too, was a work designed for the use of students; it was based on John Stuart Mill , but differed from him in many particulars, and was distinctive for its treatment of the doctrine of the conservation of energy in connection with causation and the detailed application of the principles of logic to the various sciences with a section on the classification of all the sciences .

[ citation needed ] Next came two publications in the "International Scientific Series", namely, Mind and Body (1872), [ 6 ] and Education as a Science (1879).

[ 7 ] All these works, from the Higher English Grammar downwards, were written by Bain during his twenty years as a professor at the University of Aberdeen. He also started the philosophical journal, Mind ; the first number appeared in January 1876, under the editorship of a former pupil, George Croom Robertson , of University College London . To this journal Bain contributed many important articles and discussions; and in fact he bore the whole expenses of it till Robertson, owing to ill-health, resigned the editorship in 1891 and George Stout took up the baton.

Psychology [ edit ] Although his influence as a logician and linguist in grammar and rhetoric was considerable, his reputation rests on his works in psychology . At one with the German physiologist and comparative anatomist Johannes Peter Müller in the conviction psychologus nemo nisi physiologus (one is not a psychologist who is not also a physiologist), he was the first in Great Britain during the 19th century to apply physiology in a thoroughgoing fashion to the elucidation of mental states. In discussing the will, he favoured physiological over metaphysical explanations, pointing to reflexes as evidence that a form of will, independent of consciousness, inheres in a person's limbs. He sought to chart physiological correlates of mental states but refused to make any materialistic assumptions.

[ 8 ] His idea of applying the scientific method of classification to psychical phenomena gave scientific character to his work, the value of which was enhanced by his methodical exposition and his command of illustration. In line with this, too, is his demand that psychology should be cleared of metaphysics ; and to his lead is no doubt due in great measure the position that psychology has now acquired as a distinct positive science. Bain established psychology, as influenced by David Hume and Auguste Comte , as a more distinct discipline of science through application of the scientific method . Bain proposed that physiological and psychological processes were linked, and that traditional psychology could be explained in terms of this association. Moreover, he proposed that all knowledge and all mental processes had to be based on actual physical sensations, and not on spontaneous thoughts and ideas, and attempted to identify the link between the mind and the body and to discover the correlations between mental and behavioural phenomena.

William James calls his work the "last word" of the earlier stage of psychology, but he was in reality the pioneer of the new. Subsequent psycho-physical investigations "have all been in" the spirit of his work; and although he consistently advocated the introspective method in psychological investigation, he was among the first to appreciate the help that may be given to it by social psychology , comparative psychology and developmental psychology . He may justly claim the merit of having guided the awakened psychological interest of British thinkers of the second half of the 19th century into fruitful channels. Bain emphasised the importance of our active experiences of movement and effort, and though his theory of a central innervation sense is no longer held as he propounded it, its value as a suggestion to later psychologists is great. His thought that a belief is but a preparation for action is respected by both pragmatism and functionalism .

[ 9 ] Other works [ edit ] Bain's autobiography, published in 1904, contains a full list of his works, and also the history of the last thirteen years of his life by Professor W. L. Davidson of the University of Aberdeen, who further contributed to Mind (April 1904) a review of Bain's services to philosophy.

[ 10 ] Further works include editions with notes of Paley 's Moral Philosophy (1852); Education as a Science (1879); Dissertations on leading philosophical topics (1903, mainly reprints of papers in Mind ); he collaborated with JS Mill and Grote in editing James Mill's Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind (1869), and assisted in editing Grote's Aristotle and Minor Works ; he also wrote a memoir prefixed to G Croom Robertson's Philosophical Remains (1894).

Social reform [ edit ] Bain took a keen interest in social justice and development and was frequently an active part in the political and social movements of the day; after his retirement from the Chair of Logic, he was twice elected Lord Rector of the University of Aberdeen each term of office extending over three years. He was a strenuous advocate of reform, especially in the teaching of sciences , and supported the claims of modern languages to a place in the curriculum. Moreover, he was an avid supporter for student rights and in 1884 the Aberdeen University Debating Society took the first steps towards the introduction of a students' representative council and later Aberdeen University Students' Association under his support.

Bain was a member of the Committee of the Aberdeen Public Library throughout his life as well as the School Board of Aberdeen . Furthermore, Professor Bain gave lectures and wrote papers for the Mechanics' Institutes of Aberdeen and served as the Secretary of its committee.

His services to education and social reform in Scotland were recognised by the conferment of the honorary degree of Doctor of law by the University of Edinburgh in 1871. A marble bust of him stands in the Aberdeen Public Library and his portrait hangs in Marischal College .

Later life and death [ edit ] Bain retired from his chair and Professorship from the University of Aberdeen and was succeeded by William Minto , one of his most brilliant pupils. Nevertheless, his interest in thought, and his desire to complete the scheme of work mapped out in earlier years, remained as keen as ever. Accordingly, in 1882 appeared the Biography of James Mill , and accompanying it John Stuart Mill: a Criticism, with Personal Recollections .

[ 11 ] Next came (1884) a collection of articles and papers, most of which had appeared in magazines, under the title of Practical Essays . This was succeeded (1887, 1888) by a new edition of the Rhetoric , and along with it, a book On Teaching English , being an exhaustive application of the principles of rhetoric to the criticism of style, for the use of teachers; and in 1894 he published a revised edition of The Senses and the Intellect , which contain his last word on psychology. In 1894 also appeared his last contribution to Mind . His last years were spent in privacy at Aberdeen, where he died on 18 September 1903. He married twice but left no children. His last request was that "no stone should be placed upon his grave: his books, he said, would be his monument." [ 12 ] The University of Aberdeen Philosophy Department established the Bain Medal in 1883. It is awarded annually to the best candidate who gains First Class Honours in Mental philosophy .

As Professor William L. Davidson wrote in Bain's obituary in Mind "In Dr. Bain's death, psychology has sustained a great loss; but so too has education and practical reform. It is rare to find a philosopher who combines philosophical with educational and practical interests, and who is also an active force in the community in which he dwells. Such a combination was here. Let us not fail to appreciate it." Bibliography [ edit ] "Early Life of James Mill" , from Mind , Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1876).

Review of Herbert Spencer's Principles of Sociology , from Mind , Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1876).

"Mr. G. H. Lewes and the Postulates of Experience" , from Mind , Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1876).

Education as a Science , New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1884.

Practical Essays Dissertations on Leading Philosophical Topics Autobiography by Alexander Bain LL.D.

London: Longmans, Green & Co. 1904.

Elements of Chemistry and Electricity Astronomy James Mill, A Biography (1 ed.), London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1882 , retrieved 11 December 2012 .

John Stuart Mill: A Criticism with Personal Recollections , London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1882.

The Art of Study Is There Such a Thing As Pure Malevolence?

The Classical Controversy The University Ideal: Past and Present On Teaching English: With Detailed Examples and an Enquiry Into the Definition of Poetry English Composition and Rhetoric: Emotional Qualities of Style English Composition and Rhetoric: Intellectual Elements of Style English Grammar as Bearing Upon Composition First English Grammar A Higher English Grammar An English Grammar English Composition and Rhetoric: A Manual Logic: Induction Logic: Volume 1 Deduction Some Points in Ethics Fragments on Ethical Subjects The Moral Philosophy of Paley The Emotions and the Will , 1859 The Senses and the Intellect , 1855 Mind And Body: The Theories of Their Relation Physiological Expression in Psychology Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind: Volume 1 How to Study Character; Or, the True Basis for the Science of Mind Pleasure and Pain On the Study of Character: Including an Estimate of Phrenology Mental Science: A Compendium of Psychology, and the History of Philosophy, Designed as a Text-Book for High-Schools and Colleges Moral Science: A Compendium of Ethics Mental and Moral Science: A Compendium of Psychology and Ethics , London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1868.

Mental and Moral Science: Psychology and History of Philosophy Mental and Moral Science: Theory of Ethics and Ethical Systems See also [ edit ] Association of ideas Grupo Alexander Bain Psychophysical parallelism Mind Stream of consciousness (narrative mode) References [ edit ] ^ Kunitz, p. 30 ^ Higher English Grammar at Google Books ^ An English Grammar at Google Books ^ Bain, Alexander (1870).

Logic, Part First, Deduction . Vol. I (1 ed.). London: Longmans, Green, Reader & Dyer . Retrieved 16 June 2014 .

^ Bain, Alexander (1870).

Logic, Part Second, Induction . Vol. II (1 ed.). London: Longmans, Green, Reader & Dyer . Retrieved 16 June 2014 .

^ Bain, Alexander (1873).

Mind & Body . New York: D. Aplleton & Company . Retrieved 16 June 2014 .

^ Bain, Alexander (1879).

Education as a Science . New York: D. Aplleton & Company . Retrieved 16 June 2014 .

^ Columbia Encyclopedia ^ Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy ^ Bain, Alexander (1870).

Autobiography (1 ed.). London: Logmnans, Green & Co . Retrieved 16 June 2014 .

^ Bain, Alexander (1882).

John Stuart Mill: a Criticism, with Personal Recollections . London: Longmans, Green & Co . Retrieved 16 June 2014 .

^ Alexander Bain: The Story of the Life of the Famous Aberdeen Professor. New York Times (1857–1922); 30 July 1904, pg. BR514 Further reading [ edit ] Bain, Alexander, English Composition and Rhetoric , 1871 (facsimile ed., 1996, Scholars' Facsimiles & Reprints, ISBN 978-0-8201-1497-2 ).

Hattiangadi, Jagdish N. (1970). "Bain, Alexander".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp.

403– 404.

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

B. R. Hergenhahn, An Introduction to the History of Psychology, Sixth Edition Kunitz, Stanley , and Howard Haycraft . "Bain, Alexander." British Authors of the Nineteenth Century.

H. W. Wilson Company, New York, 1936.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Alexander Bain .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Alexander Bain "Bain, Alexander" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

William L. Davidson, Professor Bain , an obituary from Mind (Jan. 1904) Moral Science: A Compendium of Ethics by Alexander Bain Works by Alexander Bain at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Alexander Bain at the Internet Archive Works by Alexander Bain at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) " Bain, Alexander ", A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature , 1910 – via Wikisource Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Alexander Bain Academic offices Preceded by Earl of Rosebery Lord Rector of the University of Aberdeen 1881–?

Succeeded by Marquess of Huntly Preceded by none Regius Chair in Logic at the University of Aberdeen ?–?

Succeeded by William Minto v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Rectors of the University of Aberdeen Edward Maitland Earl Russell M. E. Grant Duff Thomas Henry Huxley W. E. Forster Earl of Rosebery Alexander Bain Viscount Goschen Marquess of Huntly Baron Strathcona and Mount Royal Charles Thomson Ritchie Sir Frederick Treves H. H. Asquith Andrew Carnegie Winston Churchill Viscount Cowdray Sir Robert Horne Viscount Cecil of Chelwood Earl of Birkenhead Sir Arthur Keith Walter Elliot Admiral Sir Edward Evans Sir Stafford Cripps Eric Linklater Baron Tweedsmuir Jimmy Edwards Admiral Sir Rhoderick McGrigor John Bannerman Peter Scott Brigadier Sir John Hunt Frank George Thomson Jo Grimond Michael Barratt Iain Cuthbertson Sandy Gall Robert  Perryment Hamish Watt Willis Pickard Colin Bell Ian Hamilton Allan Macartney Clarissa Dickson Wright Robin Harper Stephen Robertson Maitland Mackie Maggie Chapman Martina Chukwuma-Ezike Iona Fyfe Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexander_Bain_(philosopher)&oldid=1294406564 " Categories : 1818 births 1903 deaths People from Aberdeen Rhetoricians 19th-century Scottish philosophers Scottish logicians Alumni of the University of Aberdeen Academics of the University of Aberdeen Rectors of the University of Aberdeen Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from July 2021 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from SBDEL Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 14:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alexander Bain (philosopher) 28 languages Add topic

