Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fiscal localism 2 Local currency 3 Taxes 4 Banks 5 Local exchange trading systems 6 Brexit 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Fiscal localism 4 languages Español Bahasa Indonesia Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Institutions of localized monetary exchange Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Fiscal localism comprises institutions of localized monetary exchange. Sometimes considered a backlash against global capitalism or economic globalization , fiscal localism affords voluntary, market structures that help communities trade more efficiently within their communities and regions.

[ 1 ] Fiscal localism [ edit ] Local Farmer's Market "Buy local" or local purchasing is the most visible face of fiscal localism. There are more complex institutions (both new and well established) that contribute to a community's ability to flourish. Institutions like credit unions , CDFI 's (Community Development Financial Institutions), and local currency or complementary currency all can contribute to making communities more resilient and wealthy.

Local currency has been in the news most, with journalists citing the Berkshares in Massachusetts , and the Ithaca Hours in Ithaca, New York . Beyond these salient examples, there are thousands of local currencies all over the world.

[ 2 ] Fiscal localism is rooted in the concept of decentralization . The creation and maintenance of a regional economy is supported by communities who believe that their community is economically better off sustaining itself rather than being part of and relying upon a larger economy, such as a national economy or the global economy. This is a movement against the increasing globalization of all economies around the world. The main tenets of fiscal localism include buying products that are made locally and using a currency that is unique to that local economy.

[ 3 ] This allows a community to grow at a controllable and sustainable rate by supporting farmers, shopkeepers, and service providers of a community. Consumers in these communities are more informed about how their foods and products are grown and made. Using a unique form of currency allows a community to determine its economic growth and health more accurately than using metrics of a national economy to gauge economic health.

[ 4 ] Taxation in these communities is emphasized at the local level and low importance is put on national taxes. These communities want to separate themselves from the larger national economy so they must rely on revenue generated from local taxation. Banking is also preferred to be done on a local level. Communities that follow fiscal localism would rather have one local bank than be customers of a massive bank that does business across the country as well as internationally.

Local currency [ edit ] Unique currencies used by local economies are often backed by a national currency. The town of Totnes, England, from 2007 to 2019 used the Totnes Pound , which was backed by the British Pound sterling at a one-to-one ratio. The idea behind using a unique, local currency is to keep money flowing through the community while preventing money from leaving or relying on money to enter the community. This allows a community to become self-sufficient, have enough funds to create an energy source for the community to use, and eliminate transportation costs for bringing products into the community. A large reason Totnes wanted to become self-sufficient is to decrease its dependence on the use of oil;  the town believed that it would be better off in the long run if it were able to operate without relying on oil, which is a finite resource. Following in Totnes' footsteps, several other English towns have established currencies of their own: the Bristol pound , Brixton Pound , Stroud Pound , and Exeter Pound .

[ 5 ] A few towns in the United States have also adopted unique currencies. Berkshire, Massachusetts and Ithaca, New York have implemented Massachusetts BerkShares and the HOUR, respectively. While a BerkShare is worth $.95 US dollars, the HOUR is not convertible to US dollars or any other type of national currency.

[ 5 ] Calgary Dollars, created in 1996 as the Bow Chinook Barter Community, has not been backed by or exchangeable with national currency, Canadian dollars. Their belief is that the valuation of 1:1 without exchangeability allows exchanges to be simplified but reduces the linkages to the problems associated with national currency that complementary currencies are seeking to address such as currency speculation and interest-bearing design. This concept is to "complement" the national currency with unique Calgary Dollars economic activity and increasing the local multiplier of both the Calgary Dollars and the associated percentage of national currency that is often included in the transactions.

A British Quaker colony in Pennsylvania created and used the Pennsylvania Pound in the 18th century, but fiscal localism failed for the colony and the currency was abandoned.

Lorenzo Fioramonti, director of the Centre for the Study of Governance Innovation at the University of Pretoria in South Africa, believes that the European Union would be more stable if it used multiple local currencies combined with a " digital euro ".

[ 5 ] Taxes [ edit ] Proponents of fiscal localism argue that paying higher local taxes and lower national taxes will help communities grow and thrive. A report from The TaxPayers' Alliance states that a decentralized form of taxation leads to a more efficient public sector.

[ 6 ] This report references a German econometric study which found that "government efficiency increase with the degree of fiscal decentralization".

[ 6 ] Reasons used to support local taxation include responsiveness, cost efficiency, incentives, and accountability. The Spanish Institute of Fiscal Studies conducted a study over a period stretching from 1972 to 2005 using data from 23 countries regarding taxes. The study found that "reducing the share of central government in total tax revenue by one percentage point boosts long-run GDP growth by about 0.06 per cent per annum".

[ 6 ] Setting local taxes is complicated, because too high a tax rate will lead to taxpayers refusing to pay while too low a rate will not give the local government enough funds to function and operate effectively. These taxes are separate from state and federal taxes and are not set at the state or federal level. Increasing local taxes allows a community to reinvest revenue generated from the taxes into public institutions or programs that help the local community. Residents are able to physically see and experience where their tax money is going and how it improves their lives.

Banks [ edit ] Modern banks have become monolithic institutions with thousands of branches in their respective countries of service. This globalization of banking institutions and the banking practices used by these organizations is the antithesis of what fiscal localism is about. Toby Blume argues for a shift in the banking system in his essay "Changing the Debate: The Ideas Redefining Britain." [ 7 ] Blume writes, "A more localised banking system - which is more common in other countries but we don't have in the UK - provides a way to connect surplus capital with productive purpose (for the mutual benefit of savers/investors and borrowers)." [ 7 ] Advocates for fiscal localism argue that the banking system should be restructured to accommodate the needs of smaller, local communities. These communities that are built around the tenets of fiscal localism want to have local banks that have consumer bases which are limited to the population that is geographically located around the bank. This allows the bank to know its customers on a personal level in order to determine the risk of giving a loan out to someone who lives in the community. It also allows the bank to use its excess capital to invest in services and businesses that are located in these towns, which in turn spurs the local economy at a consistent growth rate.

Local exchange trading systems [ edit ] A local exchange trading system (LETS) is composed of local members that want to trade goods and services with other members in the group. These LETS use a unique local currency on which all trade is based upon. Those who are in LETS believe that they benefit both the members and the local community due to the organized nature of these LETS. The five core traits of a LETS include “cost of service, consent, disclosure, equivalence to the regional currency, and interest-free.” [ 3 ] Member transactions through a LETS do not have to be solely monetary. A purchase can be repaid through a service performed for the other member involved in the transaction.

Brexit [ edit ] A recent, and perhaps the most widely known, push for fiscal localism occurred when the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union in 2016. The European Union is an economic union that was formed in order to allow free movement of resources and capital between the countries that compose the organization. Discussions of the United Kingdom leaving the European Union have gone on for many years, but was not made official until the public of the United Kingdom voted to leave. Many of those who were proponents of leaving the European Union wanted to do so for economic reasons. Nigel Farage, one of the most prominent endorsers of the United Kingdom leaving the European Union , wrote, "We know that the European Union is hell bent on further, deeper centralisation." [ 8 ] The disdain that Nigel Farage has for centralization is rooted in both economic and political reasons, but the economic reasons lie in his desire for increased fiscal localism. Many citizens of the United Kingdom share the same negative view of centralization. This resulted in the voting populace choosing to leave the European Union . This historic decision of the United Kingdom is an example of a community choosing to reject the increasing globalization of economic institutions and policies. However, many citizens of the United Kingdom did not want to leave the European Union . These opponents of Brexit preferred to remain in an organization that encouraged wealth and services to move freely among countries within the union. Then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Theresa May said in April 2016 that if the United Kingdom left the European Union , "There would be little we could do to stop discriminatory policies being introduced, and London 's position as the world's leading financial centre would be in danger." [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Barter Credit union Cooperatives CDFI Community currency Community-based economics Informal sector (aka informal economy) Local multiplier effect New Economy movement Time-based currency Time banking Transition Towns References [ edit ] ^ "Fiscal Localism On Rise In Germany" .

NPR.org .

^ . 13 September 2017 https://web.archive.org/web/20170913114022/http://www.complementarycurrency.org/ccDatabase/les_public.html . Archived from the original on 13 September 2017.

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ a b "Fiscal Localism" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 27 February 2017 .

^ "Fiscal Localism" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 27 February 2017 .

^ a b c Moore, Katie.

"The Totnes Pound and the American origins of Fiscal Localism" .

Yester . Archived from the original on 5 April 2017 . Retrieved 27 February 2017 .

^ a b c "The fiscal and economic case for localism" (PDF) .

taxpayersalliance.com . Retrieved 27 February 2017 .

^ a b Blume, Toby.

"The future of localism must be economic" .

senscot.net . Archived from the original on 7 April 2017 . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

^ Farage, Nigel (21 June 2016).

"Why we must vote LEAVE in the EU referendum" .

express.co.uk . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ Rampen, Julia (26 October 2016).

"The 7 brilliant arguments Theresa May once made against Brexit" .

newsstatesman.com . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

External links [ edit ] "Fiscal Localism On Rise In Germany" .

NPR.org .

"No money? Then make your own" . 17 September 2009 – via news.bbc.co.uk.

"Introducing HOUR Money" .

www.ithacahours.com .

"BerkShares Inc" .

www.berkshares.org .

Harford, Tim (3 May 2008).

"Do "local currencies" really help the communities that use them?" .

Slate Magazine .

"What Is A CDFI?" .

domini.com . Archived from the original on 19 July 2010.

v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fiscal_localism&oldid=1218849287 " Category : Localism (politics) Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 14 April 2024, at 05:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fiscal localism 4 languages Add topic

