Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of common wartime models 2 Construction 3 Timeline 4 Italy Toggle Italy subsection 4.1 World War I 4.2 World War II 4.3 After 1945 5 United Kingdom Toggle United Kingdom subsection 5.1 World War II 5.2 After 1945 6 Germany Toggle Germany subsection 6.1 World War II 7 Japan Toggle Japan subsection 7.1 World War II 8 Russia/USSR Toggle Russia/USSR subsection 8.1 After 1945 9 United States Toggle United States subsection 9.1 After 1945 10 North Korea 11 Other countries Toggle Other countries subsection 11.1 Argentina 11.2 Poland 11.3 Yugoslavia 12 Museums 13 Movies and fiction 14 See also 15 Notes 16 References 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Human torpedo 19 languages Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Jawa Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Slovenščina Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Early form of diver propulsion vehicle This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Human torpedo" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this article , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( August 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An Italian Siluro Lenta Corsa or maiale , at the Museo nazionale della scienza e della tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci , Milan Human torpedoes or manned torpedoes are a type of diver propulsion vehicle on which the diver rides, generally in a seated position behind a fairing . They were used as secret naval weapons in World War II . The basic concept is still in use.

The name was commonly used to refer to the weapons that Italy, and later (with a larger version) Britain, deployed in the Mediterranean and used to attack ships in enemy harbours. The human torpedo concept has occasionally been used by recreational divers , although this use is closer to midget submarines .

More broadly, the term human torpedo was used in the past to refer to vehicles which are now referred to as wet submarines and diver propulsion vehicles .

Midget submarines which are employed to directly support frogman operations, whether possessing airlocks or not, if used as underwater tugs to transport equipment and frogmen clinging to their exterior, also blur the line between the human torpedo and more sophisticated underwater vehicles.

A maiale at the Royal Navy Submarine Museum , Gosport History of common wartime models [ edit ] The concept of a small manned submarine carrying a bomb was developed and patented by a British naval officer in 1909, but was never used during the First World War . The Italian Navy experimented with a primitive tiny sub ( Mignatta ) carrying two men and a limpet mine : this craft successfully sank the Austro-Hungarian battleship SMS Viribus Unitis on 1 November 1918.

[ 1 ] The first truly practical human torpedo was the Italian maiale , [ 2 ] electrically propelled by a 1.6 horsepower (1.2 kW) motor in most of the units manufactured. With a top speed of 3 knots (5.6 km/h), it often took up to two hours to reach its target. Two crewmen in diving suits rode astride, each equipped with an oxygen rebreather apparatus.

[ 1 ] They steered the craft to the enemy ship. The "pig" could be submerged to 15 metres (49 ft), and hypothetically to 30 metres (98 ft), when necessary.

[ 3 ] On arrival at the target, the detachable warhead was released for use as a limpet mine . If they were not detected, the operators then rode the mini sub away to safety.

Israeli manned torpedo, 1967 Development began in 1935 but the first eleven were not completed until 1939 by San Bartolomeo Torpedo Workshops in La Spezia , Italy and a larger number followed. The official Italian name for the majority of the craft that were manufactured was Siluro Lenta Corsa (SLC or "Slow-running torpedo"). Two distinct models were made, Series 100 and then (in 1942) Series 200 with some improvements.

[ 3 ] At least 50 SLCs were built by September 1943.

[ 3 ] In operation, maiali were carried by another vessel (usually a conventional submarine), and launched near the target. Most manned torpedo operations were at night and during the new moon to cut down the risk of being seen. Attacks in 1940 were unsuccessful but in 1941, the Italian navy successfully entered the harbour of Alexandria and damaged the two British battleships HMS Queen Elizabeth and HMS Valiant , as well as the tanker Sagona . This feat encouraged the British to develop their own torpedo "chariots".

[ 1 ] The last Italian model, the SSB (for Siluro San Bartolomeo , "San Bartolomeo Torpedo") was built with a partly enclosed cockpit , a more powerful motor and larger 300 kg (660 lb) warhead (up from the earlier SLC's 220 and 250 kg (490 and 550 lb) warheads). Three units were made but not operationally used because Italy surrendered in 1943.

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] The first British version of the concept was named the Chariot manned torpedo . Two models were made; Mark I was 20 feet (6.1 m) long while Mark II was 30 feet (9.1 m) long, each suitable for carrying two men. Later versions were larger, starting with the original X-class submarine , a midget submarine, 51 feet (16 m) long, no longer truly a human torpedo but similar in concept. The X-Class were capable of 6.5 knots (12.0 km/h) on the surface or 5.5 knots (10.2 km/h) submerged. They were designed to be towed to their intended area of operations by a full-size 'mother' submarine.

[ 5 ] The German navy also developed a manned torpedo by 1943, the Neger , intended for one man, with a top speed of 4 knots (7.4 km/h) and carrying one torpedo; the frequent technical problems often resulted in the deaths of operators. Roughly 200 of these were made and they did manage to sink a few ships. The later Marder ( pine marten in English) was about 27 feet (8.2 m) long and more sophisticated and could dive to depths of 27 metres (89 ft) but with very limited endurance. About 500 were built.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] Construction [ edit ] CGI image of human torpedo : British Mk 1 "chariot" ridden by two frogmen with UBA rebreathers A typical manned torpedo has a propeller, hydroplanes , a vertical rudder [ 7 ] and a control panel with controls for its front rider. It usually allows for two riders who sit facing forwards. It has navigation aids such as a compass , and nowadays modern aids such as sonar and GPS positioning and modulated ultrasound communications gear. It may have an air (or other breathing gas ) supply so its riders do not have to drain their own apparatus while they are riding it. In some the riders' seats are enclosed; in others the seats are open at the sides as in sitting astride a horse. The seat design includes room for the riders' swimfins (if used). There are flotation tanks (typically four: left fore, right fore, left aft, right aft), which can be flooded or blown empty to adjust buoyancy and attitude .

Timeline [ edit ] SLC displayed in the "Museo della Scienza e della Tecnica" in Milan 1909: The British designer Commander Godfrey Herbert received a patent for a manned torpedo. It was rejected by the War Office as impracticable and unsafe.

1 November 1918: Two men of the Regia Marina , Raffaele Paolucci and Raffaele Rossetti , in diving suits, rode a primitive manned torpedo (nicknamed Mignatta or "leech") into the Austro-Hungarian Navy base at Pola ( Istria ), where they sank the Austrian battleship Viribus Unitis and the freighter Wien using limpet mines. They had no breathing sets so they had to keep their heads above water, and thus were discovered and taken prisoner.

[ 8 ] 1938: In Italy the "1 a Flottiglia Mezzi d'Assalto" (First Fleet Assault Vehicles) was formed as a result of the research and development efforts of two men – Major Teseo Tesei and Major Elios Toschi of the Italian Royal Navy. The pair resurrected the idea of Paolucci and Rossetti.

1940: Commander Vittorio Moccagatta of the Italian Royal Navy reorganised the 1st Fleet Assault Vehicles into the Decima Flottiglia MAS (Tenth Light Flotilla of assault vehicles) or "X-MAS", under the command of Ernesto Forza . It secretly manufactured manned torpedoes and trained war frogmen, called nuotatori (Italian: "swimmers").

26 March 1941 The Raid on Souda Bay was an attack by the Decima MAS (X-MAS). Decima MAS used explosive boats (MTM) against British ships lying in Souda Bay, Crete, during the early hours of 26 March 1941. The MTM explosive boats had been ferried from Astypalaia by the destroyers Francesco Crispi and Quintino Sella and launched at the approaches to the bay. After crossing the three boom defences, the MTM attacked the British heavy cruiser HMS York and the Norwegian tanker Pericles (8,324 GRT).

26 July 1941: An attack on Valletta Harbour ended in disaster for the X MAS and Major Teseo Tesei lost his life.

19 December 1941: The Decima Flottiglia MAS attacked the port of Alexandria with three maiali . The battleships HMS Valiant and Queen Elizabeth (and an 8,000-ton tanker ) were sunk in shallow water putting them out of action for many months.

Luigi Durand de la Penne and five other swimmers were taken prisoner. De la Penne was awarded the Gold Medal of Military Valour after the war.

October 1942: Two British Chariot manned torpedoes were carried aboard the Shetland bus fishing-boat Arthur to attack the Tirpitz on Operation Title . They were swung overboard once in Norwegian waters but both became detached from their tow hooks in a gale and the operation was a total failure.

[ 9 ] 8 December 1942. An attack by three manned torpedoes from the Olterra against British naval targets was thwarted in Gibraltar . Three divers were killed by depth charges when the British harbour defence "reacted furiously" to the attack. Among the dead were Lieutenant Licio Visintini , commander of the divers unit on board the Olterra , Petty Officer Giovanni Magro, and Sergeant Salvatore Leone, from Taormina , Sicily. Leone's body was never found. Sergeant Leone was awarded the Medaglia d'oro al Valor Militare and a memorial was erected in the Community Gardens in Taormina on the 50th anniversary of the attack. The memorial includes a rebuilt maiale and a description of the events, in three languages.

1–2 January 1943: British submarines Thunderbolt , Trooper and P311 took part in Operation Principal.

P311 was lost en route to La Maddelena but the other two boats had some success at Palermo , launching two and three Chariots respectively. The Ulpio Traiano was sunk and the stern torn off Viminale.

However the cost was high with one submarine and one chariot lost and all but two charioteers captured.

18 January 1943: Thunderbolt took two chariots to Tripoli for Operation Welcome. This was to prevent blockships being sunk at the harbour mouth, so denying access to the Allies. Again, partial success was achieved. This was the last operation in which chariots were carried in containers on British submarines, although some others followed with the chariots on deck without containers.

6 May & 10 June 1943: Italian maiali from the Olterra , now under the command of Lieutenant Ernesto Notari, sank six Allied merchant ships in Gibraltar, for a total of 42,000 tons.

September 1943: Operation Source was an attempt to destroy warships including the Tirpitz using X-class midget subs. Of the five deployed, only two were successful.

Tirpitz was badly damaged, crippled, and out of action until May 1944.

[ 10 ] 2 October 1943: A bigger Italian frogman-carrier, 10 metres (33 ft) long and carrying four frogmen, called Siluro San Bartolomeo , or SSB, was going to attack Gibraltar, but Italy surrendered and the attack was called off.

21 June 1944: A British-Italian joint operation was mounted against shipping in La Spezia harbour. The chariots were carried on board an MTB and the cruiser Bolzano was sunk.

6 July 1944: A German Neger -type vessel torpedoed the Royal Navy minesweepers HMS Magic and Cato .

[ 11 ] 8 July 1944: A German Neger-type torpedo manned by Lieutenant Potthast heavily damaged the Polish light cruiser ORP Dragon off the Normandy beaches.

20 July 1944: Royal Navy destroyer HMS Isis was mined at anchor in Seine Bay . A German human torpedo was believed responsible.

[ 11 ] 27–28 October 1944: The British submarine Trenchant carried two Mk 2 Chariots (nicknamed Tiny and Slasher ) to an attack on Phuket harbour in Thailand . See British commando frogmen for more information about this attack. No manned torpedo operations in combat in any war are known with certainty after this date.

20 November 1944: The USS Mississinewa was sunk by a Japanese kaiten manned suicide torpedo.

Immediate post-war period: The British Chariots were used to clear mines and wrecks in harbours.

For other events, see Operations of X Flottiglia MAS and British commando frogmen .

Some nations including Italy have continued to build and deploy manned torpedoes since 1945.

Italy [ edit ] A maiale in Taormina , Sicily Cockpit of a maiale Waterproof container for a maiale . The container could be attached to the deck of a submarine so that an attack could be made without being seen. In the Naval Museum ( Museo storico navale ), Venice.

World War I [ edit ] Raffaele Rossetti in 1918 created a new weapon, based on his idea of a torpedo manned by a person, to be linked to enemy vessels under water and explode under the ship hull . This weapon was called a mignatta (leech) and was the precursor of the maiali of World War II.

World War II [ edit ] Siluro a Lenta Corsa (Italian, Low-Speed Torpedo – SLC), also known as a maiale .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Siluro San Bartolomeo (Italian, St. Bartholomew Torpedo, also called SSB). It was never used in action.

[ 3 ] : 11–13 For information on Italian manned torpedo operations, see Decima Flottiglia MAS .

After 1945 [ edit ] CE2F/X100 is a swimmer delivery vehicle made after 1945. They were made in Italy. Range 50 miles (80 km). Two riders. The Pakistan Navy has several of them. India and Argentina also have some.

[ 14 ] Recent upgrades included: control module with a GPS autopilot digitized on board electronics launcher for five LCAW mini-torpedoes (optional) United Kingdom [ edit ] World War II [ edit ] See also: British commando frogmen Chariot Mark I , 6.8 metres (22 ft) long, 0.9 metres (2 ft 11 in) wide, 1.2 metres (3 ft 11 in) high, speed 2.5 knots (4.6 km/h), weight: 1.6 tonnes, maximum diving depth: 27 metres (89 ft). Endurance five hours (distance depended on water current). Its control handle was in the shape of a sideways figure 8. Thirty-four examples were made.

[ citation needed ] Chariot Mark II , 30 feet 6 inches (9.30 m) long, 2 feet 6 inches (0.76 m) diameter, 3 feet 3 inches (0.99 m) maximum height, weight 5,200 pounds (2,400 kg), maximum speed 4.5 knots (8.3 km/h; 5.2 mph), range 5–6 hours at full speed, had two riders, who sat back to back. Thirty examples were made.

[ 15 ] Both types of the Chariot were made by Stothert & Pitt at Bath, Somerset .

Motorised Submersible Canoe (MSC), nicknamed Sleeping Beauty , a crewed wet submersible with a capacity of one frogman, used for clandestine operations, sabotage, and reconnaissance.

X-class submarine , nicknamed X-Craft , a true midget submarine with both diesel and electric propulsion, possessing both a periscope and an airlock for frogman egress and entry. During Operation Source , a sortie of X-Craft was successful in sinking the Tirpitz in shallow water while the vessel was at anchorage behind anti-torpedo nets in Kåfjord .

[ 16 ] The attack did not destroy the vessel, which was raised and repaired.

XE-class submarine , an improved and enlarged version of the X-class. The vehicles were used in the Pacific theatre, cutting underwater communication cables and also successfully sinking the Takao in Singapore harbour.

Welman submarine , a midget submarine with a pressurized interior, meant to deploy magnetic limpet mines against the hulls of immobile vessels, and potentially also support frogman operations as a tug. The vehicle did not have a periscope and relied on the pilot's cupola emerging from below the water to orient itself against terrain and targets, as well as visually assessing its targets at short range under water. Despite over a hundred units constructed, they were used operationally only once and assessed as being unsuccessful.

Welfreighter submarine , a true midget submarine intended to support frogman operations and serve as a clandestine agent transport, transporting both men and equipment. The vehicle's propulsion system used the same type of diesel engine as employed on the X-class.

After 1945 [ edit ] See also: Special Boat Service Archimedes DPV , nicknamed Archie , a modification of the Mark 20 Bidder ASW torpedo into a diver propulsion vehicle with deployable handlebars and an internal cargo compartment, which could function either autonomously or under direct control by a frogman.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Subskimmer DPV , a hybrid of a motorized rigid inflatable boat while on the surface, and a battery electric submersible while under water. Frogmen can cling or hitch themselves onto the vehicle while it's under water, with the pilot seated in a kneeling position.

[ 19 ] Mark 8 SDV , a crewed wet submersible and swimmer delivery vehicle originally in use by the United States Navy .

Mark 11 SWCS , a crewed wet submersible and swimmer delivery vehicle.

Germany [ edit ] See also: German commando frogmen World War II [ edit ] A Marder exhibited in Aalborg Søfarts- og Marinemuseum , Denmark. The depicted version has a standard dome cupola.

Hecht , a midget submarine similar in design and application to the British Welman , constructed after studying the British X-Craft captured after the attack on the battleship Tirpitz . The Hecht had a complement of two crewmen and normally carried both a limpet mine on its nose section and a conventional torpedo slung beneath, on a slip rail mount. Propulsion was all-electric, using a standard electric torpedo motor, and the vehicle was designed to always be submerged; consequently, range was poor, with the vehicle intended to be towed to the vicinity of the target by a conventional submarine. Optionally, instead of a limpet mine, the Hecht could carry a third operative - a frogman equipped with a diving suit, riding astride the vehicle.

Neger , [ 20 ] a submersible constructed on the basis of a G7e torpedo with a second, normal G7e carried beneath it, launched from a slip rail mount. An extreme form of a genuine human torpedo [ 11 ] which could function as both a swimmer delivery vehicle and an armed midget submarine. The Neger was 7.65 m (25.1 ft) long, with a body diameter of 53 cm (21 in). Total displacement, together with the payload, was approximately 5 tons. Top speed was 4.2 kn (7.8 km/h). The Neger was incapable of diving, set to a shallow depth; it relied on the extremely small profile of the pilot's cupola which projected above the waterline as well as the cover of night for stealth. The crew complement consisted of a single pilot. This manned torpedo was named after its inventor, Richard Mohr.

A Marder exhibited in Technik Museum Speyer , Germany. The depicted version is equipped with a conning tower and diver hatch.

Marder , [ 20 ] an improvement upon the Neger with the addition of a diving tank and other features. The maximum diving depth was limited by the G7e depth-keeping mechanism at 15 m (49 ft), with normal operational depth not exceeding 10 m (33 ft). The Marder was 8.3 m (27 ft) long, with a body diameter of 53 cm (21 in). Total displacement, together with the payload, was approximately 5.5 tons. Top speed was 4.2 kn (7.8 km/h). The crew complement consisted of a single pilot.

Hai , [ 20 ] an experimental craft based upon the Marder. The body was lengthened, with additional batteries installed in the midsection. The Hai was 11 m (36 ft) long, with a body diameter of 53 cm (21 in). Total displacement, together with the payload, was approximately 6 tons. Top speed was 4.2 kn (7.8 km/h). The depth characteristics were identical to those of the Marder. The crew complement consisted of a single pilot. Only a single unit was constructed, which was assessed as lacking manoeuvrability.

Biber , midget submarines which carried two torpedoes and one or two men. There were other types that never reached production.

In July 1944, the Kriegsmarine introduced their human torpedoes to harass allied positions at Normandy anchorages. Although they could not submerge, they were difficult to observe at night and inflicted several losses on allied vessels.

[ 11 ] They were also used to harass allied vessels in the invasion of southern France but were largely ineffective.

[ 21 ] Japan [ edit ] A captured Kaiten torpedo at the USS Bowfin Museum in Hawaii World War II [ edit ] The Kaiten was a manned fast torpedo intended to be piloted directly into its target, in practice becoming a suicide weapon . As such, its operation differed substantially from the human torpedo as used by Italian, British, and German militaries.

Russia/USSR [ edit ] After 1945 [ edit ] Siren. It is or was made after 1945. It is longer than a British or Italian Chariot because it has two warheads. It has two riders. It was designed to exit through a submarine 's torpedo tube . See Russian commando frogmen .

United States [ edit ] After 1945 [ edit ] There are pictures and descriptions of modern US Chariot-like underwater frogman-carriers used by SEALs and a fast surface boat that can submerge, here: Swimmer Delivery Vehicle (SDV) SEAL Delivery Vehicle [ 22 ] Swimmer Transport Device (STD) [ 23 ] North Korea [ edit ] It has been reported that North Korea has developed and deployed human torpedoes as part of its unconventional warfare tactics.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] These units, which are part of the 17th Sniper Corps, [ 24 ] operate at the brigade level both in the East and in the West Sea Fleets.

[ 24 ] Each sea fleet has one suicide unit [ 26 ] comprising elite soldiers who are well-fed and treated to a standard of living that is superior to that of submarine crews, even during periods of widespread economic hardship.

[ 24 ] The training regimen is focused on the execution of suicide bombing attacks.

[ 24 ] Initially, the agents travel on submarines, but at a later stage, they embark on torpedoes, which they direct towards their targets.

[ 26 ] The agents are instructed to utilize a favourable tide to depart for their target, attach a magnetic bomb to it, retreat with the ebb tide, detonate the explosives remotely, and return to base via a small submarine.

[ 25 ] Possibly, light torpedoes could be fired at close range instead of planting remotely detonated explosives. Despite the fact that torpedo carriers are informed that they can escape, it is often exceedingly challenging in practice.

[ 26 ] Other countries [ edit ] Argentina [ edit ] Argentine navy 's CE2F/X100-T , designed for operations in cold waters Argentina developed manned torpedoes and special mini-submarines in the 1950s, the latter with a torpedo attached under the two-man crew. Their crews were trained by Eugenio Wolk [ it ] , a former member of the Italian Decima MAS .

Poland [ edit ] In the months before the outbreak of the Second World War, a number of Polish volunteers came forward to pilot torpedoes against German warships. A Bureau of Living Torpedoes was set up to organize and train these volunteers, and prepare suitable equipment, but nothing had come to fruition before the German invasion and occupation .

Yugoslavia [ edit ] The Yugoslav Navy did not have manned torpedoes, but frogmen used the underwater device called "R-1 Diver" for a variety of missions including mine clearance, infiltration, clandestine surveillance and security, and assault missions on enemy shipping and naval objects.
These small apparatuses were relegated to the navies of Croatia (HRM) (1991) and Montenegro (2007).

Museums [ edit ] A SLC, or "maiale", exhibited in the Museo Sacrario delle Bandiere [ it ] delle Forze Armate, in Rome, Italy Original SLCs (Siluri Lenta Corsa or maiali ), displayed at the Naval History Museum Venice , Italy.

There are three chariots on public view in Eden Camp Museum near Malton, North Yorkshire in England: A restored original British Mark II, which was found derelict in a scrapyard in Portsmouth .

[ 27 ] In this design, the two riders sat back to back.

A working chariot that was made in 1992 in Milton Keynes with approximately the outside appearance of a British wartime Mark I, but with differing internal working parts. It has been filmed in action for the television. It has a dummy warhead .

[ 28 ] It was last used in 2006.

A replica Italian maiale made soon after 1945 by the same Italian firm ( Caproni ) who made the wartime maiali . As of July 2008 this was on loan to the National Maritime Museum Cornwall in Falmouth, Cornwall , until the end of 2008, but as of 16 March 2009 it was back in Eden Camp.

There is an Italian SSB maiale in the Naval Museum at Groton, Connecticut , United States.

Movies and fiction [ edit ] The movie The Valiant , made in 1962, is about the sinking of HMS Valiant in Alexandria harbour. There is even a 1953 Italian movie ( I sette dell'Orsa Maggiore Hell Raiders of the Deep ) about the attack, done with some real members of Decima Flottiglia MAS as support actors in the cast.

The film Above Us the Waves (released in 1955) concentrates on the midget submarine attack on the German battleship Tirpitz . The film has a scene of a fight between British and German frogmen at an anti-submarine net ; this never happened in the real attack on Tirpitz .

The film The Silent Enemy (released in 1958) does not represent real events accurately. In particular, in the real world there was no attack on the Olterra , and no underwater hand-to-hand battle between Italian and British frogmen. The breathing sets used by the film actors representing the Italian frogmen seem to be British naval-type rebreathers and not authentic Italian rebreathers. The three chariots seen in the movie, representing Italian maiali , were crudely made film props .

A film The Eagle Has Landed briefly features a German paratroop Officer, a Colonel played by Michael Caine and his men who have been sent to man chariots on the Channel Islands .

Ian Fleming who wrote the James Bond stories was in Naval Intelligence stationed at Gibraltar in the war, and was probably aware of the Italian operations. The chariot seen in the James Bond film On Her Majesty's Secret Service is a realistic-looking but non-functioning film prop. When seen it is in a kit store. It does not take part in any action; the action happens up a mountain in the Swiss Alps . Underwater vehicles (not chariot-shaped) featured in the James Bond film Thunderball .

In Metal Gear Solid , Solid Snake uses one to approach Shadow Moses island .

In Infinity Ward's Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 , Operators from "Task Force 141" uses two of these to approach one of the four oil rigs. This takes place in the mission: The only easy day, was yesterday .

In the game Battlestations: Pacific , Kaitens and Kaiten-carrying submarines are player-controllable units.

In Hidden & Dangerous 2 , the only mission set in Norway, entitled "Operation Seawolf: Steam Piping", is based on the failed Operation Title from 31 October 1942 against Tirpitz.

See also [ edit ] Diver propulsion vehicle – Powered device for diver mobility and range extension Frogman – Tactical scuba diver Kaiten – Japanese manned suicide torpedoes used by the Imperial Navy in World War II MT explosive motorboat – Weapon of the Regia Marina Midget submarine – Submarine under 150 tons Wet sub – Ambient pressure diver propulsion vehicle X-class submarine – Midget submarine class built for the Royal Navy during 1943–44 XE-class submarine – 1944 class of British midget submarines Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c "Emilio Bianchi, 'human torpedo' – obituary" .

Telegraph . 20 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 18 September 2018 .

^ a b "Manned Submarines: Italy's Daredevil Torpedo Riders" .

Warfare History . Sovereign Media. 26 August 2015. Archived from the original on 15 December 2017 . Retrieved 18 September 2018 .

^ a b c d e Crociani, Piero; Battistelli, Pier Paolo (2013).

Italian Navy & Air Force Elite Units & Special Forces 1940–45 (illustrated ed.). Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 12.

ISBN 9781849088589 .

^ "Submersible : SSB 'Maiale' (pig) Manned-torpedo : Italian" .

Imperial War Museums . 2011 . Retrieved 18 September 2018 .

^ "X-5 Class Midget Submarine" .

Imperial War Museums . 2011 . Retrieved 18 September 2018 .

^ "Neger (Negro) - Midget Submarines - German U-boats of WWII - Kriegsmarine - uboat.net" .

uboat.net .

^ Kemp, Paul (8 January 1999).

Midget Submarines of the Second World War . Chatham.

ISBN 9781861760425 – via Google Books.

^ http://www.marina.difesa.it/storia/galleria/viribus.asp Archived 4 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine Photographs of the "mignatta", the first human torpedo invented by Raffaele Rossetti, and the "Viribus Unitis" sinking ^ Quick, D. (1970).

"A History Of Closed Circuit Oxygen Underwater Breathing Apparatus" .

Royal Australian Navy, School of Underwater Medicine .

RANSUM -1-70. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008 . Retrieved 20 March 2009 .

^ "Lost heroes of the 'Tirpitz' " .

BBC History . BBC. 17 February 2011.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2022 . Retrieved 18 September 2018 .

^ a b c d Brown p. 115 ^ http://www.edencamp.co.uk/hut31/Image3.gif Archived 27 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Historical Diving Times , pp.

6– 11 has several large photographs of one recovered after Decima Flottiglia MAS#1941-an attack on Malta on 26 July 1941 ^ " "Stealing the Sword: Limiting Terrorist Use of Advanced Conventional Weapons", p. 60" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 October 2008 . Retrieved 13 June 2008 .

^ pp 61 & 62, Chariots of War , by Robert W. Hobson, publ. Ulric Publishing, Church Stretton , Shropshire, England, 2004, ISBN 0-9541997-1-5 ^ "Operation Source: British midget submarines against a German battleship" .

Traces of War . Retrieved 6 December 2024 .

^ Parker, John (1997).

SBS: The Inside Story of the Special Boat Service .

Headline Book Publishing . p. 172-173.

ISBN 0-7472-1976-1 .

^ Hennessy, Peter; Jinks, James (2015).

The Silent Deep: The Royal Navy Submarine Service Since 1945 .

Penguin Books . p. 288.

^ "Getting it Done: By Sea and Stealth" (PDF) .

Armada International . June 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2007 . Retrieved 8 February 2008 .

^ a b c "Human Torpedoes" .

German U-Boats and the Battle of the Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2024 . Retrieved 6 December 2024 .

^ Morison pp. 278 and 279 ^ http://specialwarrior.com/wordpress/elite/seal-delivery-vehicle/ [ dead link ] ^ "Google search for images" .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ a b c d e " 'Human Torpedoes' Are the North's Secret Naval Weapon" .

The Chosun Daily . 22 February 2024 . Retrieved 7 August 2024 .

^ a b "North Korea's Human Torpedoes" .

Daily NK English . 5 June 2010 . Retrieved 7 August 2024 .

^ a b c d Hyun, Shin Joo (1 June 2010).

"North Korean Submarine Helmsman Breaks 14-Year Silence" .

Daily NK English .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2024 . Retrieved 7 August 2024 .

^ "Archived copy" .

www.edencamp.co.uk . Archived from the original on 27 February 2006 . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Archived copy" .

www.edencamp.co.uk . Archived from the original on 27 February 2006 . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) References [ edit ] Brown, David – Warship Losses of World War Two.

Arms and Armour, London, Great Britain, 1990.

ISBN 0-85368-802-8 C. Warren and J. Benson – Above Us The Waves (Harrap 1953) Junio Valerio Borghese – Sea Devils (1954) Robert W. Hobson – "Chariots of War" (Ulric Publishing 2004) ISBN 0-9541997-1-5 Jack Greene and Alessandro Massignani – The Black Prince and the Sea Devils: The Story of Prince Valerio Borghese and the Elite Units of the Decima Mas (2004) ISBN 0-306-81311-4 Mitchell, Pamela – Chariots of the Sea Richard Netherwood (1998) ISBN 1-872955-16-9 Samuel Eliot Morison – History of United States Naval Operations in World War II , Volume XI (1957) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Human torpedoes .

Media related to Maiale manned torpedo at Wikimedia Commons v t e Naval ships and warships in 19th and 20th centuries Naval ship classes in service submarine auxiliary Operational zones Brown-water navy Green-water navy Blue-water navy Gun placement Broadside Central battery Casemate Turrets Aircraft carriers Aircraft cruiser Amphibious assault ship Anti-submarine warfare carrier Balloon carrier Battlecarrier CAM ship Escort carrier Fighter catapult ship Fleet carrier Flight deck cruiser Helicopter carrier Light aircraft carrier Merchant aircraft carrier Seaplane tender Supercarrier Battleships Coastal defence ship Dreadnought Fast battleship Pre-dreadnought battleship Super-dreadnought ( Standard-type battleship ) Treaty battleship Cruisers Armored cruiser Battlecruiser Guided missile cruiser Heavy cruiser Pocket battleship Light cruiser Merchant raider Protected cruiser Scout cruiser Strike cruiser Torpedo cruiser Unprotected cruiser Escort Aviso Convoy rescue ship Destroyer Destroyer escort Destroyer leader Escort destroyer Escorteur Frigate Guided-missile destroyer Kaibōkan Sloop Transport Amphibious transport dock Amphibious warfare ship Attack transport Dock landing ship Landing craft Landing craft carrier Landing Craft Support Landing Ship Heavy Landing ship, infantry Landing Ship Logistics Landing Ship Medium Landing Ship, Tank Landing Ship Vehicle Troopship Patrol craft Armed boarding steamer Armed yacht Coastal motor boat Corvette Gunboat Harbour defence motor launch Motor launch Naval drifter Naval trawler Ocean boarding vessel Patrol boat Q-ship Submarine chaser Torpedo boat Fast attack craft E-boat MAS MGB Missile boat MTB MTM MTSM PT boat Shin'yō Mine warfare Danlayer Destroyer minesweeper Mine countermeasures vessel Mine planter Minehunter Minelayer Minesweeper Command and support Amenities ship Ammunition ship Auxiliary repair dock Auxiliary ship Collier Combat stores ship Command ship Crane vessel Depot ship Destroyer tender Dispatch boat Fast combat support ship Flotilla leader General stores issue ship Hospital ship Joint support ship Naval tugboat Net laying ship Repair ship Replenishment oiler Submarine tender Submarines Attack submarine Ballistic missile submarine Coastal submarine Cruise missile submarine Cruiser submarine Deep-submergence vehicle DSRV Fleet submarine Human torpedo Midget submarine Submarine aircraft carrier Wet sub Miscellaneous Armed merchantman Arsenal ship Barracks ship Breastwork monitor Capital ship Drone carrier Flagship Floating battery Littoral combat ship Monitor Mother ship River monitor Related Ship types Sailing vessels v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐7p2gp
Cached time: 20250818111745
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.259 seconds
Real time usage: 1.593 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7086/1000000
Revision size: 39836/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 593297/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10771/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 122370/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.637/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25236106/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1106.152      1 -total
 22.45%  248.376      1 Template:Reflist
 16.86%  186.540     36 Template:Navbox
 14.46%  159.969     16 Template:Cite_web
 12.89%  142.599      8 Template:Annotated_link
 12.14%  134.294      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 11.69%  129.344      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.22%   79.882      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  6.55%   72.425      1 Template:Warship_types_of_the_19th_&amp;_20th_centuries
  6.24%   68.969      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:988678:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818111745 and revision id 1294060491. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_torpedo&oldid=1294060491 " Categories : Underwater diver propulsion equipment Manned torpedoes World War II weapons of Italy World War II submarines of the United Kingdom Frogman operations Italian inventions Naval weapons of Italy Wet subs Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2017 Articles needing additional references from January 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from August 2012 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from August 2012 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 09:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Human torpedo 19 languages Add topic

