Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Mikhail Katz 3 languages العربية فارسی Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Israeli mathematician Mikhail Katz מיכאיל כץ Born 1958 (age 66–67) Chișinău , Moldavian SSR Nationality Israeli Education Harvard University ( BA ) Columbia University ( PhD ) Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions Bar-Ilan University Thesis Jung's Theorem in Complex Projective Geometry Doctoral advisor Troels Jørgensen Mikhail Gromov Website http://u.cs.biu.ac.il/~katzmik/ Mikhail " Mischa " Gershevich Katz ( / k æ t s / , Hebrew : מיכאיל כץ ; born 1958) [ 1 ] is an Israeli mathematician and professor of mathematics at Bar-Ilan University . His main interests are differential geometry , geometric topology , nonstandard analysis , and mathematics education ; he is the author of the book Systolic Geometry and Topology , which is mainly about systolic geometry . The Katz–Sabourau inequality is named after him and Stéphane Sabourau.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Mikhail Katz was born in Chișinău in 1958. His mother was Clara Katz ( née Landman). In 1976, he moved with his mother to the United States.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Katz earned a bachelor's degree in 1980 from Harvard University .

[ 1 ] He did his graduate studies at Columbia University , receiving his Ph.D. in 1984 under the joint supervision of Troels Jørgensen and Mikhael Gromov .

[ 6 ] His thesis title is Jung's Theorem in Complex Projective Geometry.

He moved to Bar-Ilan University in 1999, after previously holding positions at the University of Maryland, College Park , Stony Brook University , Indiana University Bloomington , the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques , the University of Rennes 1 , Henri Poincaré University , and Tel Aviv University .

[ 1 ] Work [ edit ] Katz has performed research in systolic geometry in collaboration with Luigi Ambrosio , Victor Bangert , Mikhail Gromov , Steve Shnider , Shmuel Weinberger , and others. He has authored research publications appearing in journals including Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics , Duke Mathematical Journal , Geometric and Functional Analysis , and Journal of Differential Geometry . Along with these papers, Katz was a contributor to the book " Metric Structures for Riemannian and Non-Riemannian Spaces ".

[ 7 ] Marcel Berger in his article "What is... a Systole?" [ 8 ] lists Katz's 2007 book Systolic Geometry and Topology as one of two books he cites in systolic geometry.

More recently Katz also contributed to the study of mathematics education , including work that provides an alternative interpretation of the number 0.999...

.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Curriculum vitae [ permanent dead link ] , retrieved 2011-05-23.

^ Kalogeropoulos, Nikolaos (2017). "Systolic aspects of black hole entropy".

arXiv : 1711.09963 [ gr-qc ].

^ Chavel, Isaac (2006-04-10).

Riemannian Geometry: A Modern Introduction . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-45257-1 .

^ "Clara Katz, a Soviet émigré who saved her ailing granddaughter, dies at 85 – The Boston Globe" .

archive.boston.com . Retrieved 2018-01-10 .

^ "Grandmother bucked the Soviet system – Obituaries – smh.com.au" .

www.smh.com.au . 12 October 2006 . Retrieved 2018-01-10 .

^ Mikhail Katz at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ^ Gromov, Misha : Metric structures for Riemannian and non-Riemannian spaces . Based on the 1981 French original. With appendices by M. Katz, P. Pansu and S. Semmes . Translated from the French by Sean Michael Bates. Progress in Mathematics, 152. Birkhäuser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 1999. xx+585 pp.

ISBN 0-8176-3898-9 ^ Berger, M.: What is... a Systole ?

Notices of the AMS 55 (2008), no. 3, 374–376.

^ Stewart, I. (2009) Professor Stewart's Hoard of Mathematical Treasures , Profile Books, p. 174.

External links [ edit ] Mikhail Katz's home page Mikhail Katz publications indexed by Google Scholar Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH Google Scholar DBLP MathSciNet Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mikhail_Katz&oldid=1294135906 " Categories : 1958 births Living people 21st-century Israeli mathematicians Differential geometers Harvard University alumni Columbia University alumni University of Maryland, College Park faculty Stony Brook University faculty Indiana University faculty Academic staff of Bar-Ilan University Textbook writers Israeli mathematics educators Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Hebrew-language text This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 20:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mikhail Katz 3 languages Add topic

