Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Importance of Post-Revolutionary context 1.2 Impact of Russian art collectors 1.3 'Hylea' and the impact of Marinetti's ' Futurist Manifesto' 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origin of the term 2.2 Development of the movement 2.3 End of Cubo-Futurism 3 Art Toggle Art subsection 3.1 Artists 3.2 Sculpture 4 Literature Toggle Literature subsection 4.1 Poetry 4.2 Theatre 5 Effects of Cubo-Futurism 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Cubo-Futurism 23 languages Alemannisch العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Русиньскый Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian art movement For other uses, see Futurism (disambiguation) .

Natalia Goncharova, Cyclist (1913), oil on canvas, 78×105 cm,  State Russian Museum Cubo-Futurism ( Russian : кубофутуризм , romanized : kubofuturizm ) was an art movement , developed within Russian Futurism , that arose in the early 20th-century Russian Empire , defined by its amalgamation of the artistic elements found in Italian Futurism and French Analytical Cubism .

[ 1 ] Cubo-Futurism was the main school of painting and sculpture practiced by the Russian Futurists.  
In 1913, the term "Cubo-Futurism" first came to describe works from members of the poetry group "Hylaeans", as they moved away from poetic Symbolism towards Futurism and zaum , the experimental "visual and sound poetry of Kruchenykh and Khlebninkov ".

[ 2 ] Later in the same year the concept and style of "Cubo-Futurism" became synonymous with the works of artists within Ukrainian and Russian post-revolutionary avant-garde circles as they interrogated non-representational art through the fragmentation and displacement of traditional forms, lines, viewpoints, colours, and textures within their pieces.

[ 3 ] The impact of Cubo-Futurism was then felt within performance art societies, with Cubo-Futurist painters and poets collaborating on theatre, cinema, and ballet pieces that aimed to break theatre conventions through the use of nonsensical zaum poetry, emphasis on improvisation, and the encouragement of audience participation (an example being the 1913 Futurist satirical tragedy Vladimir Mayakovsky ).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The coexistence of these differing strands of artistic practice within Cubo-Futurism reflects an ideological preoccupation with collective renewal and deconstruction (a notion born of their post-revolutionary context) with each poet or painter free to create their own aesthetic consciousness based on the concept of revolution and collective action through reinterpretation of artistic and social traditions.

[ 6 ] Background [ edit ] Importance of Post-Revolutionary context [ edit ] In the context of late Tsarist Russia , society was deeply divided by social class. Russian industrialisation, development, economic growth, and urbanisation fell far behind other Western nations, with the country experiencing high levels of illiteracy, poor health care, and struggling with the limitations of little mass communication outside larger cities.

[ 7 ] Looking outward at the realities of those from neighbouring countries, artists who would later become members of the Cubo-Futurist movement noticed the impacts of the burgeoning Machine Age on everyday life, recognising the beauty, dynamism, and energy of the utilitarian machine aesthetic leading to a renewed interest in technological modernisation within art, poetry, and life.

[ 8 ] Ukrainian modernist painter Aleksandr Shevchenko (1883–1948) echoed this sentiment when, in 1913, he stated, "the world has been transformed into a single, monstrous, fantastic, perpetually-moving machine, into a single huge non-animal automatic organism… [this] cannot help but be reflected in our thinking and in our spiritual life: in Art".

[ 9 ] The "cult of the machine" became an increasingly utopic concept within Cubo-Futurist circles, with artists perceiving the idyllic phenomenon of machine production as the foremost " proletariat creation" due to its ability to help construct an equitable, collective life for all people regardless of class.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] This ideological conception of utopic perfection through machinery significantly impacted the stylistic elements of the Cubo-Futurist movement, influencing artists to experiment with pure abstraction , geometric shapes, harsh lines and planes, and the deconstruction of organic forms into powerful structures infused with machine symbolism.

[ 12 ] Impact of Russian art collectors [ edit ] Sergey Schukin by Dm. Melnikov (1915) At the top of early 20th century Russia’s deep social, political, and class divisions were a small group of elite aristocrats and businessmen. With considerable access to international art markets and dealers , they assembled significant number European masterpieces of the early 20th century for their own personal collections. Collectors and patrons , Sergei Shchukin (1854–1936) and Ivan Morozov (1871–1921), paid special attention to Impressionist , Post-Impressionist , Fauvist , Cubist , and Futurist art from all over Europe amassing a large selection of momentous works, and consequently introducing local Russian artists to art movements, techniques, and styles popular around the continent.

[ 13 ] Shchukin’s collection included a considerable number of Picassos , Matisses , Cezannes , Monets , and Gauguins , thus allowing artists in St. Petersburg and Moscow access to Cubist and Futurist artworks that would later influence the development of the Cubo-Futurist movement.

[ 13 ] 'Hylea' and the impact of Marinetti's ' Futurist Manifesto' [ edit ] Filippo Tommaso Marinetti , author of the Manifesto of Futurism While Cubo-Futurism was first named and identified in 1913, the movement can be traced back to a congregation of Russian artists who called themselves Soyuz Molodyozhi ('Union of Youth') in 1910.

[ 14 ] The group was brought together by the Ukrainian painter and poet David Burliuk (1882–1967) under the name budetlyane (a Russian interpretation of the western term "futurists"), inspired by Italian Filippo Tommaso Marinetti 's (1876–1944) 1909 Futurist Manifesto .

[ 15 ] Marinetti's work espoused the need for creatives (e.g. artists and writers) to abandon the past by moving towards the utilisation of the aesthetic language of machinery, industrialisation, urban living, and utilitarian design .

[ 16 ] For Marinetti and those that followed him, the futurist movement stood for freedom, collectivity, perfection, and social rejuvenation.

[ 17 ] Influenced by the Futurist Manifesto , the aesthetics of dislocation and fragmentation became the vocabulary of the Cubo-Futurists in their attempt to interrogate the tireless and repetitive dynamism of technology, and highlight their fantasies of a utopic mechanical modernity. The Cubo-Futurists combined the modernist, cosmopolitan spirit of Marinetti's futurism with the aesthetic characteristics of analytical cubism (e.g. abstracted forms, flatness, fragmentation, geometric shapes, muted and dark colours, combination of various viewpoints) in order to create their own didactic art form designed to display the revolutionary focus of the artistic community.

[ 18 ] History [ edit ] Origin of the term [ edit ] The term 'Cubo-Futurism' first appeared in a lecture in 1913, originally to refer to the poets who belonged to David and Vladimir Burliuk 's literary group, 'Hylaea', also spelt 'Guilée' [ 19 ] and 'Gylea'.

[ 20 ] This term was coined by Korney Chukovsky (1882–1969), a Russian art critic, in reference to the work of Vladimir Mayakovsky , Aleksey Kruchonykh , Velimir Khlebnikov , Benedict Livshits , and Vasily Kamensky , members of the Hylaea group.

[ 21 ] It was only after aforementioned poets began to display shocking public behaviour (for example wearing absurd clothes), when the writers and the movement in general began to be called simply ' Russian Futurism '.

[ 20 ] As a result, 'Cubo-Futurism' then began to refer to the artists who were influenced by Cubism and Futurism, [ 4 ] though both terms still remain interchangeable.

Development of the movement [ edit ] The earliest appearances of the Cubo-Futurist art style can be found in the works of Natalia Goncharova , who, as early as 1909, applied Cubist and Futurist means of expression in her paintings.

[ 22 ] Thanks to modern technology (transport and telegraphy, for example) and the artists' experience of other countries, the creatives in Russia knew much about the avant-garde events in Europe.

[ 23 ] Cubo-Futurism as an art style would begin to take its full form in the years 1912 to 1913, [ 23 ] though the style of poetry ended when Russian Futurism itself also faded.

One of the first major painters to become a Cubo-Futurist would be Kazimir Malevich , who entered his Cubo-Futurist phase in 1912–13; he termed the works he exhibited at the 1912 ' Donkey's Tail ' and 1913 'Target' exhibitions as being 'Cubo-Futurist'.

[ 24 ] For Malevich, Cubo-Futurism would be especially important, because it symbolised the connection between the stillness of conventional Cubism, and the dynamism inherent in Futurism.

[ 23 ] Rather than simply following the example of painting industrial scenes, set by the Futurists in Italy, or of painting in fairly flat colours, set by the Cubists in France, he placed heavy rural Russian themes on his work; this therefore led to his paintings of traditional village life in a bright, juxtaposing avant-garde style.

[ 25 ] An example of his Cubo-Futurist work is The Knifegrinder , painted circa 1912–1913.

Natalia Goncharova officially entered her Futurist stage in around 1912 to 1913; soon, Cubo-Futurist influences became apparent in her work.

[ 26 ] This was not, for her, a dramatic change in her previous style of painting. In 1913, an exhibition of her latest work was held at a Russian art gallery, which received a massive variety of responses.

Mikhail Larionov followed suit in the latest avant-garde trend, by publishing two manifestos on his and Goncharova's new art movement, Rayonism , which was inspired by Cubo-Futurism.

[ 26 ] Other Cubo-Futurist artists emerged, for example Aleksandra Ekster , who was involved in Ukrainian and Russian Futurist stage design, [ 27 ] and Lyubov Popova , who had learned of Cubism during her 1912 stay in Paris, and painted in the Cubo-Futurist style in the years 1913 to 1914.

[ 28 ] The movement in Russia was notable for having a large percentage of female painters, in contrast to the movement in Italy.

[ 23 ] Composition with Cards (1915) by Olga Rozanova The Cubo-Futurists – both poets and artists – were also notable for their curious activities, both public and artistic: Mayakovsky wore a bright yellow jacket, Ilia Zdanevich ("Iliazd") and Burliuk painted on their faces, and some of the painters attached objects upon their canvases, in such manners that predated the Dada avant-garde movement based in Zurich, Berlin, and Paris, which would begin a few years later.

[ 29 ] In 1913, the opera Victory over the Sun – prologue by Khlebnikov, libretti by Kruchenykh, and music by Mikhail Matyushin – was completed. The costume and set designer was Malevich; the opera has since become notable for starring the first appearance of his influential painting Black Square , as part of a design for a stage curtain.

[ 30 ] The next year, a Russian Futurist book was published: Tango with Cows , written by aviator-poet Vasily Kamensky and illustrated by the Burliuk brothers.

By 1914, the Russian Futurists (many of them Cubo-Futurist) developed a hostility to the Italians. When Marinetti went on a lecture tour of Russia in that year, he was met with general unfriendliness, contrary to the positive reception he had on his previous tour of 1910: Larionov had, for example, a serious argument with a pro-Marinetti cultural figure, the former wishing to greet him with rotten eggs and the latter with flowers, [ 19 ] whereas the female Cubo-Futurist painters may have been put off by Marinetti's misogyny.

[ 23 ] The relations worsened to such an extent that Hylea began to fake the publication dates of their books, as though to state that they were earlier and more Futurist than their colleagues in Italy.

[ 19 ] The Russian Futurists were also disgusted with the Ego-Futurists , a rival Russian literary association who had been formed in 1911 by the poet Igor Severyanin . This time, the negative feelings went both ways: Severyanin disapproved of the attitudes of the Cubo-Futurists, whilst they dismissed the Ego-Futurists as being immature, tasteless impostors.

End of Cubo-Futurism [ edit ] By the year 1915, Cubism and Futurism both began to become exhausted for the painters; [ 1 ] nevertheless, in 1915, the first all-Russian Futurist exhibition, called 'Tramway V', opened on March 3; organised by Ivan Puni , Vladimir Tatlin 's works became the main focus, and the exhibition led to a succés de scandale . In 1916, another notable Cubo-Futurist book was published: Universal War , by Aleksei Kruchenykh , perhaps in collaboration with his wife Olga Rozanova .

Cubo-Futurism can be said to have ended with the 0,10 Exhibition of 1915–1916, also organised by Puni, and fuelled by the rivalry between Malevich and Tatlin; afterwards, most of the participants of Cubo-Futurism began to direct their energies to other styles of writing or painting, for example Malevich's new art movement Suprematism , which officially began at the 0,10 Exhibition, or with Constructivism .

[ 1 ] According to the Italian Futurist painter Gino Severini , who had met and heard first-hand accounts from the Russian Futurist painters Larionov, Puni and Kseniya Boguslavskaya , the movement finished in 1916, [ 19 ] though, according  to the Encyclopædia Britannica , the style continued to be in use until roughly 1919.

[ 4 ] Art [ edit ] Kazimir Malevich, The Knife Grinder (Principle of Glittering) (1912–13), oil on canvas, 79.534 cm × 79.534 cm, Yale University Art Gallery For Cubo-Futurist artists, this movement represented a shift in stylistic values from a perception of painting as a reflection of their current reality into a portrayal of idealism through depictions of a perfect future defined by equality and an organised collective consciousness.

[ 31 ] One such example would be Kazimir Malevich 's 1912–13 The Knife Grinder (The Glittering Edge) . The flickering of reflective metallic colours creates a dynamic representation of motion and energy, depicting the "mechanical vibration and dynamic rhythm" of modernisation through industrialisation and mechanical harmony.

[ 32 ] The knife grinder himself is central to the composition , camouflaged within the dense abstracted geometric shapes that surround and encompass him, invoking the idea that the man has fused into the mechanical perfection of a giant organised system.

[ 32 ] To Malevich and other artists of the Cubo-Futurist movement, works like this acted as a social metaphor highlighting the process of transformation, revolution, social rebuilding, and proletariat collectivism they wished to see in their society's future.

[ 6 ] Complex abstracted geometric shapes and representations of perfected mechanical society's highlights the revolutionary nature of their work as, "only futurist art is constructed on collective principles… Only futurist art is, at the present time, 'the art of the proletariat'", as painter and sculptor Nathan Altman (1889–1970) once stated.

[ 33 ] Cubo-Futurist artists are unique in their independence and autonomy from other members of the group.

[ 2 ] Non-representational artists experimenting with Cubo-Futurism – such as Kandinsky , Larionov , Malevich , and Tatlin – adopted the distinctive ideals and theoretical background of the movement but followed their own aesthetic path, thus depicting the freedom these artists were given to express their own perceptions of a modernised world.

[ 2 ] Picture of Natalia Goncharova, one of the members of the Cubo-Futurist movement.

Artists [ edit ] The following artists have been associated with Cubo-Futurism: [ 34 ] Alexander Archipenko Wladimir Baranoff-Rossine Alexander Bogomazov David Burliuk Wladimir Burliuk Aleksandra Ekster Natalia Goncharova Ivan Kliun Mikhail Larionov Lyubov Popova Olga Rozanov Sonia Terk Vasyl Yermylov Alberto Magnelli Vadym Meller Aristarkh Lentulov Oleksandr Bogomazov Sculpture [ edit ] Sculpture was a smaller subsect of the Cubo-Futurist movement. Influenced by the work of Italian futurist sculptor and painter Umberto Boccioni , and Pablo Picasso 's cubist sculptures, Russian artists began experimenting with the combination of the two styles.

[ 35 ] Artists who experimented with Cubist and Futurist (or a combination of both) styles within their sculptures all expressed a dislike of traditional, classical artistic traditions, thus highlighting the characteristically Cubo-Futurist interest in transformation, innovation, and rejuvenation.

[ 36 ] Cubo-Futurist sculptors included Joseph Chaikov , Boris Korolev and Vera Mukhina , all of whom taught at the Soviet state art school in Moscow, Vkhutemas .

Literature [ edit ] Vladimir Mayakovsky and his muse, Lilya Brik .

Poetry [ edit ] Poets that experimented with Cubo-Futurist ideals pressed the importance of deconstructing the rules and meaning of poetry, systematically attacking the previously popular Russian classical and symbolist poets due to their propensity to examine metaphysical , esoteric ideas that did not resonate with the common populace.

[ 37 ] Cubo-Futurist artists had a passion for the democratisation of poetry through the use of chaotic, common language (and concepts) that allowed for freedom of expression and interpretation by the average person.

[ 37 ] Like artists of the same movement, these poets were interested in creating "totally new words and a new way of combining them", transforming and recreating poetry into a literary form that depicted their ideas of a modernised future.

[ 38 ] Poets of the Cubo-Futurist movement saw writing as a "laboratory or workshop" to renew language and literature, dissecting words and generating neologisms in order to shift contemporary understandings of poetry in order to display their interest in revolution and modernity.

[ 38 ] This practice is known as "transrational poetry" (or zaum ). The purity and dynamism artists of this movement found in mechanisation and technology, literary Cubo-Futurists found in transrational poetry, with this poetic experimentation later developing to involve the deconstruction of language to onomatopoeic forms.

[ 38 ] One such example of this is Velimir Khlebnikov 's sound-paintings in his play Zangezi .

[ 39 ] Poets of this movement also utilised unorthodox methods during their public poetry recitals, such as painted faces, public clowning, and extravagant clothing in order to gather attention to their work, and highlight their futuristic experimentation.

[ 21 ] Theatre [ edit ] Some of the attendees of the Pervyi vserossiiskii sjezd Baiachei Budushchego (poetov futuristov) (First All-Russian Congress of Bards of the Future [The Futurist Poets]) – Mikhail Matyushin , Kazimir Malevich , and Aleksei Kruchenikh.

Introduction of Cubo-Futurist theories and ideologies into the realm of theatre production came with widespread scandal among those within the turn-of-the-century Russian society.

[ 40 ] Similar to those that engaged with Cubo-Futurism within the art world, individuals within the theatre community utilised the movement's characteristic ideology of cultural renewal, transformation, and revolution within their works, expanding futurism from the literary and artistic realm and into theatre. In July 1913, a collection of poets and artists within the Cubo-Futurist movement came together for a meeting entitled Pervyi vserossiiskii sezd Baiachei Budushchego (poetov futuristov) (First-All Russian Congress of Bards of the Future [The Futurist Poets]), establishing that the group would create a "new 'Futurian' theatre" that would be run by their own collective and "transform Russian theatre" into a modern art form.

[ 41 ] The Cubo-Futurists employed a more aggressive style within their performances, making use of arte-azione 's (art-in-action) playfulness, provocative or unintelligible language, improvisation, and unpredictability.

[ 42 ] As stated by Roman Jakobson (1896–1982): "The evenings of the Futurists brought… the public… The public's reaction was various: many came for the scandal, but a broad segment of the student public awaited the new art, wanted the new world".

[ 43 ] Effects of Cubo-Futurism [ edit ] Example of Malevich's suprematist works. Kazimir Malevich, Dynamic Suprematism (1916), oil on canvas, 80.2 x 80.3 cm, Tate Gallery Cubo-Futurism was incredibly significant in the development of art styles like Rayonism , Suprematism , and Constructivism , with the movement acting as a transitionary phase between objective, figurative works and radical non-objective , non-representational abstract art.

[ 44 ] Cubo-Futurism gave artists the freedom to engage with the limitations of representation and subjectivity, and experiment with use geometric shapes and fragmented forms in order to convey a movement and dynamism that reflected their attempts to reconstruct understandings of their world and their art.

Cubo-Futurism acted as the jumping point for artists Mikhail Larionov (1881–1964) and Natalia Goncharova to develop Rayism (also called Rayonism), one of the first non-objective Russian artistic styles.

It was either Rayism [ 45 ] or, once more, Cubism and Futurism [ 19 ] (or a mixture of all three) which then later influenced Kazimir Malevich to create Suprematism , an art mode that is now considered one of the most significant modern art movements of the 20th century.

Gallery [ edit ] Woodcutter (1912) by Kazimir Malevich Costume design (c. 1910-1913) by Kazimir Malevich for Victory over the Sun Backdrop design (c. 1910-1913) by Kazimir Malevich for Victory over the Sun Vladimir Burliuk (from Trebnik Troikh , 1913) by David Burliuk Cavalier (1913) by Alexandra Exter City (1913) by Alexandra Exter Blue on Tin (1913) by Olga Rozanova The Pianist (1914) by Lyubov Popova Angels and Aeroplanes (from Mystical Images of War , 1914) by Natalia Goncharova The poem Constantinople from Tango with Cows (illustrated by David and Vladimir Burliuk ) by Vasily Kamensky , 1914 Fyodor Christiania (1915) by Vladimir Baranov-Rossine Dancer in Motion (1915) by Mikhail Larionov Travelling Woman (1915) by Lyubov Popova Construction with Flowers (1916) by Natalia Goncharova Relief (c. 1915-1916) by Ivan Puni See also [ edit ] Futurism Cubism Russian Futurism Rayonism Vorticism Natalia Goncharova Mikhail Larionov Modern art (disambiguation) – list of articles associated with the title 'Modern art' Art period References [ edit ] West, Shearer (1996).

The Bullfinch Guide to Art . UK: Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 0-8212-2137-X .

^ a b c Parton, Anthony (2016-05-09).

"Cubo-Futurism" .

Routledge Encyclopedia of Modernism .

Archived from the original on 2020-05-31 . Retrieved 2020-03-18 .

^ a b c Gourianova, Nina (2012). "The Aesthetics of Anarchy".

The Aesthetics of Anarchy: Art and Ideology in the Early Russian Avant-Garde . California: University of California Press. p. 17.

^ Douglas, Charlotte (1975). "The New Russian Art and Italian Futurism".

Art Journal .

34 (3): 229– 239.

doi : 10.1080/00043249.1975.10793686 .

^ a b c Sarabianov, Andrei (2019-12-06).

"Cubo-Futurism: Art Movement" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 2019-12-23 . Retrieved 2020-03-18 .

^ "Russian Futurism Movement Overview and Analysis" .

The Art Story . 2017.

Archived from the original on 2020-04-19 . Retrieved 2020-03-18 .

^ a b Hughes, Robert (1980). "Faces of Power".

The Shock of the New: Art and the Century of Change . London: British Broadcasting Company. p. 85.

^ Tian-Shanskaia, Olga (1993). "Introduction".

Village Life in Late Tsarist Russia . Indiana: Indiana University Press. p. xi.

^ Kinchin, Juliet (2018). "The Machinery of the Modern World".

MOMA at NGV: 130 Years of Contemporary Art . Melbourne: The Council of Trustees of the National Gallery of Victoria. p. 44.

^ Vaingurt, Julia (2013).

Wonderlands of the Avant-Garde: Technology and the Arts in Russia of the 1920s . Illinois: Northwestern University Press. p. 241.

^ Hughes, Robert (1980).

The Shock of the New: Art and the Century of Change . London: British Broadcasting Company. p. 85.

^ Gassner, Hubertus (1992). "The Constructivists: Modernism on the Way to Modernisation".

The Great Utopia: The Russian and Soviet Avant-Garde 1915–1932 . New York: Guggenheim Museum Publications. p. 298.

^ Sharp, Jane Ashton (1986). "A Westernising Avant-Garde".

in Russian Modernism between East and West: Natalia Goncharova and the Moscow Avant-Garde . Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press. p. 61.

^ a b Hughes, Robert (1980). "Faces of Power".

The Shock of the New: Art and the Century of Change . London: British Broadcasting Company. p. 81.

^ Brown, Edward (1973).

Mayakovsky: A Poet in the Revolution . New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 41.

^ Brown, Edward (1973).

Mayakovsky: A Poet in the Revolution . New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 42.

^ "Words in Freedom: Futurism at 100" .

MoMA .

Archived from the original on 2020-11-27 . Retrieved 2020-05-18 .

^ Blum, Cinzia (1996).

The Other Modernism: F.T. Marinetti's Futurist Fiction of Power . New Jersey: University of California Press. p. 7.

^ Buelens, Geert; Hendrix, Harald; Jansen, Monica, eds. (2012).

The History of Futurism: The Precursors, Protagonists, and Legacies . New York: Lextingon Books.

^ a b c d e Severini, Gino.

The Life of a Painter . Princeton University Press. pp.

294– 7.

^ a b Parton, Anthony (2003).

"Cubo-Futurism" .

Oxford Art Online .

doi : 10.1093/gao/9781884446054.article.T020562 .

ISBN 978-1-884446-05-4 .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-02 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ a b "Art of the 20th Century: A Revolution in the Arts - Great Avant-Garde Movements" .

A World History of Art .

Archived from the original on 2011-12-16 . Retrieved 2020-05-20 .

^ Dietfried, Maly; Dietfried, Gerhardus.

Cubism and Futurism . Phaidon. p. 74.

^ a b c d e "Futurism (2009 exhibition) room guide, room 6, Russia: Cubo-Futurism" .

Tate . 12 June – 20 September 2009.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ "Cubo-Futurism" .

Oxford Reference .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2018 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ "Malevich (Exhibition) Room Guide: Room 3: Cubo-Futurism" .

Tate .

Archived from the original on 7 June 2020 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ a b "Natalia Goncharova Exhibition: Guide" .

Tate . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ FitzLyon, Kyril (July 26, 1983). "Female Pioneers".

Times Literary Supplement : 807.

^ "Lyubov Popova" .

MoMA ( Museum of Modern Art , New York) .

Archived from the original on 2019-11-06 . Retrieved 2020-05-20 .

^ Bowlt, John Edward (May 16, 1975). "The Feast of Unreason".

Times Literary Supplement : 540.

^ "Five Ways to Look at Malevich's "Black Square" " .

Tate .

Archived from the original on 26 May 2020 . Retrieved 28 May 2020 .

^ Stapanian, Juliette (1986). "Conclusion: From the Broken Frame toward the Opened Form".

Mayakovsky's Cubo-Futurist Vision . Texas: Rice University Press. p. 186.

^ a b McKiernan, Mike (2014).

"Kazimir Malevich, The Knife Grinder (The Glittering Edge) 1912–13" .

Art and Occupation: Occupational Medicine .

64 (5): 317– 318.

doi : 10.1093/occmed/kqu065 .

PMID 25005543 .

^ Erjavec, Aleš (2015).

Aesthetic Revolution and Twentieth-Century Avant-Garde Movements . North Carolina: Duke University Press. p. 102.

^ Parton, Anthony (2009).

"Cubo-Futurism" .

Museum of Modern Art . Oxford University Press . Retrieved 7 June 2011 .

^ "Technical Manifesto of Futurist Sculpture" .

World Digital Library . 2017.

Archived from the original on 2021-03-28 . Retrieved 2020-05-20 .

^ White, John (2019).

"Futurism" .

Britannica .

Archived from the original on 2023-06-28 . Retrieved 2020-05-20 .

^ a b Terras, Victor (1985).

Handbook of Russian Literarture . New Haven, Ct.: Yale University Press. p. 163.

ISBN 0300048688 .

^ a b c Bray, Joe; Gibbons, Alison; McHale, Brian, eds. (2012).

The Routledge Companion to Experimental Literature . Oxfordshire: Routledge. p. 28.

^ Harte, Tim (2009).

Fast Forward: The Aesthetic and Ideology of Speed in Russian Avant-Garde Culture, 1910–1930 . Wisconsin: The University Of Wisconsin Press. p. 69.

^ Berghaus, Gunter (2019).

Handbook of International Futurism . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 774.

^ Railing, Patricia (2009).

Victory Over the Sun . East Sussex: Artist Bookworks. pp.

14– 15.

^ Berghaus, Gunter (2019).

Handbook of International Futurism . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 775.

^ Jakobson, Roman (1997).

My Futurist Years . New York: Marsilio Publishers. p. 4.

^ Barooshian, Vahan (1975).

Russian Cubo-Futurism, 1910–1930 . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 146.

^ Kinchin, Juliet (2018). "A New Unity".

MOMA at NGV: 130 Years of Contemporary Art . Melbourne: The Council of Trustees of the National Gallery of Victoria. p. 73.

External links [ edit ] https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/glossary/ - Museum of Modern Art online dictionary of visual art terms.

https://www.metmuseum.org/learn/educators/curriculum-resources – Metropolitan Museum of Art curriculum resources page https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/ – free online resources engaging for modern and contemporary art https://www.moma.org/collection/terms/?=MOOC – glossary of significant art terms https://www.moma.org/research-and-learning/ – MOMA research and learning online page https://www.tate.org.uk/research/publications/tate-papers – Tate Modern London online journal of research papers and scholarly articles https://www.oxfordartonline.com/ – Oxford's collection of peer reviewed articles, important dictionary terms, and images v t e Futurism Italian Futurists Giacomo Balla ( list of works ) "Barbara" Umberto Boccioni Anton Bragaglia Benedetta Cappa Carlo Carrà Franco Casavola Nikolay Diulgheroff Luigi De Giudici F. T. Marinetti Marisa Mori Bruno Munari Aldo Palazzeschi Ugo Piatti Francesco Balilla Pratella Antonio Russolo Luigi Russolo Antonio Sant'Elia Gino Severini Ardengo Soffici Ego-Futurists Graal Arelsky Vasilisk Gnedov Boris Gusman Georgy Ivanov Igor Severyanin Dmitri Kryuchkov Konstantin Olimpov Rurik Ivnev Pavel Shirokov Russian Futurists and Cubo-Futurists Alexander Archipenko Nikolai Aseev Vladimir Baranoff-Rossine Lilya Brik Osip Brik Alexander Bogomazov Kseniya Boguslavskaya David Burliuk Vladimir Burliuk Joseph Chaikov Aleksandra Ekster Nina Genke-Meller Natalia Goncharova Elena Guro Vasily Kamensky Velimir Khlebnikov Ivan Kliun Aleksei Kruchyonykh Nikolai Kulbin Mikhail Larionov Aristarkh Lentulov El Lissitzky Benedikt Livshits Kazimir Malevich Mikhail Matyushin Vladimir Mayakovsky Boris Pasternak Victor Palmov Lyubov Popova Ivan Puni Olga Rozanova Vadim Shershenevich Nadezhda Udaltsova Ilia Zdanevich (Iliazd) Aeropittura Giacomo Balla "Barbara" Benedetta Cappa Giuseppe Caselli Tullio Crali Fortunato Depero Gerardo Dottori Fillìa Sante Monachesi Marisa Mori Enrico Prampolini Other Futurists Alice Bailly Mina Loy Almada Negreiros C. R. W. Nevinson Emilio Pettoruti Valentine de Saint-Point Jules Schmalzigaug Mykhaylo Semenko Amadeo de Souza-Cardoso Frances Simpson Stevens Mary Swanzy Růžena Zátková Techniques, sub-genres and inventions Anti-neutral suit Intonarumori Italian futurism in cinema Futurist architecture Futurist cooking Futurist literature Futurist music Noise music Zaum Selected output Abstract Speed + Sound Antigrazioso The Art of Noises BÏF§ZF+18 The City Rises Cyclist Development of a Bottle in Space Drama in the Futurists' Cabaret No. 13 Dyr bul shchyl Dynamism of a Car Dynamism of a Cyclist Dynamism of a Dog on a Leash Dynamism of a Human Body: Boxer Dynamism of a Soccer Player Dynamism of a Speeding Horse + Houses Futurist Painting: Technical Manifesto The Knifegrinder Girl Running on a Balcony The Hand of the Violinist Lacerba Man of Smoke Manifesto of Futurism Manifesto of Futurist Musicians Mercury Passing Before the Sun The Poem of the End Poesia The Street Enters the House The Street Light Thaïs Tango with Cows Unique Forms of Continuity in Space Universal War Victory over the Sun Vladimir Mayakovsky Zangezi Zang Tumb Tumb Associated people Luisa, Marchesa Casati Gabriele D'Annunzio Sergei Diaghilev Benito Mussolini Wyndham Lewis Léonide Massine Igor Stravinsky Groups influenced Agitprop Agit-train Constructivism Dadaism Donkey's Tail Grosvenor School Jack of Diamonds Neo-Primitivism Oberiu Panfuturism Precisionism Rayonism Soyuz Molodyozhi Suprematism Supremus Vorticism See also 0,10 Exhibition 5×5=25 Cubism Divisionism Estorick Collection of Modern Italian Art Le Chahut Pointillism Primitivism Robert René Meyer-Sée Russian avant-garde Russian Ballet Sackville Gallery Ukrainian avant-garde Verbovka Village Folk Centre Zveno (art) v t e Cubism Leaders Pablo Picasso Georges Braque Jean Metzinger Albert Gleizes Robert Delaunay Juan Gris Fernand Léger Marcel Duchamp Henri Le Fauconnier Section d'Or Alexander Archipenko María Blanchard Constantin Brâncuși Joseph Csaky Robert Delaunay Sonia Delaunay Marcel Duchamp Pierre Dumont Raymond Duchamp-Villon Alexandra Exter Henri Le Fauconnier Roger de La Fresnaye Albert Gleizes Natalia Goncharova Henri Hayden Auguste Herbin František Kupka Jean Lambert-Rucki Marie Laurencin Henri Laurens Fernand Léger Jacques Lipchitz André Lhote Jean Marchand Louis Marcoussis Jean Metzinger Francis Picabia Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes Jeanne Rij-Rousseau Diego Rivera Gino Severini Léopold Survage Tobeen Henry Valensi Georges Valmier Jacques Villon Others Giacomo Balla Alice Bailly Patrick Henry Bruce Carlo Carrà Paul Klee Lyonel Feininger El Lissitzky Stanton Macdonald-Wright August Macke Kazimir Malevich Franz Marc Lyubov Popova Diego Rivera Morgan Russell Alexander Rodchenko Nadezhda Udaltsova Marie Vassilieff Marie Vorobieff Paintings Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (Picasso) Portrait of Ambroise Vollard (Picasso) Portrait of Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler (Picasso) The Accordionist (Picasso) Le pigeon aux petits pois (Picasso) La Coiffeuse (Picasso) Le goûter (Metzinger) La Femme au Cheval (Metzinger) Dancer in a café (Metzinger) L'Oiseau bleu (Metzinger) La Femme aux Phlox (Gleizes) Portrait of Jacques Nayral (Gleizes) Man on a Balcony (Gleizes) Les Baigneuses (Gleizes) Les Joueurs de football (Gleizes) Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (Duchamp) The Cathedral (Katedrála) (Kupka) The City (Léger) Still Life with Candlestick (Léger) Still Life with Checked Tablecloth (Gris) Three Musicians (Picasso) Sculptures Groupe de femmes (Csaky) Danseuse (Csaky) Head (Csaky) Influences Paul Cézanne Paul Gauguin Gustave Courbet Georges Seurat Paul Signac Maurice Princet Esprit Jouffret Neo-impressionism Pointillism Divisionism Symbolism (arts) Fauvism Proto-Cubism Chronophotography Influenced Section d'Or Cubo-Futurism Cubist sculpture Czech Cubism Rondocubism Die Brücke Orphism (art) Abstract art Synchromism Tubism Futurism Crystal Cubism Purism Suprematism Dada Constructivism De Stijl Art Deco Russian Futurism Ego-Futurism Vorticism Related Du "Cubisme" (1912 book) The Cubist Painters, Aesthetic Meditations (1913 book) La Maison Cubiste Related Louis Vauxcelles (critic) Guillaume Apollinaire (poet, critic) André Salmon (critic) Max Jacob (poet) Maurice Raynal (poet, critic) Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler (art dealer) Léonce Rosenberg (art dealer) Paul Rosenberg (art dealer) Daniel Robbins (art historian) Gertrude Stein (art collector) Berthe Weill (art dealer) Wilhelm Uhde (art collector) John Quinn (collector) Leonard Lauder (art collector) Douglas Cooper (art historian) Arthur Jerome Eddy (art collector) Pierre Reverdy (poet) Blaise Cendrars (poet) Armory Show Fourth dimension in art v t e Russian art and literary movements Abramtsevo Colony Acmeist poetry Russian avant-garde Second Russian avant-garde Conceptualism Constructivism The Five Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Ego-Futurism Zaum Imaginism Lieutenant prose Metarealism Mir iskusstva Natural school New peasant poets Oberiu Peredvizhniki Rayonism Russian postmodernism Russian symbolism Socialist realism Soviet nonconformism Stroganov school Suprematism Village prose v t e Modern and Contemporary Art Galleries in Russia ARKA Gallery Erarta Galeyev Gallery Garage Museum of Contemporary Art Institute of Russian Realist Art Lumiere Brothers Center Shazina Gallery v t e Geometric abstraction Concrete art Constructivism De Stijl Minimalism Op art Suprematism v t e Schools of poetry Acmeism Akhmatova's Orphans Angry Penguins Auden Group The Beats Black Arts Movement Black Mountain poets British Poetry Revival Cairo poets Castalian Band Cavalier poets Chhayavaad Churchyard poets Conceptismo Confessionalists Créolité Cubo-Futurism Culteranismo Cyclic Poets Dada Deep image Della Cruscans Dolce Stil Novo Dymock poets Ecopoetry Ego-Futurism The poets of Elan Flarf Fugitives Garip Gay Saber Generation of '27 Generation of the '30s Generation of '98 Georgian poets Goliard The Group Harlem Renaissance Harvard Aesthetes Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Informationist poetry İkinci Yeni Jindyworobaks Lake Poets Language poets Marinism Martian poetry Metaphysical poets Misty Poets Modernist poetry The Movement Négritude Neotericism New American Poetry New Apocalyptics New Formalism New York School Oberiu Objectivists Others Parnassian poets La Pléiade Précieuses Rhymers' Club San Francisco Renaissance Scottish Renaissance Sicilian School Sons of Ben Southern Agrarians Spasmodic poets Sung poetry Surrealism Symbolism Uranian poetry Zutiste Poetry portal v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism v t e Modernism Movements Acmeism Art Deco Art Nouveau Ashcan School Constructivism Cubism Dada Expressionism Der Blaue Reiter Die Brücke Music Fauvism Functionalism Bauhaus Futurism Imagism Lettrism Neoplasticism De Stijl Orphism Surrealism Symbolism Synchromism Tonalism Literary arts Literature Apollinaire Barnes Beckett Bely Breton Broch Bulgakov Chekhov Conrad Döblin Forster Faulkner Flaubert Ford Gide Hamsun Hašek Hemingway Hesse Joyce Kafka Koestler Lawrence Mann Mansfield Marinetti Musil Dos Passos Platonov Porter Proust Stein Svevo Unamuno Woolf Poetry Akhmatova Aldington Auden Cendrars Crane H.D.

Desnos Eliot Éluard Elytis George Jacob Lorca Lowell (Amy) Lowell (Robert) Mallarmé Moore Owen Pessoa Pound Rilke Seferis Stevens Thomas Tzara Valéry Williams Yeats Works In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927) The Metamorphosis (1915) Ulysses (1922) The Waste Land (1922) The Magic Mountain (1924) Mrs Dalloway (1925) The Sun Also Rises (1926) The Master and Margarita (1928–1940) The Sound and the Fury (1929) Visual arts Painting Albers Arp Balthus Bellows Boccioni Bonnard Brâncuși Braque Calder Cassatt Cézanne Chagall Chirico Claudel Dalí Degas Delaunay Delaunay Demuth Dix Doesburg Duchamp Dufy Ensor Ernst Gauguin Giacometti Goncharova Gris Grosz Höch Hopper Kahlo Kandinsky Kirchner Klee Kokoschka Kooning Lawrence Léger Magritte Malevich Manet Marc Matisse Metzinger Miró Modigliani Mondrian Monet Moore Munch Nolde O'Keeffe Picabia Picasso Pissarro Ray Redon Renoir Rodin Rousseau Schiele Seurat Signac Sisley Soutine Steichen Stieglitz Toulouse-Lautrec Van Gogh Vuillard Wood Film Akerman Aldrich Antonioni Avery Bergman Bresson Buñuel Carné Cassavetes Chaplin Clair Cocteau Dassin Deren Dovzhenko Dreyer Edwards Eisenstein Epstein Fassbinder Fellini Flaherty Ford Fuller Gance Godard Hitchcock Hubley Jones Keaton Kubrick Kuleshov Kurosawa Lang Losey Lupino Lye Marker Minnelli Murnau Ozu Pabst Pudovkin Ray (Nicholas) Ray (Satyajit) Resnais Renoir Richardson Rossellini Sirk Sjöström Sternberg Tarkovsky Tati Trnka Truffaut Varda Vertov Vigo Welles Wiene Wood Architecture Breuer Bunshaft Gaudí Gropius Guimard Horta Hundertwasser Johnson Kahn Le Corbusier Loos Melnikov Mendelsohn Mies Nervi Neutra Niemeyer Rietveld Saarinen Steiner Sullivan Tatlin Wright Works A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886) Mont Sainte-Victoir (1887) The Starry Night (1889) Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907) The Dance (1909–1910) Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912) Black Square (1915) The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920) Ballet Mécanique (1923) Battleship Potemkin (1925) Metropolis (1927) Un Chien Andalou (1929) Villa Savoye (1931) Fallingwater (1936) Citizen Kane (1941) Meshes of the Afternoon (1943) Performing arts Music Antheil Bartók Berg Berio Boulanger Boulez Copland Debussy Dutilleux Falla Feldman Górecki Hindemith Honegger Ives Janáček Ligeti Lutosławski Milhaud Nono Partch Russolo Satie Schaeffer Schoenberg Scriabin Stockhausen Strauss Stravinsky Szymanowski Varèse Villa-Lobos Webern Weill Theatre Anderson Anouilh Artaud Beckett Brecht Chekhov Ibsen Jarry Kaiser Maeterlinck Mayakovsky O'Casey O'Neill Osborne Pirandello Piscator Strindberg Toller Wedekind Wilder Witkiewicz Dance Balanchine Cunningham Diaghilev Duncan Fokine Fuller Graham Holm Laban Massine Nijinsky Shawn Sokolow St. Denis Tamiris Wiesenthal Wigman Works Don Juan (1888) Ubu Roi (1896) Verklärte Nacht (1899) Pelléas et Mélisande (1902) Salome (1905) The Firebird (1910) Afternoon of a Faun (1912) The Rite of Spring (1913) Fountain (1917) Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921) The Threepenny Opera (1928) Waiting for Godot (1953) Related American modernism Armory Show Avant-garde Ballets Russes Bloomsbury Group Buddhist modernism Classical Hollywood cinema Degenerate art Ecomodernism Experimental film Film noir Fin de siècle Fourth dimension in art Fourth dimension in literature Grosvenor School of Modern Art Hanshinkan Modernism High modernism Hippie modernism Impressionism Music Literature Post- Incoherents International Style Late modernism Late modernity List of art movements List of avant-garde artists List of modernist poets Maximalism Metamodernism Modernity Neo-primitivism Neo-romanticism New Hollywood New Objectivity Poetic realism Pop Art Pulp noir Reactionary modernism Remodernism Second Viennese School Structural film Underground film Vulgar modernism ← Romanticism Postmodernism → Category v t e Visual arts and the art world Artwork Appropriation Collage Conceptual art Cultural artifact Drawing Fine art Fine-art photograph Found object Installation art Kinetic art Mixed media bricolage Mural fresco graffiti New media art history digital virtual Painting Performance art Plastic arts Portrait Printmaking Public art street art Sculpture carving relief statue tallest Site-specific art Social sculpture Soft sculpture Stained glass Artwork title Roles Artist Collector Conservator-restorer paintings frescos Critic Curator Dealer Model Patron Visual arts education Europe Places and events Art auction Art colony Art commune Art exhibition alternative exhibition space Art gallery Contemporary art gallery Art museum Single-artist museum Art school Europe Arts centre Arts festival Artist collective Artist cooperative Artist-in-residence program Artist-run initiative Artist-run space Biennale Commission Sculpture garden Sculpture trail Virtual museum History of art Timeline of art Art history (academic study) Art manifesto Art movements Criticism feminist History of painting outline Periods in Western art history Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America Related Art market The arts Catalogue raisonné Classificatory disputes Museum collection management deaccessioning Conservation-restoration paintings Cultural policy Depiction Destination painting Eclecticism in art Economics of art art finance art valuation Elements of art Forgery Index of painting-related articles Outline of the visual arts painting sculpture Provenance Sociology of art Style Unfinished work Lists Art magazines Art media Art techniques Art movements Art museums largest most visited sculpture parks single artist Art reference books Colossal sculptures in situ Contemporary artists Contemporary art galleries Modern artists National galleries Painters by name by nationality Photographers Sculptors female Stolen paintings Most expensive paintings , sculptures , works by living artists Painting portal Visual arts portal Arts portal v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Arts criticism Topics Architecture criticism Dance criticism Film criticism Literary criticism Music journalism Rockism and poptimism Television criticism Theatre criticism Video game journalism Visual art criticism ( Feminist ) See also Arts journalism Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cubo-Futurism&oldid=1297659811 " Categories : Cubism Russian Futurism Russian avant-garde Russian art movements Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 17:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cubo-Futurism 23 languages Add topic

