Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Comparative application of the European Civil War concept 2 Supporting case 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents European Civil War 9 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español Français Nederlands کوردی ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept describing 19th and 20th century conflicts in Europe as one continuous civil war This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "European Civil War" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A French satirical cartoon map of Europe in 1870 The European Civil War is a concept meant to characterize a series of 19th- and early 20th-century conflicts in Europe as segments of an overarching civil war within a supposed European society. The timeframes associated with this European Civil War vary among historians. Some descriptions range from 1914 to 1945, thus including World War I , World War II , and many lesser conflicts of the interwar period .

[ 1 ] Others argue that this period started in 1870 [ 2 ] with the Franco-Prussian War , or in 1905.

[ 3 ] Sometimes, the notion also serves to explain the process of European integration , and the creation of the European Union as a peaceful solution to this conflict.

Arguments in favor of this description usually point towards the relative cultural homogeneity of the European continent , to the family relation of European monarchs at the beginning of World War I, or to the continuity of armed conflicts in Europe between the various time frames. Arguments against the notion point towards the strong distinctions in religions and political systems that existed between European nations at the beginning of the period which undermine the idea that Europe formed a united "civil society". Other stress the global, i.e. not strictly European, nature of both world wars , which the characterization sometimes fails to account for. Consensus among historians does not support the notion of a European Civil War.

[ citation needed ] Comparative application of the European Civil War concept [ edit ] The concept of a European Civil War attempts to characterize World War I and World War II , along with the inter-war period and its conflicts, as a protracted civil war taking place in Europe . It is used [ by whom?

] in referring [ citation needed ] to the repeated confrontations that occurred during the first half of the 20th century. Unlike traditional approaches to history, this construct re-interprets the past in the light of a present reality (a semi-unified Europe), rather than interpreting past events in the light of the past. On the other hand, pre-Reformation European societies acknowledged a communal religious bond which lasted in many other ways including the intertwined dynasties of the various European royal houses.

The term does not easily encompass aspects of several conflicts in the period of its presumed application. No consensus has emerged over many details and links, such as the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), the Russian Revolution and Russian Civil War (1917–1923). There is no consensus on its application to related conflicts within or between proximate European colonies in North Africa and in the Middle East . There is no consensus on its application to related conflicts outside the fringes of Europe such as the Japanese invasion of China and campaigns in the Pacific theater and Southeast Asia theater of World War II. The role of the United States in these events is also difficult to explain within the construct. Thus, the concept of a European Civil War is difficult to reconcile with the involvement of numerous sovereign non-colonial combatants in the conflicts in Europe from continents other than Europe, including South America (Brazil) and the Pacific (Thailand).

In comparison with traditional historical analysis of 20th-century European conflicts, the utility of the "civil war" concept has not been demonstrated. As of 2017 [update] , the construct of a continental European "civil war" in the period has not yet completely explained the geographic coverage, the multiple causes of the subsets of conflicts within the historical period and geographical range of operations and effects. At least two historically understood national" civil wars", the Russian Civil War and the Spanish Civil War, are among some of the internally conflicting arguments of the thesis.

K. M. Panikkar 's original range from 1914 to 1945 is among the chronological ranges proposed, but it does not explain some of these problems, such as the ideological content of both the nationalist and communist movements, the decline or elimination of related monarchies and the rise of national and transnational social democratic organizations (political parties and trade-union movements) in the period.

The period of events between 1936 and 1945, beginning  with the conflict in Spain and ending with the European portion of World War II, are commonly cited.

[ by whom?

] The University of Massachusetts Boston argues 1945 as the end-date, but the beginning of the conflict in 1917 with the Russian Civil War.

[ citation needed ] However, for the self-mutilation perspective there is a tendency to stretch the beginning to as early as the start of the Franco-Prussian War on 19 July 1870 and the end to as late as the reunification of Germany of 1990.

[ citation needed ] The London School of Economics course "European Civil War: 1890 to 1990" argues that 1945 was the end date and that the second half of the 20th century was the result of the conflagration's aftermath. The University of Hong Kong 's Department of History proposes dividing the content into two sections, with one covering 1914-1945 and the second 1945 onwards.

[ 4 ] Supporting case [ edit ] Those supporting the idea of a European Civil War contend that the heads of state in many European nations were so closely related as to constitute branches of the same family.

[ citation needed ] European culture is also relatively homogeneous, with most nations tracing the roots of their culture to two principal sources, namely Christianity and classical antiquity . While separate, their respective legal systems were remarkably similar and evolved to become more so over time.

At the end of the conflict, elites in the different countries of Europe began work to create a community of nations that has since grown into the European Union . The emergence of the European Union from World War II is central to the argument as a civil war typically occurs when competing parties within the same country or empire struggle for national control of state power. Civil wars usually result in the emergence of a new or restrengthened central authority.

As mentioned below, some academics regard the First and Second World Wars as part of the same conflict with a 22-year cease-fire. The theory defines the Spanish and Russian civil wars as intermediate conflicts and links the roots of World War I back to the earlier Franco-Prussian conflict, regarding political changes in Italy, Portugal and elsewhere in a single context.

The central proponents of the European Civil War were originally based at the history department of the London School of Economics . In his 1996 work The Republic Besieged: Civil War in Spain 1936–1939 , Paul Preston describes the Spanish Civil War as an "episode in a greater European Civil War that ended in 1945". The department even included the subject as a course in its own right (taught by Dr.

Robert Boyce ).

[ 5 ] However, their position has since gained ground with academics elsewhere.

Others who have used the notion of a European Civil War in their work include professor emeritus of Sociology at the University of Rome , University of California, Berkeley 's Anthony Adamthwaite [ 6 ] and Duke University's J. M. Roberts. In his 1996 work A History of Europe , Roberts stated that the "European Civil War ended the dominance of Europe in the world", a typical claim of the idea's proponents.

[ full citation needed ] An early reference to this concept occurs during the 1970s television series The World at War , when historian Stephen Ambrose comments that 1945 witnessed an invasion of an exhausted Europe by Russian and American armies, "thus ensuring that no European nation actually wins the European Civil War". Earlier still were comments by Indian diplomat K. M. Panikkar in his 1955 book Asia and Western Dominance 1498-1945 .

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Long War (20th century) Postwar: A History of Europe Since 1945 Second Thirty Years War (another term for the period) Political history of the world Short 20th century (a period extended by the Cold War) References [ edit ] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: The Causes of World War I ^ "World War I Led to a Century of Violence in the Middle East" . "The so-called European Civil War, a term used to describe the period of bloody violence that racked Europe from 1914 onwards, came to an end in 1945".

^ Anna Triandafyllidou; Ruth Wodak; Michał Krzyżanowski (2009).

The European Public Sphere and the Media: Europe in Crisis .

Palgrave Macmillan . p. 80.

ISBN 0230210422 .

^ "Twentieth century European history civil war" .

^ "University of Hong Kong Course Guide" .

Archived February 26, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ "LSE Course Guide, 2004-2005" .

Archived November 19, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Keynote address "The Spanish Civil War- ideological battleground of a European civil war?", international conference "Democratic powers and the Right in interwar Europe", University of Salford UK" . History.berkeley.edu. June 2006. Archived from the original on 2008-12-31 . Retrieved 2007-03-08 .

^ K. M. Panikkar.

Asia and Western Dominance 1498-1945 .

Further reading [ edit ] Traverso, Enzo (2016).

Fire and Blood: The European Civil War, 1914-1945 . Verso Books.

ISBN 978-1-78478-133-0 .

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Civil_War&oldid=1295689543 " Categories : Late modern Europe Civil wars involving the states and peoples of Europe Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2022 This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 07:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European Civil War 9 languages Add topic

