Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Africa 2 Antarctica 3 Asia 4 Australia 5 Europe 6 North America 7 South America 8 By mountain range 9 References Toggle the table of contents Regional geology 7 languages Čeština Deutsch فارسی Հայերեն हिन्दी Nederlands Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of geologic regions This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Regional geology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be confusing or unclear to readers . In particular, it's contradictory, unsourced, meaningless in places.

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( May 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Regional geology is the geological study of large-scale regions. Usually, it encompasses multiple geological disciplines to piece together the history of an area. It is the geologic equivalent of regional geography . The size and the borders of each region are defined by geologically significant boundaries and by the occurrence of geologic processes.

[ 1 ] Examples of geologically significant boundaries are the interfingering facies change in sedimentary deposits when discussing a sedimentary basin system, or the leading or boundary thrust of an orogen .

[ 2 ] Africa [ edit ] Geology of Africa Geology of Chad Geology of Egypt Geology of Madagascar Geology of Rwanda Geology of Togo Antarctica [ edit ] Geology of Antarctica Asia [ edit ] Geology of Asia Geology of Armenia Geology of Azerbaijan Geology of Bangladesh Geology of China Geology of Fujian Geology of Georgia (country) Geology of Hong Kong Geology of India Geology of Sikkim Geology of Indonesia Geology of Japan Geology of New Zealand Geology of Pakistan Geology of the Philippines Geology of Russia Geology of Singapore Geology of Taiwan Geology of Turkey Geology of Vietnam Australia [ edit ] Geology of Australia Geology of the Australian Capital Territory Geology of New South Wales Geology of Queensland Geology of Tasmania Geology of Victoria Geology of the Yilgarn craton Europe [ edit ] Geology of Europe Geology of Andorra Geology of Armenia Geology of Azerbaijan Geology of Cyprus Geology of Denmark Geology of Faroe Islands Geology of Greenland Geology of Finland Geology of France Alps Aquitaine Basin Armorican Massif Massif Central Paris Basin Pyrenees Upper Rhine Plain Rhone Furrow Vosges Mountains Geology of Germany Geology of Great Britain Geology of England Geology of the English counties Geology of Cambridgeshire Geology of Cheshire Geology of Cornwall Lizard Complex Geology of Dorset Geology of East Sussex Geology of Essex Geology of Gloucestershire Geology of Hampshire Geology of Hertfordshire Geology of Lincolnshire Geology of Norfolk Geology of Rutland Geology of Shropshire Geology of Somerset Geology of Suffolk Geology of Yorkshire Geology of Scotland Geology of Orkney Geology of Skye Geology of Wales Geology of Guernsey Geology of Alderney Geology of the Iberian Peninsula Geology of Iceland Geology of Ireland Geology of Italy Geology of Jersey Geology of the Netherlands Geology of Norway Geology of Svalbard Geology of Russia Geology of Serbia Geology of Slovenia Geology of Sweden Geology of Gotland Geology of Turkey North America [ edit ] Geology of North America Geology of the Appalachians Geology of New England Geology of the Pacific Northwest Geology of the Rocky Mountains Geology of Canada Geology of the United States Geology of Alabama Geology of Alaska Geology of Arizona Geology of the Grand Canyon area Geology of Arkansas Geology of California Geology of the Death Valley area Geology of the Lassen volcanic area Geology of Mount Shasta Geology of the Yosemite area Geology of Colorado Geology of Connecticut Geology of Delaware Geology of Florida Geology of Georgia Geology of Hawaii Geology of Idaho Geology of Illinois Geology of Indiana Geology of Iowa Geology of Kansas Geology of Kentucky Geology of Louisiana Geology of Maine Geology of Maryland Geology of Massachusetts Geology of Michigan Geology of Minnesota Geology of Mississippi Geology of Missouri Geology of Montana Geology of Nebraska Geology of Nevada Geology of New Hampshire Geology of New Jersey Geology of New Mexico Geology of New York Glacial geology of the Genesee River Geology of North Carolina Geology of North Dakota Geology of Ohio Geology of Oklahoma Geology of Oregon Geology of Pennsylvania Geology of Rhode Island Geology of South Carolina Geology of South Dakota Geology of Tennessee Geology of Texas Geology of Utah Geology of the Bryce Canyon area Geology of the Canyonlands area Geology of the Capitol Reef area Geology of the Zion and Kolob canyons area Geology of Vermont Geology of Virginia Geology of Washington Geology of Washington, D.C.

Geology of Mount Adams Geology of West Virginia Geology of Wisconsin Geology of Wyoming Geology of the Grand Teton area South America [ edit ] Geology of South America Geology of Bolivia Geology of Chile Geology of Colombia Geology of the Falkland Islands Geology of Uruguay By mountain range [ edit ] Geology of the Alps Geology of the Andes Geology of the Appalachians Geology of the Himalaya Geology of the Rocky Mountains References [ edit ] ^ Davis, George H.; Stephen J. Reynolds; Charles F. Kluth (2008).

Structural geology of rocks and regions (3rd ed.). Hoboken: Wiley.

ISBN 978-0471152316 .

^ Roberts, D. G.; A.W. Bally (2012). "1 – Regional geology and tectonics of sedimentary basins: A Prologue".

Regional Geology and Tectonics: Principles of Geologic Analysis : 0– 15.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-444-53042-4.00070-4 .

ISBN 9780444530424 .

v t e Geology of Europe Countries Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Faroe Islands Estonia Finland Åland Islands France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy ( Sicily ) Kazakhstan Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Jan Mayen Svalbard Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Gibraltar Alderney Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Geologic regions Orogens Acadian Alpine Belomorian Cadomian Caledonian Carpathian Dalslandian Gothian Grampian Hallandian-Danopolonian Hellenic Laxfordian Lopian Saamian Scandian Scourian Timanide Svecofennian Sveconorwegian Uralian Variscan Mountain ranges Alps Apennines Caucasus Dinaric Alps Harz Massif Central Ore Mountains Pyrenees Scandinavian Mountains Sudetes Urals Western Carpathians Oceanic basins Atlantic Ocean Arctic Ocean Bay of Biscay Black Sea Mediterranean Sea Norwegian Sea Intracontinental basins and grabens Aquitaine Basin Barents Basin Baltic Sea Basin Central Lowlands Dnieper–Donets Rift Ebro Basin European Cenozoic Rift System Hellenic Trench Limagne Graben Mezen Basin Molasse Basin Moscow Basin North Sea Basin Oslo Rift Pannonian Basin Paris Basin Peri-Caspian Depression Timan-Pechora Basin White Sea Rift System Tectonic plates and microcontinents Adriatic plate Aegean Sea plate Anatolian plate Eurasian plate Iberian plate Jan Mayen Microcontinent Moesian plate Pelso plate Tisza plate Terranes Armorican terrane Avalonia Baltica Cimmeria East European Craton Fennoscandian Craton Sarmatian Craton Volgo–Uralia UNESCO World Heritage Sites Aeolian Islands Aggtelek Calanques de Piana Curonian Spit Dolomites Durmitor Geirangerfjord Giant's Causeway Glarus High Coast Jungfrau-Aletsch Jurassic Coast Komi Kvarken Laponia Messel Pit Meteora Monte Perdido Monte San Giorgio Mount Etna Nærøyfjord Pirin Plitvice Rhine Gorge Scandola Škocjan St Kilda Stevns Klint Surtsey Thingvellir Compagnoni, R. (2003). "HP metamorphic belt of the western Alps". Episodes. 26 (3): 200–204.

Geology of Mid-way Range Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regional_geology&oldid=1284064921 " Category : Regional geology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2013 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2013 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 10:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Regional geology 7 languages Add topic

