Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Flora 3 Fauna 4 Conservation 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Oman 7 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Slovenščina Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna of Oman ) Oasis in an Oman desert landscape The wildlife of Oman is the flora and fauna of this country in the south eastern corner of the Arabian Peninsula , with coasts on the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea . The climate is hot and dry, apart from the southeastern coast, and the country offers a variety of habitats for wildlife including mountains, valleys, deserts, coastal plains and sea coasts.

Geography [ edit ] Fog-shrouded Dhofar Mountains in southern Oman, near Salalah To the north of the country is a small exclave with a rugged coastline beside the Strait of Hormuz . This is the Musandam Peninsula , and is separated from the rest of Oman by part of the United Arab Emirates . The country in the north of the main part of Oman is mountainous, Al Hajar Mountains reaching almost to 3,000 m (10,000 ft). They run parallel to the coast of the Gulf of Oman , with a narrow coastal plain in between. This is crossed by a number of wadis and has several oases. Central Oman consists of a tableland bounded to the west by the Rub' al Khali desert of Saudi Arabia . The coastline in eastern and southern Oman is barren. In the south of the country in the Dhofar Governorate , the mountains run in an easterly-westerly direction and include Jabal Samhan and Jebel Qamar .

[ 1 ] The climate in general is very hot, with temperatures rising to 40 °C (104 °F) or more in mid-summer.

[ 2 ] About 25 cm (10 in) of rain falls annually in the Hajar Mountains in the north but the bulk of the country is very dry, with the exception of the southeastern coastal area which is humid and is subject to the khareef , a seasonal southeastern monsoon that brings rain and fog to coastal areas.

[ 1 ] In the summer, the weather pattern over the whole of the Arabian Peninsula is very static with a low pressure weather system stationary over the area. The low- albedo desert interior heats up and the hot air rises, but the humidity is so low that no clouds form. Dust however does get wafted aloft giving rise to the hazy conditions often seen here.

[ 3 ] Flora [ edit ] Over four hundred species of plant have been recorded in eastern Arabia. The most famous is probably Boswellia sacra , the frankincense tree, which only grows in the mountains of southern Oman, Yemen and Somaliland .

[ 4 ] Though many parts of the coast are rocky, the coastal plains of the Al Batinah Region and the Dhofar Region are edged with dunes and saline marshes. Here salt-loving plants flourish and the dominant species include Zygophyllaceae , sea-lavender and white mangrove . Many of the salt-tolerant plants of Al Batinah differ from those of the south coast, and plants like Salsola drummondii , Bienertia cycloptera and Salsola rosmarinus are also found in the Irano-Turanian Region .

[ 5 ] Sabkhas (salt flats) with hypersaline conditions are typically marked by an absence of vegetation. In some cases plant life can be accommodated on small sandy mounds in these sabkhas known as nabkhas due to their relatively lower salinity levels.

[ 6 ] In the south of the country, the monsoon rainfall creates a wealth of vegetation that is not present in more arid regions.

[ 3 ] Fauna [ edit ] See also: List of birds of Oman and List of mammals of Oman Arabian humpback whales off Dhofar One of the last places in which the Arabian leopard survives is the Dhofar mountains in southern Oman, and the Jabal Samhan Nature Reserve has been set up to protect these critically endangered big cats. Other carnivores present in the reserve include the striped hyena , Blanford's fox and Arabian wildcat .

[ 7 ] The central section of Oman has vast stretches of gravelly desert with very little vegetation. The Arabian Oryx Sanctuary was set up here to aid in the conservation of the Arabian oryx , and it is also a refuge for the sand gazelle , the mountain gazelle , the Nubian ibex , the honey badger , the red fox , the caracal , the sand cat and the Arabian wildcat .

[ 7 ] Over five hundred species of bird have been recorded from Oman. Some of these are resident, others arrive in spring to breed, departing by autumn. Still more are in transit, on migration routes between the Palearctic realm , Africa , and the Indian Subcontinent. The east coast with its mudflats and lagoons is visited by many species of wader, and the mangrove areas are home to the red-wattled lapwing and the collared kingfisher . The coast and offshore islands are home to gulls, terns and cormorants. The mountainous north of the country attracts many passerines in passage, the desert areas are home to the endangered houbara bustard , sand partridge , four species of sandgrouse , desert larks , pipits , wheatears and buntings . The mountains additionally attract golden eagles and Egyptian vultures . The Dhofar region in the south has a great variety of breeding and migratory species.

[ 7 ] The Omani owl ( Strix butleri ) is a species of owl discovered in 2013, and is believed to be the only bird endemic to Oman.

[ 8 ] Oman has about sixty-four species of reptile ; these include lizards , skinks , geckos , agamas and a single species of chameleon . Most of the approximately one dozen or so snake species in the country are harmless, but the uncommon horned viper , carpet viper , puff adder and cobra are venomous. There are just three species of amphibian , one of which is the Dhofar toad .

[ 7 ] The number of freshwater fish found in the country is limited because there are few bodies of permanent water. The Oman garra is one fish found in the northern mountains, and it also has a blind version that lives in caves.

[ 9 ] Oman is also rich in marine diversity, especially cetaceans . There is a population of humpback whales that may be the most isolated, possibly the most endangered, and the only non-migratory population in the world. Off Muscat there are other humpback whales, pygmy blue whales , Bryde's whales , sperm whales , false killer whales , Risso's dolphins , spinner dolphins , bottlenose dolphins , Indo-Pacific humpbacked dolphins , and the occasional killer whale .

[ 10 ] Conservation [ edit ] Oman is more aware than some of its neighbors of the need to conserve its wildlife. It is a signatory to a number of treaties on global issues, and a number of areas have been set aside as nature reserves . Measures have been put in place to protect the beaches where the endangered green sea turtle breed, [ 11 ] a leopard conservation trust has been set up, and the Arabian Oryx Sanctuary was established and became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1994. However, the Omani government later reduced the size of the protected area by about 90% to allow for oil prospecting, and in 2007, the sanctuary became the first ever World Heritage Site to be delisted.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Oman portal Wildlife of Saudi Arabia Wildlife of the United Arab Emirates Wildlife of Yemen List of mountains in the United Arab Emirates List of wadis of the United Arab Emirates List of mountains in Oman List of wadis in Oman Jebel Hafeet , an outlier of the Western Hajar on the border of Oman and the UAE Masirah Island References [ edit ] ^ a b Philip's (1994).

Atlas of the World . Reed International. pp.

86– 87.

ISBN 0-540-05831-9 .

^ "Climate of Oman" . WeatherOnline . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ a b Ghazanfar, S.A.

; Fisher, M. (2013).

Vegetation of the Arabian Peninsula . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

7– 8.

ISBN 978-94-017-3637-4 .

^ King, David C. (2008).

Oman . Marshall Cavendish. p.

13 .

ISBN 978-0-7614-3120-6 .

^ Ghazanfar, S.A.; Fisher, M. (2013).

Vegetation of the Arabian Peninsula . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 211.

ISBN 978-94-017-3637-4 .

^ P.König (October 2012). "Plant life in the Umm as Samim, Oman – A case study in a major inland sabkha".

Journal of Arid Environments .

85 : 122– 127.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaridenv.2012.06.007 .

^ a b c d Darke, Diana (2013).

Oman . Bradt Travel Guides. pp.

6– 10.

ISBN 978-1-84162-471-6 .

^ Robb, Magnus; van den Berg, Arnoud B.; Constantine, Mark (2013).

"A new species of Strix owl from Oman" (PDF) .

Dutch Birding .

35 (5): 275– 310.

^ Harrison, I.J. (2015).

" Garra barreimiae " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2015 : e.T8916A3147989.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2015-2.RLTS.T8916A3147989.en .

^ Kennedy, Fergus.

"Whales and dolphins of Oman: Dolphins, Humpbacks and Blue whales!" .

Wildlife Extra . Oman Whale and Dolphin Research Group . Retrieved 21 January 2016 .

^ King, David C. (2008).

Oman . Marshall Cavendish. pp.

51 –52.

ISBN 978-0-7614-3120-6 .

^ "Arabian Oryx Sanctuary" . UNESCO . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

v t e Wildlife of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Oman articles History Archaeology Magan Incense trade route Tribes of Arabia Imamate of Oman Omani Empire Muscat and Oman Battle of Dhank Jebel Akhdar War Dhofar rebellion Battle of Mirbat 1970 coup d'état 2011 protests (Arab Spring) 2018–2019 unemployment protests Geography Borders Cities Eco-regions Geology Governorates Provinces Rivers Rub' al Khali (desert) World heritage sites Wildlife Politics Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Military Visa policy Government Sultan Crown Prince Cabinet Council Council of State (upper house) Consultative Assembly (lower house) Economy Agriculture Central bank Companies Petroleum Rial (currency) Telecommunications Tourism Transport airports Society Anthem Cinema Crime Cuisine Culture regional Demographics Education Emblem Flag Healthcare International rankings Language Music People Public holidays Religion Sport Traditional games Women Outline Index Category Portal v t e Conservation by country Angola Australia Bangladesh Belize Botswana Brazil Cambodia Cameroon Canada Central African Republic Chad Chile Costa Rica Democratic Republic of the Congo Iceland India Indonesia Italy Laos Libya Madagascar Malaysia Mauritius Namibia Nepal New Zealand North Macedonia Oman Pakistan Papua New Guinea Romania Rwanda South Sudan Sweden Tanzania Thailand Togo Turkey Turkmenistan Uganda United Kingdom United States Vietnam v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_Oman&oldid=1274301251 " Categories : Wildlife by country Fauna of Oman Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 6 February 2025, at 15:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Oman 7 languages Add topic

