Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Use in education 2 Philosophical eristic 3 Argumentation theory 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Eristic 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Interlingua Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Argumentation for the sake of winning the argument instead of reaching or seeking truth Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e In philosophy and rhetoric , eristic (from Eris , the ancient Greek goddess of chaos, strife, and discord) refers to an argument that aims to successfully dispute another's argument, rather than searching for truth . According to T.H. Irwin , "It is characteristic of the eristic to think of some arguments as a way of defeating the other side, by showing that an opponent must assent to the negation of what he initially took himself to believe." [ 1 ] Eristic is defined by Rankin as arguing for the sake of conflict, as opposed to resolving conflict.

[ 2 ] Use in education [ edit ] Eristic was a type of "question-and-answer" [ 3 ] teaching method popularized by the Sophists , such as Euthydemos and Dionysiodoros . Students learned eristic arguments to "refute their opponent, no matter whether he [said] yes or no in answer to their initial question".

[ 4 ] Plato contrasted this type of argument with dialectic and other more reasonable and logical methods (e.g., at Republic 454a). In the dialogue Euthydemus , Plato satirizes eristic. It is more than persuasion, and it is more than discourse. It is a combination that wins an argument without regard to truth. Plato believed that the eristic style "did not constitute a method of argument" because to argue eristically is to consciously use fallacious arguments, which therefore weakens one's position.

[ 5 ] Unlike Plato, Isocrates (often considered a Sophist) did not distinguish eristic from dialectic.

[ 6 ] He held that both lacked a "'useful application' ... that created responsible citizens", [ 7 ] which unscrupulous teachers used for "enriching themselves at the expense of the youth." [ 8 ] Philosophical eristic [ edit ] Schopenhauer considers that only logic pursues truth. For him, dialectic , sophistry , and eristic have no objective truth in view, but only the appearance of it; he believed that they do not seek truth itself but, rather, victory. He names these three last methods as "eristic dialectic (contentious argument)." [ 9 ] According to Schopenhauer , Eristic Dialectic is mainly concerned to tabulate and analyze dishonest stratagems, [ 10 ] so that they may at once be recognized and defeated, in order to continue with a productive dialectic debate. It is for this very reason that Eristic Dialectic must admittedly take victory, and not objective truth, for its selfish aim and purpose.

Argumentation theory [ edit ] Argumentation theory is a field of study that asks critical questions about eristic arguments and the other types of dialogue.

See also [ edit ] The Art of Being Right Logical fallacy Eris (mythology) Notes [ edit ] ^ Irwin, T.H. "Plato's Objection to the Sophists." The Greek World. London: Routledge, 1995. P. 585. Print.

^ H.D. Rankin (1983). Sophists, Socratics and Cynics. Pp. 233–237.

^ Nehamas A., 1990, "Eristic, Antilogic, Sophistic, Dialectic: Plato's Demarcation of Philosophy from Sophistry", History of philosophy quarterly, Vol.7 (1) p.3-16 (page 6) ^ Irwin, T.H. "Plato's Objection to the Sophists." The Greek World. London: Routledge, 1995. 583. Print.

^ Alexander Nehamas. "Eristic, Antilogic, Sophistic, Dialectic: Plato's Demarcation of Philosophy from Sophistry". (page 7).

^ "Plato, Republic, Book 5, section 454a" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu .

^ Marsh, Charles. Classical rhetoric and modern public relations: an Isocratean model. New York: Routledge, 2013. P. 121.

^ "Isocrates, Antidosis, section 45" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu .

^ Controversial Dialectic Archived 2007-07-15 at the Wayback Machine on CoolHaus.de accessed at January 19, 2008 ^ In his Dialectica Eristica Schopenhauer presents 38 eristic stratagems References [ edit ] Schopenhauer, Arthur.

Eristische Dialektik , 1830.

Encyclopædia Britannica defines eristic External links [ edit ] Arthur Schopenhauer's Eristische Dialektik : German and English version of Eristische Dialektik Archived 2002-12-15 at the Wayback Machine German version of Eristische Dialektik v t e Megarian philosophy Philosophers Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus Pasicles Clinomachus Stilpo Nicarete Bryson Simmias of Syracuse Eubulides Alexinus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Panthoides Aristotle the Dialectician Concepts Dialectic Eristic Future contingents Master argument Liar paradox Sorites paradox Authority control databases : National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eristic&oldid=1292184842 " Categories : Philosophical arguments Rhetoric Concepts in epistemology Eris (mythology) Philosophical methodology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 17:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eristic 22 languages Add topic

