Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Suicide Sunday 3 May Week Alternative Toggle May Week Alternative subsection 3.1 Aims 3.2 Chronology 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents May Week Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Celebration of the end of the academic year at Cambridge This article is about the tradition at the University of Cambridge. For the celebratory week in Argentina, see May Revolution .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "May Week" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guideline for events .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "May Week" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Trinity College choir at Singing on the River 2016 St John's College May Ball 2014 fireworks from Castle Mound May Week is the name used in the University of Cambridge to refer to a period at the end of the academic year. Originally May Week took place in the week during May before year-end exams began.

[ 1 ] Nowadays, May Week takes place in June after exams, and is a cause for great celebration amongst the students of the University. Highlights of the week include bumps races , May Balls , June Events and garden parties .

History [ edit ] May Week festivities were originally held in May, in the final week before exams; however, the May boat races, also known as the May Bumps , moving toward June, right after exams to celebrate the year end.

[ 2 ] Suicide Sunday [ edit ] Some cardboard boat race participants on Suicide Sunday 2012 Suicide Sunday is the name used at Cambridge University to refer to the Sunday immediately after the end of the summer term (known as Easter Term). By this Sunday, all students have finished exams but most of the results have not been published, so it is traditionally a period of nerves and suspense. A student-led campaign in 2015 encouraged use of the name "May Week Sunday" instead, though "Suicide Sunday" continues to persist among students and the public.

[ citation needed ] The name refers to the celebration of the end of exam term, in contrast to Caesarian Sunday on the day before the early May Bank Holiday which is named after the Jesus College drinking society, the Caesarians.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Caesarian Sunday is traditionally a final opportunity for students to get drunk on Jesus Green before exams begin.

The events are for current students of the University of Cambridge but are frequented by former students that indulge in the student lifestyle.

The Cardboard Boat Race is a main attraction to Suicide Sunday, offering an alternative to the many garden parties and more serious boating. The first race was in 2010, with three boats from Magdalene College . In 2011, the race was opened to other colleges.

[ 5 ] May Week Alternative [ edit ] May Week Alternative (MWA), [ 6 ] is a "feel good" initiative set up by undergraduates at Cambridge University to encourage students to celebrate the end of the academic year through charitable endeavours. In the organisation's first 3 years, it attracted the support of approximately 650 students, and raised £150,000, protecting almost 180,000 people from malaria [ 7 ] according to the Against Malaria Foundation .

Aims [ edit ] The organisation states three main aims: Direct impact: MWA seeks to raise money for AMF and in doing so transform tens of thousands of lives by providing life-saving anti-malaria nets .

[ 8 ] Put charity at the heart of May Week celebrations : The initiative attempts to equip students with a positive framework which allows them to celebrate May Week by making the world a better place. By inviting students to see charity as a central and positive part of the May Week experience, MWA believes it can "unlock huge philanthropic potential".

Inspire students with a bold, positive vision for giving: By inviting students to engage with significant giving through this explicitly positive, celebratory context, May Week Alternative hopes that students will develop philanthropic tendencies which they will take forward into their future careers, rather than seeing charity as a burden.

Chronology [ edit ] In the spring of 2018, a group of five students founded the initiative and raised £12,000 for AMF, with over 40 students joining.

In February 2019 MWA hosted its first annual Launch Party. MWA also presented at various events, including the Cambridge International Development Conference, Cambridge Union , and TEDxCambridgeUniversity In the same month it was one of only four initiatives recognised at Cambridge University's first ever Social Impact Awards.

In March 2019, MWA raised over £36,000 (having acquired matched funding), with more than 170 students joining. This total was triple the previous year and according to AMF's calculations is sufficient protect 40,000 people from malaria.

In June 2019 the initiative hosted a Summer Party with over 140 participants, and the support of 11 university and corporate partners.

In 2020, the cancellation of all May Balls and other May Week events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic lead to the creation of The May Week Mega Event. Co-hosted by May Week Alternative, Cambridge Rag (student society) , and the May Ball Presidents' Committee, this virtual celebration of May Week featured over 500 performers from across the university in a four and a half hour livestream, attracting over 10,000 viewers. Over the course of the evening, over £14,000 was raised to support Addenbrooke's Charitable Trust and the Centre for the Study of Existential Risk .

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ "May Week: balls, boats and bubbly" .

King's College, Cambridge . Retrieved 6 July 2014 .

^ "We had a Ball" – William Ham Bevan. Cambridge Alumni Magazine, Issue 72 (Easter 2014) ^ "CAESARIAN SHUN-DAY" .

thetab.com .

^ "Inside Cambridge Drinking Societies" .

varsity.co.uk .

^ "2011 Cardboard Boat Race" .

Facebook .

^ "George Rosenfeld receives VC award for May Week Alternative" . 26 March 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "May Week Alternative" .

www.mayweekalternative.org.uk . Retrieved 22 July 2020 .

^ "May Week Alternative: a new way to celebrate" .

The Cambridge Student . 8 June 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "Distanced students celebrate 'May Week Mega Event' " .

Varsity Online . Retrieved 1 July 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Listings with details of current May Balls / June Events v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=May_Week&oldid=1306583145 " Categories : Terminology of the University of Cambridge June Culture of the University of Cambridge English traditions University folklore Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles with topics of unclear notability from August 2022 All articles with topics of unclear notability Event articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from April 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 15:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents May Week Add languages Add topic

