Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hélène Deutsch 2 Melanie Klein 3 Nancy Chodorow 4 Luce Irigaray 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle the table of contents Feminist views on the Oedipus complex 3 languages العربية فارسی Հայերեն Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Feminist psychoanalytic response to Freud's model of gender identity Sphinx & Oedipus Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminists have long struggled with Sigmund Freud 's classical model of gender and identity development, which centers on the Oedipus complex . Freud's model, which became integral to orthodox psychoanalysis , suggests that because women lack the visible genitals of the male, they feel they are "missing" the most central characteristic necessary for gaining narcissistic value—therefore developing feelings of gender inequality and penis envy . In his late theory on the feminine, Freud recognized the early and long lasting libidinal attachment of the daughter to the mother during the pre-oedipal stages.

Feminist psychoanalysts have confronted these ideas (particularly the female relationship to the real, imaginary and symbolic phallus ) and reached different conclusions. Some generally agree with Freud's major outlines, modifying it through observations of the pre-Oedipal phase. Others reformulate Freud's theories more completely.

Hélène Deutsch [ edit ] Hélène Deutsch (1884–1982) was one of Freud's first female pupils and the first analyst who made an integral, chronological study of woman's psychological development. In short, Deutsch claims that women have a passive-masochistic sexuality, they are born for reproduction and their development must be seen as different from the development of men.

[ 1 ] Deutsch sees the female development as exceedingly difficult and tortuous, because at some point she must transfer her primary sexual object choice from her mother to her father (and males), if she is to attain her expected heterosexual adulthood.

[ 2 ] According to Deutsch, the girl blames her father, not her mother, for the lack of a penis; thus, she stops identifying with her father and masculinity.  Because of this relationship with her father, she develops libidinous fantasies of being raped. Thus, the rape fantasy is universal and non-pathological, a key part of female sexuality.  Meanwhile, the girl identifies herself with her mother through the wish for an " anal child ". When she recognizes her failure, a decline to the pre-genital stage takes place: a wish for the earlier active ( phallic ) clitoris.

Masochistic tensions in the girl prevail and she longs to be castrated by her father. The desire for a child also becomes masochistic.

Melanie Klein [ edit ] Melanie Klein , originator of the Kleinian school of psychoanalysis, agreed with the basic structure of the Oedipal situation, but argued that it originated at 6 months of life while subsequently continuing to be worked through during the time that Freud had previously articulated. She identified the recognition of triangular relationships as originating during this time with the start of the infant's burgeoning awareness of the mother's relationships with others.

Nancy Chodorow [ edit ] Nancy Chodorow noted that Freud believed that males possess physical superiority and that a woman's personality is inevitably determined by her lack of a penis. Like Freud, but for different reasons, Chodorow emphasizes that the female Oedipal crisis is not resolved completely, unlike the male crisis: a girl cannot and does not completely reject her mother in favour of men, but continues her relationship of attachment to her. The strength and quality of her relationship with her father are completely dependent upon the strength and quality of her relationship with her mother. Chodorow claims that most women are genitally heterosexual, but they have other, equally deep relationships with their children and with other women, as a result of the primary relationship with the mother.

[ 3 ] Thus, a girl represses neither her pre-Oedipal nor her Oedipal attachment to her mother nor her Oedipal attachment to her father. This means that she grows up with more ongoing preoccupation with internalized object relationships and with external relationships. Because a girl does not have to repress her pre-Oedipal and Oedipal attachment to father and mother, she reaches a more relational sensibility than boys. Chodorow illustrated this through studies suggesting that men love (and fall in love) romantically, where women love and fall in love sensibly and rationally.

[ 4 ] Luce Irigaray [ edit ] In Freud 's model there is no place for femininity unless it is related to masculinity .

Luce Irigaray , a student of Jacques Lacan , disagrees with the thoughts about the importance of the penis and phallic for women.

[ 5 ] She hypothesizes that the reason the penis is privileged in Freud's model is that it is visible. This is also the reason that male sexuality is based, in early Lacanianism, on having (a penis) and female sexuality is based on lack. In Freud's paradigm, female desire is the desire for a baby to substitute for penis, thus female pleasure is derived from reproduction.

[ 6 ] Irigaray disagrees: "How can we accept that the entire female sexuality is being controlled by the lack and envy of the penis?" [ 7 ] Female sexuality is not solely related to reproduction, but neither is it less valuable in reproduction, and thus it should not hold less social power.

[ 8 ] Furthermore, she says that Freud is forgetting the mother-daughter relationship.

[ 9 ] To enter the Oedipus-complex, a girl must hate her mother. Irigaray says this view makes it impossible for a girl to give meaning to the relationship with her mother.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Jessica Benjamin Dorothy Dinnerstein Francoise Dolto Anna Freud Karen Horney Melanie Klein Julia Kristeva Jacques Lacan Juliet Mitchell Griselda Pollock Joan Riviere Gender Gender inequality Feminist theory Judith Van Herik Notes [ edit ] ^ Fischer, Psychoanalyse en vrouwelijke seksualiteit , p. 103.

^ Juschka, D. M.

Feminism in the Study of Religion , p. 88.

^ Chorodow, Family structure and feminine personality , pp. 87–89.

^ Chorodow, Feminism and Psychoanalytic Theory , pp. 73–74.

^ Irigaray, Ce sexe qui n'en est pas un , p. 73.

^ Irigaray, Ce sexe qui n'en est pas un , pp. 57, 34.

^ Irigaray, Ce sexe qui n'en est pas un , p. 58.

^ Irigaray, Ce sexe qui n'en est pas un , p. 59.

^ Irigaray, Ce sexe qui n'en est pas un , p. 119.

^ Irigaray, Ce sexe qui n'en est pas un , p. 120.

References [ edit ] Benjamin, J. (1995).

Like Subject, Love Objects . Yale University Press.

Bornheimer, C., and C. Kahane (1985).

In Dora's Case . London: Virago Press.

Chorodow, N. J. (2001).

Family structure and feminine personality In: Juschka, D. M., Feminism in the Study of Religion . London and New York: Continuum.

Chorodow, N. J. (1989).

Feminism and Psychoanalytic Theory . Cambridge: Polity Press.

Chorodow, N. J. (1978).

The Reproduction of Mothering . University of California Press.

Fischer, A., W. Van Hoorn, and J. Jansz (1983).

Psychoanalyse en vrouwelijke seksualiteit . Uitgeverij Boom, Meppel en Amsterdam.

Freud, S. (1931). "Female Sexuality".

The Standard Edition of Sigmund Freud . London: Hogarth Press, 1961.

Horney, K. (1951).

Neurosis and Human Growth . London: Routledge.

Horney, K. (1922–37).

Feminine Psychology . New York: Norton. 1967.

Irigaray, L. (1977).

Ce sexe qui n'en est pas un . Paris: Editions de Minuit.

Irigaray, L. (1974).

Speculum of the Other Woman . 1985. Cornell University Press.

Irigaray, L. (2004).

Key Writings . New York: Continuum.

Irigaray, L. (1993).

Sexes and Genealogies . Columbia University Press.

Kristeva, J. (1982).

The Powers of Horror . Columbia University Press.

Lacan, J. (1973).

Encore: On Feminine Sexuality . New York: Norton & Company, 1998.

Mitchell, J., and J. Rose (1982).

Jacques Lacan and the ecole freudienne, Feminine Sexuality . New York: Pantheon.

Parallax no. 8. Special issue on Julia Kristeva. Issue no. 8 [Vol. 4(3)].

Paris, B. J. (1994).

Karen Horney. A psychoanalyst's search for self-understanding . New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

Pollock, G. (2006). "Beyond Oedipus. Feminist Thought, Psychoanalysis, and Mythical Figurations of the Feminine." In: Zajko, V., and M. Leonard (eds), Laughing with Medusa . Oxford University Press.

Riviere, J. "Womanliness as masquerade", International Journal of Psychoanalysis no. 10, 1929.

v t e Oedipus Titles and lineage Theban kings in Greek mythology Laius (biological father) Polybus of Corinth (adoptive father) Merope (adoptive mother) Jocasta /Epicaste (biological mother/wife) Creon (Jocasta's brother/Laius' successor) Antigone (half sister/daughter) Eteocles (half brother/son) Polynices (half brother/son) Ismene (half sister/daughter) Euryganeia (2nd wife) Astymedusa (later wife) Theban plays Antiquity Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes Sophocles: Antigone Oedipus Rex Oedipus at Colonus Euripides: Antigone Oedipus The Phoenician Women Seneca: Oedipus Other (Oedipus) Oedipus (Dryden & Lee) Oedipus (Voltaire) The Infernal Machine Greek The Gospel at Colonus Other (Antigone) Antigone (Cocteau) Antigone (Anouilh) The Burial at Thebes Operas Antigona (Traetta) Antigona (Mysliveček) Œdipe à Colone Oedipus rex (Stravinsky) Œdipe (Enescu) Greek Edipo re Oedipus (Rihm) Films Oedipus Rex (1957) Antigone (1961) Oedipus Rex (1967) Oedipus the King (1968) Funeral Parade of Roses (1969) Night Warning (1982) Voyager (1991) Oedipus Mayor (1996) Antigone (2019) Other works Oedipodea Thebaid Theban Cycle Lille Stesichorus The Gods Are Not to Blame Oedipus Tex Home Fire Related Oedipus complex Electra complex Feminist views on the Oedipus complex Hamlet and Oedipus Jocasta complex Phaedra complex " The End " Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_views_on_the_Oedipus_complex&oldid=1271717009 " Categories : Freudian psychology Feminism and health Feminism and psychoanalysis Feminism and sexuality Feminism and the family Women and psychology History of psychiatry Point of view Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 25 January 2025, at 09:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist views on the Oedipus complex 3 languages Add topic

