Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Status 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Saint Peter's burial site 3.2 Old St. Peter's Basilica 3.3 Plan to rebuild 3.4 Financing with indulgences 3.5 Digital copies 4 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 4.1 Successive plans 4.2 Michelangelo's contribution 4.3 Dome: successive and final designs 4.3.1 Bramante and Sangallo, 1506 and 1513 4.3.2 Michelangelo and Giacomo della Porta, 1547 and 1585 4.3.3 Completion 4.3.4 Discovery of Michelangelo draft 4.4 Addition of nave and facade 4.4.1 Maderno's facade 4.4.2 Bernini's Towers 4.4.3 Narthex and portals 4.4.4 Maderno's nave 4.5 Influence on church architecture 5 Bernini's furnishings Toggle Bernini's furnishings subsection 5.1 Pope Urban VIII and Bernini 5.1.1 Baldacchino and niches 5.1.2 Cathedra Petri and Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament 6 St. Peter's Piazza 7 Clocks 8 Bells 9 Treasures Toggle Treasures subsection 9.1 Tombs and relics 9.2 Artworks 9.2.1 Towers and narthex 9.2.2 Nave 9.2.3 North aisle 9.2.4 South aisle 10 Archpriests since 1053 11 Specifications 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References 15 Bibliography 16 External links Toggle the table of contents St. Peter's Basilica 121 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Patois Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Rumantsch Русский Seeltersk Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Twi Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°54′08″N 12°27′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.90222°N 12.45333°E ﻿ / 41.90222; 12.45333 Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 17 August 2025 .

Roman Catholic basilica and landmark in Vatican City For other uses, see St. Peter's Basilica (disambiguation) .

Church in Vatican City St. Peter's Basilica Papal Basilica of Saint Peter in the Vatican Basilica di San Pietro ( Italian ) Basilica Sancti Petri ( Latin ) Main façade and dome of Saint Peter's Basilica, seen from St. Peter's Square 41°54′08″N 12°27′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.90222°N 12.45333°E ﻿ / 41.90222; 12.45333 Country Vatican City Denomination Catholic Sui iuris church Latin Church Tradition Roman Rite Website St. Peter's Basilica History Status Papal major basilica Dedication Saint Peter Consecrated 18 November 1626 Architecture Architect(s) Bernardo Rossellino , Giuliano da Sangallo , Bramante , Raffaello Sanzio , Giovanni Giocondo , Antonio da Sangallo il Giovane , Baldassarre Peruzzi , Michelangelo Buonarroti , Domenico Fontana , Giacomo Della Porta , Jacopo Barozzi da Vignola , Pirro Ligorio , Carlo Maderno , Gian Lorenzo Bernini and Francesco Borromini .

Style Renaissance and Baroque Groundbreaking 18 April 1506 Completed 18 November 1626 ( 1626-11-18 ) Specifications Capacity 60,000 standing and 20,000 seated [ 1 ] Length 220 metres (720 ft) Width 150 metres (490 ft) Height 136.6 metres (448 ft) [ 2 ] Nave height 46.2 metres (152 ft) Dome diameter (outer) 42 metres (138 ft) Dome diameter (inner) 41.5 metres (136 ft) Administration Diocese Rome Clergy Archpriest Mauro Gambetti UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name Vatican City Type Cultural Criteria i, ii, iv, vi Designated 1984 (8th session ) Reference no.

286 Region Europe and North America The Papal Basilica of Saint Peter in the Vatican ( Italian : Basilica Papale di San Pietro in Vaticano ), or simply St. Peter's Basilica ( Latin : Basilica Sancti Petri ; Italian: Basilica di San Pietro [baˈziːlika di sam ˈpjɛːtro] ), is a church of the Italian High Renaissance located in Vatican City , an independent microstate enclaved within the city of Rome , Italy. It was initially planned in the 15th century by Pope Nicholas V and then Pope Julius II to replace the ageing Old St. Peter's Basilica , which was built in the fourth century by Roman emperor Constantine the Great . Construction of the present basilica began on 18 April 1506 and was completed on 18 November 1626.

[ 3 ] Designed principally by Donato Bramante , Michelangelo , and Carlo Maderno , with piazza and fittings by Gian Lorenzo Bernini , Saint Peter's is one of the most renowned works of Italian Renaissance architecture [ 4 ] and is the largest church in the world by interior measure.

[ note 1 ] While it is neither the mother church of the Catholic Church nor the cathedral of the Diocese of Rome (these equivalent titles being held by the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran in Rome), Saint Peter's is regarded as one of the holiest Catholic shrines. It has been described as "holding a unique position in the Christian world", [ 5 ] and as "the greatest of all churches of Christendom ".

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Catholic tradition holds that the basilica is the burial site of Saint Peter , chief among Jesus 's apostles and also the first Bishop of Rome (Pope).

Saint Peter's tomb is directly below the high altar of the basilica, also known as the Altar of the Confession .

[ 7 ] For this reason, many popes, cardinals and bishops have been interred at St. Peter's since the Early Christian period.

St. Peter's is famous as a place of pilgrimage and for its liturgical functions. The pope presides at a number of liturgies throughout the year both within the basilica or the adjoining St. Peter's Square ; these liturgies draw audiences numbering from 15,000 to over 80,000 people.

[ 8 ] St. Peter's has many historical associations, with the early Christian Church , the Papacy, the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-Reformation and numerous artists, especially Michelangelo. As a work of architecture, it is regarded as the greatest building of its age.

[ 9 ] St. Peter's is ranked second, after the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran , among the four churches in the world that hold the rank of major papal basilica , all four of which are in Rome, and is also one of the Seven Pilgrim Churches of Rome . Contrary to popular misconception, it is not a cathedral because it is not the seat of a bishop.

[ 10 ] Overview [ edit ] View from the Tiber on Ponte Sant'Angelo and the Basilica. The iconic dome dominates the skyline of Rome.

St. Peter's is a church built in the Renaissance style located in the Vatican City west of the River Tiber and near the Janiculum Hill and Hadrian's Mausoleum . Its central dome dominates the skyline of Rome. The basilica is approached via St. Peter's Square , a forecourt in two sections, both surrounded by tall colonnades . The first space is oval and the second trapezoidal. The façade of the basilica, with a giant order of columns, stretches across the end of the square and is approached by steps on which stand two 5.55-metre (18.2 ft) statues of the first-century apostles to Rome, Saints Peter and Paul .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The basilica is cruciform in shape, with an elongated nave in the Latin cross form but the early designs were for a centrally planned structure and this is still in evidence in the architecture. The central space is dominated both externally and internally by one of the largest domes in the world. Set into the niches of the dome's four gargantuan support piers are colossal statues representing the four major holy relics believed to be held in the basilica: St. Longinus with his spear , St. Helena with the True Cross , St. Veronica with her veil , and St. Andrew , whose skull was possessed by the Vatican until the 20th century.

[ 13 ] The entrance is through a narthex , or entrance hall, which stretches across the building. One of the decorated bronze doors leading from the narthex is the Holy Door , opened only during jubilees .

[ 11 ] The interior dimensions are vast when compared to other churches.

[ 3 ] One author wrote: "Only gradually does it dawn upon us – as we watch people draw near to this or that monument, strangely they appear to shrink; they are, of course, dwarfed by the scale of everything in the building. This in its turn overwhelms us." [ 14 ] The nave which leads to the central dome is in three bays, with piers supporting a barrel vault, the highest of any church. The nave is framed by wide aisles which have a number of chapels off them. There are also chapels surrounding the dome. Moving around the basilica in a clockwise direction they are: The Baptistery , the Chapel of the Presentation of the Virgin , the larger Choir Chapel, the altar of the Transfiguration, the Clementine Chapel with the altar of Saint Gregory , the Sacristy Entrance, the Altar of the Lie, the left transept with altars to the Crucifixion of Saint Peter, Saint Joseph and Saint Thomas , the altar of the Sacred Heart , the Chapel of the Madonna of Column, the altar of Saint Peter and the Paralytic, the apse with the Chair of Saint Peter , the altar of Saint Peter raising Tabitha , the altar of St. Petronilla, the altar of the Archangel Michael , the altar of the Navicella , the right transept with altars of Saint Erasmus , Saints Processo and Martiniano, and Saint Wenceslas , the altar of St. Jerome, the altar of Saint Basil , the Gregorian Chapel with the altar of the Madonna of Succour, the larger Chapel of the Holy Sacrament , the Chapel of Saint Sebastian and the Chapel of the Pietà .

[ 11 ] The Monuments, in a clockwise direction, are to: Maria Clementina Sobieska , The Stuarts , Benedict XV , John XXIII , St.

Pius X , Innocent VIII , Leo XI , Innocent XI , Pius VII , Pius VIII , Alexander VII , Alexander VIII , Paul III , Urban VIII , Clement X , Clement XIII , Benedict XIV , St Peter (Bronze Statue), Gregory XVI , Gregory XIV , Gregory XIII , Matilda of Canossa , Innocent XII , Pius XII , Pius XI , Christina of Sweden , and Leo XII .

At the heart of the basilica, beneath the high altar, is the Confessio or Chapel of the Confession , named in reference to the confession of faith by St. Peter, which led to his martyrdom. Two curving marble staircases lead to this underground chapel at the level of the Constantinian church and immediately above the purported burial place of Saint Peter.

Pope Gregory XVI granted a "perpetual privilege" in 1836 authorizing any Catholic priest to celebrate Mass at the altar in the chapel.

[ 15 ] The entire interior of St. Peter's is lavishly decorated with marble, reliefs, architectural sculpture and gilding. The basilica contains a large number of tombs of popes and other notable people, many of which are considered outstanding artworks. There are also a number of sculptures in niches and chapels, including Michelangelo 's Pietà . The central feature is a baldachin , or canopy over the Papal Altar, designed by Gian Lorenzo Bernini . The apse culminates in a sculptural ensemble, also by Bernini, and containing the symbolic Chair of Saint Peter .

The American philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson described St. Peter's as "an ornament of the earth ... the sublime of the beautiful." [ 16 ] Panorama of St. Peter's Square Status [ edit ] St. Peter's Basilica is one of the papal basilicas (previously styled "patriarchal basilicas") [ note 2 ] and one of the four Major Basilicas of Rome the others (all of which are also Papal Basilicas) being the Basilicas of St. John Lateran , St. Mary Major , and St. Paul outside the Walls . The rank of major basilica confers on St. Peter's Basilica precedence before all minor basilicas worldwide. However, unlike all the other Papal Major Basilicas, it is wholly within the territory, and thus the sovereign jurisdiction, of the Vatican City State , and not that of Italy.

[ 17 ] Bishops at the Second Vatican Council in 1962 It is the most prominent building in the Vatican City . Its dome is a feature of the skyline of Rome and covers an area of 0.139 hectares (0.34 acres). One of the holiest sites of Christianity and Catholic Tradition, it is traditionally the burial site of its titular, St. Peter , who was the head of the twelve Apostles of Jesus and, according to tradition, the first Bishop of Antioch and later the first Bishop of Rome , rendering him the first Pope . Although the New Testament does not mention St. Peter's martyrdom in Rome, tradition, based on the writings of the Fathers of the Church , [ clarification needed ] holds that his tomb is below the baldachin and the altar of the Basilica in the "Confession". For this reason, many Popes have, from the early years of the Church, been buried near Pope St. Peter in the necropolis beneath the Basilica. Construction of the current basilica, over the old Constantinian basilica, began on 18 April 1506 and finished in 1615. At length, on 18 November 1626 Pope Urban VIII solemnly dedicated the Basilica.

[ 3 ] St. Peter's Basilica is neither the Pope's official seat nor first in rank among the Major Basilicas of Rome. This honour is held by the Pope's cathedral, the Archbasilica of St. John Lateran , the mother church of all churches in communion with the Catholic Church . However, St. Peter's is functionally the Pope's principal church, as most Papal liturgies and ceremonies take place there due to its size, proximity to the Papal residence, and location within the Vatican City proper. The " Chair of Saint Peter ", or cathedra , an ancient chair sometimes presumed to have been used by St. Peter himself, but which was a gift from Charles the Bald and used by many popes, symbolizes the continuing line of apostolic succession from St. Peter to the reigning Pope. It occupies an elevated position in the apse of the Basilica, supported symbolically by the Doctors of the Church and enlightened symbolically by the Holy Spirit .

[ 18 ] As one of the constituent structures of the historically and architecturally significant Vatican City, St. Peter's Basilica was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1984 under criteria (i), (ii), (iv), and (vi).

[ 19 ] With an exterior area of 21,095 square metres (227,060 sq ft), [ 20 ] an interior area of 15,160 square metres (163,200 sq ft), [ 21 ] [ 22 ] St. Peter's Basilica is the largest Christian church building in the world by the two latter metrics and the second largest by the first as of 2016 [update] . The top of its dome, at 448.1 feet (136.6 m), also places it as the second tallest building in Rome as of 2016 [update] .

[ 23 ] The dome's soaring height placed it among the tallest buildings of the Old World , and it continues to hold the title of tallest dome in the world . Though the largest dome in the world by diameter at the time of its completion, it no longer holds this distinction.

[ 24 ] History [ edit ] Saint Peter's burial site [ edit ] Main article: Saint Peter's tomb A modern conjectural reconstruction of the relative locations of the circus, and the medieval and current Basilicas of St. Peter [ 25 ] After the crucifixion of Jesus , it is recorded in the Biblical book of the Acts of the Apostles that one of his twelve disciples, Simon known as Saint Peter, a fisherman from Galilee , took a leadership position among Jesus' followers and was of great importance in the founding of the Christian Church . The name Peter is "Petrus" in Latin and "Petros" in Greek, deriving from petra which means "stone" or "rock" in Greek , and is the literal translation of the Aramaic "Kepa", the name given to Simon by Jesus. ( John 1:42 , and see Matthew 16:18 ) Catholic tradition holds that Peter, after a ministry of thirty-four years, travelled to Rome and met his martyrdom there along with Paul on 13 October 64 AD during the reign of the Roman Emperor Nero . His execution was one of the many martyrdoms of Christians following the Great Fire of Rome . According to Jerome , Peter was crucified head downwards, by his own request because he considered himself unworthy to die in the same manner as Jesus.

[ 26 ] The crucifixion took place near an ancient Egyptian obelisk in the Circus of Nero .

[ 27 ] The obelisk now stands in St. Peter's Square and is revered as a "witness" to Peter's death. It is one of several ancient Obelisks of Rome .

[ 28 ] According to tradition, Peter's remains were buried just outside the Circus, on the Mons Vaticanus across the Via Cornelia from the Circus, less than 150 metres (490 ft) from his place of death. The Via Cornelia was a road which ran east-to-west along the north wall of the Circus on land now covered by the southern portions of the Basilica and St. Peter's Square. A shrine was built on this site some years later. Almost three hundred years later, Old St. Peter's Basilica was constructed over this site.

[ 27 ] The area now covered by the Vatican City had been a cemetery for some years before the Circus of Nero was built. It was a burial ground for the numerous executions in the Circus and contained many Christian burials as for many years after the burial of Saint Peter , many Christians chose to be buried near him.

[ citation needed ] In 1939, in the reign of Pope Pius XII, 10 years of archaeological research began under the crypt of the basilica in an area inaccessible since the ninth century. The excavations revealed the remains of shrines of different periods at different levels, from Clement VIII (1594)  to Callixtus II (1123) and Gregory I (590–604), built over an aedicula containing fragments of bones that were folded in a tissue with gold decorations, tinted with the precious murex purple. Although it could not be determined with certainty that the bones were those of Peter, the rare vestments suggested a burial of great importance. On 23 December 1950, in his pre-Christmas radio broadcast to the world, Pope Pius XII announced the discovery of Saint Peter's tomb .

[ 29 ] Old St. Peter's Basilica [ edit ] Maarten van Heemskerck – Santa Maria della Febbre, Vatican Obelisk, Saint Peter's Basilica in construction (1532) A conjectural view of the Old St. Peter's Basilica by H. W. Brewer, 1891 Main article: Old St. Peter's Basilica Old St. Peter's Basilica was the fourth-century church begun by the Emperor Constantine the Great between 319 and 333 AD.

[ 30 ] It was of typical basilical form, a wide nave and two aisles on each side and an apsidal end, with the addition of a transept or bema , giving the building the shape of a tau cross . It was over 103.6 metres (340 ft) long, and the entrance was preceded by a large colonnaded atrium . This church had been built over the small shrine believed to mark the burial place of St. Peter , though the tomb was "smashed" in 846 AD .

[ 31 ] It contained a very large number of burials and memorials, including those of most of the popes from St. Peter to the 15th century. Like all of the earliest churches in Rome, both this church and its successor had the entrance to the east and the apse at the west end of the building.

[ 32 ] Since the construction of the current basilica, the name Old St. Peter's Basilica has been used for its predecessor to distinguish the two buildings.

[ 33 ] Plan to rebuild [ edit ] By the end of the 15th century, having been neglected during the period of the Avignon Papacy , the old basilica had fallen into disrepair. It appears that the first pope to consider rebuilding or at least making radical changes was Pope Nicholas V (1447–1455). He commissioned work on the old building from Leone Battista Alberti and Bernardo Rossellino and also had Rossellino design a plan for an entirely new basilica, or an extreme modification of the old. His reign was frustrated by political problems and when he died, little had been achieved.

[ 27 ] He had, however, ordered the demolition of the Colosseum and by the time of his death, 2,522 cartloads of stone had been transported for use in the new building.

[ 27 ] [ note 3 ] The foundations were completed for a new transept and choir to form a domed Latin cross with the preserved nave and side aisles of the old basilica. Some walls for the choir had also been built.

[ 35 ] Pope Julius II planned far more for St Peter's than Nicholas V's program of repair or modification. Julius was at that time planning his own tomb, which was to be designed and adorned with sculpture by Michelangelo and placed within St Peter's.

[ note 4 ] In 1505 Julius made a decision to demolish the ancient basilica and replace it with a monumental structure to house his enormous tomb and "aggrandize himself in the popular imagination".

[ 9 ] A competition was held, and a number of the designs have survived at the Uffizi Gallery . A succession of popes and architects followed in the next 120 years, their combined efforts resulting in the present building. The scheme begun by Julius II continued through the reigns of Leo X (1513–1521), Adrian VI (1522–1523), Clement VII (1523–1534), Paul III (1534–1549), Julius III (1550–1555), Marcellus II (1555), Paul IV (1555–1559), Pius IV (1559–1565), Pius V (saint) (1565–1572), Gregory XIII (1572–1585), Sixtus V (1585–1590), Urban VII (1590), Gregory XIV (1590–1591), Innocent IX (1591), Clement VIII (1592–1605), Leo XI (1605), Paul V (1605–1621), Gregory XV (1621–1623), Urban VIII (1623–1644) and Innocent X (1644–1655).

Financing with indulgences [ edit ] One method employed to finance the building of St. Peter's Basilica was the granting of indulgences in return for contributions. A major promoter of this method of fund-raising was Albrecht, Archbishop of Mainz and Magdeburg , who had to clear debts owed to the Roman Curia by contributing to the rebuilding program. To facilitate this, he appointed the German Dominican preacher Johann Tetzel , whose salesmanship provoked a scandal and led to the Protestant Reformation .

[ 36 ] Digital copies [ edit ] In the 2020s, the Vatican began seeking to use digital recreations of the Basilica in order to enhance education and allow people to experience it without needing to visit in person. In 2024, the Vatican partnered with Microsoft to create an interactive 3D model of the Basilica. The model was generated with artificial intelligence using over 400,000 high-resolution photographs taken by drones. Microsoft president Brad Smith described the project as "one of the most technologically advanced and sophisticated projects of its kind that has ever been pursued".

[ 37 ] The Vatican further collaborated with Microsoft in 2025 through the creation of another interactive version of the Basilica, this time recreated in the video game Minecraft .

[ 38 ] The Minecraft map, titled "Peter is Here", was developed as part of the 2025 Jubilee with the goal of engaging young audiences.

[ 39 ] Architecture [ edit ] Successive plans [ edit ] Pope Julius's scheme for the grandest building in Christendom [ 9 ] was the subject of a competition for which a number of entries remain intact in the Uffizi Gallery , Florence. It was the design of Donato Bramante that was selected, and for which the foundation stone was laid in 1506. This plan was in the form of an enormous Greek cross with a dome inspired by that of the huge circular Roman temple, the Pantheon .

[ 9 ] The main difference between Bramante's design and that of the Pantheon is that where the dome of the Pantheon is supported by a continuous wall, that of the new basilica was to be supported only on four large piers. This feature was maintained in the ultimate design. Bramante's dome was to be surmounted by a lantern with its own small dome but otherwise very similar in form to the Early Renaissance lantern of Florence Cathedral designed for Brunelleschi 's dome by Michelozzo .

[ 40 ] Bramante had envisioned that the central dome would be surrounded by four lower domes at the diagonal axes. The equal chancel , nave and transept arms were each to be of two bays ending in an apse. At each corner of the building was to stand a tower, so that the overall plan was square, with the apses projecting at the cardinal points. Each apse had two large radial buttresses, which squared off its semi-circular shape.

[ 41 ] When Pope Julius died in 1513, Bramante was replaced with Giuliano da Sangallo and Fra Giocondo , who both died in 1515 (Bramante himself having died the previous year).

Raphael was confirmed as the architect of St. Peter's on 1 August 1514.

[ 42 ] The main change in his plan is the nave of five bays, with a row of complex apsidal chapels off the aisles on either side. Raphael's plan for the chancel and transepts made the squareness of the exterior walls more definite by reducing the size of the towers, and the semi-circular apses more clearly defined by encircling each with an ambulatory.

[ 43 ] In 1520 Raphael also died, aged 37, and his successor Baldassare Peruzzi maintained changes that Raphael had proposed to the internal arrangement of the three main apses, but otherwise reverted to the Greek cross plan and other features of Bramante.

[ 44 ] This plan did not go ahead because of various difficulties of both Church and state. In 1527 Rome was sacked and plundered by Emperor Charles V . Peruzzi died in 1536 without his plan being realized.

[ 9 ] At this point Antonio da Sangallo the Younger submitted a plan which combines features of Peruzzi, Raphael and Bramante in its design and extends the building into a short nave with a wide façade and portico of dynamic projection. His proposal for the dome was much more elaborate in both structure and decoration than that of Bramante and included ribs on the exterior. Like Bramante, Sangallo proposed that the dome be surmounted by a lantern which he redesigned to a larger and much more elaborate form.

[ 45 ] Sangallo's main practical contribution was to strengthen Bramante's piers, which had begun to crack.

[ 27 ] On 1 January 1547, in the reign of Pope Paul III, Michelangelo, then in his seventies, succeeded Sangallo the Younger as "Capomaestro", the superintendent of the building program at St Peter's.

[ 46 ] He is to be regarded as the principal designer of a large part of the building as it stands today, and as having brought the construction to a point where it could be carried through. He did not take on the job with pleasure; it was forced upon him by Pope Paul, frustrated at the death of his chosen candidate, Giulio Romano and the refusal of Jacopo Sansovino to leave Venice . Michelangelo wrote, "I undertake this only for the love of God and in honour of the Apostle". He insisted that he should be given a free hand to achieve the ultimate aim by whatever means he saw fit.

[ 27 ] Bramante's plan Raphael's plan Michelangelo's plan Michelangelo's contribution [ edit ] Michelangelo took over a building site at which four piers, enormous beyond any constructed since ancient Roman times, were rising behind the remaining nave of the old basilica. He also inherited the numerous schemes designed and redesigned by some of the greatest architectural and engineering minds of the 16th century. There were certain common elements in these schemes. They all called for a dome to equal that engineered by Brunelleschi a century earlier and which has since dominated the skyline of Renaissance Florence, and they all called for a strongly symmetrical plan of either Greek Cross form, like the iconic St. Mark's Basilica in Venice, or of a Latin Cross with the transepts of identical form to the chancel, as at Florence Cathedral .

Even though the work had progressed only a little in 40 years, Michelangelo did not simply dismiss the ideas of the previous architects. He drew on them in developing a grand vision. Above all, Michelangelo recognized the essential quality of Bramante's original design. He reverted to the Greek Cross and, as Helen Gardner expresses it: "Without destroying the centralising features of Bramante's plan, Michelangelo, with a few strokes of the pen converted its snowflake complexity into massive, cohesive unity." [ 47 ] As it stands today, St. Peter's has been extended with a nave by Carlo Maderno . It is the chancel end (the ecclesiastical "Eastern end") with its huge centrally placed dome that is the work of Michelangelo. Because of its location within the Vatican State and because the projection of the nave screens the dome from sight when the building is approached from the square in front of it, the work of Michelangelo is best appreciated from a distance. What becomes apparent is that the architect has greatly reduced the clearly defined geometric forms of Bramante's plan of a square with square projections, and also of Raphael's plan of a square with semi-circular projections.

[ 48 ] Michelangelo has blurred the definition of the geometry by making the external masonry of massive proportions and filling in every corner with a small vestry or stairwell. The effect created is of a continuous wall surface that is folded or fractured at different angles, but lacks the right angles which usually define change of direction at the corners of a building. This exterior is surrounded by a giant order of Corinthian pilasters all set at slightly different angles to each other, in keeping with the ever-changing angles of the wall's surface. Above them, the huge cornice ripples in a continuous band, giving the appearance of keeping the whole building in a state of compression.

[ 49 ] Dome: successive and final designs [ edit ] The dome of St. Peter's rises to a total height of 136.57 metres (448.1 ft) from the floor of the basilica to the top of the external cross. It is the tallest dome in the world .

[ note 5 ] Its internal diameter is 41.47 metres (136.1 ft), slightly smaller than two of the three other huge domes that preceded it, those of the Pantheon of Ancient Rome , 43.3 metres (142 ft), and Florence Cathedral of the Early Renaissance , 44 metres (144 ft). It has a greater diameter by approximately 30 feet (9.1 m) than Constantinople's Hagia Sophia church, completed in 537. It was to the domes of the Pantheon and Florence duomo that the architects of St. Peter's looked for solutions as to how to go about building what was conceived, from the outset, as the greatest dome of Christendom .

Bramante and Sangallo, 1506 and 1513 [ edit ] 1506 medal by Cristoforo Foppa depicting Bramante's design, including two of the four flanking smaller domes [ 50 ] [ failed verification ] The dome of the Pantheon stands on a circular wall with no entrances or windows except a single door. The whole building is as high as it is wide. Its dome is constructed in a single shell of concrete , made light by the inclusion of a large amount of the volcanic stones tuff and pumice. The inner surface of the dome is deeply coffered which has the effect of creating both vertical and horizontal ribs while lightening the overall load. At the summit is an ocular opening 8 metres (26 ft) across which provides light to the interior.

[ 9 ] Bramante's plan for the dome of St. Peter's (1506) follows that of the Pantheon very closely, and like that of the Pantheon, was designed to be constructed in Tufa Concrete for which he had rediscovered a formula. With the exception of the lantern that surmounts it, the profile is very similar, except that in this case, the supporting wall becomes a drum raised high above ground level on four massive piers. The solid wall, as used at the Pantheon, is lightened at St. Peter's by Bramante piercing it with windows and encircling it with a peristyle .

In the case of Florence Cathedral , the desired visual appearance of the pointed dome existed for many years before Brunelleschi made its construction feasible.

[ note 6 ] Its double-shell construction of bricks locked together in a herringbone pattern (re-introduced from Byzantine architecture), and the gentle upward slope of its eight stone ribs made it possible for the construction to take place without the massive wooden formwork necessary to construct hemispherical arches. While its appearance, with the exception of the details of the lantern, is entirely Gothic, its engineering was highly innovative, and the product of a mind that had studied the huge vaults and remaining dome of Ancient Rome.

[ 40 ] Sangallo's plan (1513), of which a large wooden model still exists, looks to both these predecessors. He realized the value of both the coffering at the Pantheon and the outer stone ribs at Florence Cathedral. He strengthened and extended the peristyle of Bramante into a series of arched and ordered openings around the base, with a second such arcade set back in a tier above the first. In his hands, the rather delicate form of the lantern, based closely on that in Florence, became a massive structure, surrounded by a projecting base, a peristyle and surmounted by a spire of conic form.

[ 45 ] According to James Lees-Milne the design was "too eclectic, too pernickety and too tasteless to have been a success".

[ 27 ] Bramante's dome Sangallo's design The engraving by Stefan du Pérac was published in 1569, five years after the death of Michelangelo.

Michelangelo and Giacomo della Porta, 1547 and 1585 [ edit ] St. Peter's Basilica from Castel Sant'Angelo showing the dome rising behind Maderno's façade The dome was brought to completion by Giacomo della Porta and Fontana.

Michelangelo redesigned the dome in 1547, taking into account all that had gone before. His dome, like that of Florence , is constructed of two shells of brick, the outer one having 16 stone ribs, twice the number at Florence but far fewer than in Sangallo's design. As with the designs of Bramante and Sangallo, the dome is raised from the piers on a drum. The encircling peristyle of Bramante and the arcade of Sangallo are reduced to 16 pairs of Corinthian columns, each of 15 metres (49 ft) high which stand proud of the building, connected by an arch. Visually they appear to buttress each of the ribs, but structurally they are probably quite redundant. The reason for this is that the dome is ovoid in shape, rising steeply as does the dome of Florence Cathedral, and therefore exerting less outward thrust than does a hemispherical dome, such as that of the Pantheon, which, although it is not buttressed, is countered by the downward thrust of heavy masonry which extends above the circling wall.

[ 9 ] [ 27 ] The ovoid profile of the dome has been the subject of much speculation and scholarship over the past century. Michelangelo died in 1564, leaving the drum of the dome complete, and Bramante's piers much bulkier than originally designed, each 18 metres (59 ft) across. Following his death, the work continued under his assistant Jacopo Barozzi da Vignola with Giorgio Vasari appointed by Pope Pius V as a watchdog to make sure that Michelangelo's plans were carried out exactly. Despite Vignola's knowledge of Michelangelo's intentions, little happened in this period. In 1585 the energetic Pope Sixtus V appointed Giacomo della Porta who was to be assisted by Domenico Fontana . The five-year reign of Sixtus was to see the building advance at a great rate.

[ 27 ] Michelangelo left a few drawings, including an early drawing of the dome, and some details. There were also detailed engravings published in 1569 by Stefan du Pérac who claimed that they were the master's final solution. Michelangelo, like Sangallo before him, also left a large wooden model. Giacomo della Porta subsequently altered this model in several ways. The major change restored an earlier design, in which the outer dome appears to rise above, rather than rest directly on the base.

[ 51 ] Most of the other changes were of a cosmetic nature, such as the adding of lion's masks over the swags on the drum in honour of Pope Sixtus and adding a circlet of finials around the spire at the top of the lantern, as proposed by Sangallo.

[ 27 ] A drawing by Michelangelo indicates that his early intentions were towards an ovoid dome, rather than a hemispherical one.

[ 47 ] In an engraving in Galasso Alghisi ' treatise (1563), the dome may be represented as ovoid, but the perspective is ambiguous.

[ 52 ] Stefan du Pérac's engraving (1569) shows a hemispherical dome, but this was perhaps an inaccuracy of the engraver. The profile of the wooden model is more ovoid than that of the engravings, but less so than the finished product. It has been suggested that Michelangelo on his death bed reverted to the more pointed shape. However, Lees-Milne cites Giacomo della Porta as taking full responsibility for the change and as indicating to Pope Sixtus that Michelangelo was lacking in the scientific understanding of which he himself was capable.

[ 27 ] Helen Gardner suggests that Michelangelo made the change to the hemispherical dome of lower profile in order to establish a balance between the dynamic vertical elements of the encircling giant order of pilasters and a more static and reposeful dome. Gardner also comments, "The sculpturing of architecture [by Michelangelo] ... here extends itself up from the ground through the attic stories and moves on into the drum and dome, the whole building being pulled together into a unity from base to summit." [ 47 ] It is this sense of the building being sculptured, unified and "pulled together" by the encircling band of the deep cornice that led Eneide Mignacca to conclude that the ovoid profile, seen now in the end product, was an essential part of Michelangelo's first (and last) concept. The sculptor/architect has, figuratively speaking, taken all the previous designs in hand and compressed their contours as if the building were a lump of clay. The dome must appear to thrust upwards because of the apparent pressure created by flattening the building's angles and restraining its projections.

[ 49 ] If this explanation is the correct one, then the profile of the dome is not merely a structural solution, as perceived by Giacomo della Porta; it is part of the integrated design solution that is about visual tension and compression. In one sense, Michelangelo's dome may appear to look backward to the Gothic profile of Florence Cathedral and ignore the Classicism of the Renaissance, but on the other hand, perhaps more than any other building of the 16th century, it prefigures the architecture of the Baroque .

[ 49 ] Completion [ edit ] Giacomo della Porta and Domenico Fontana brought the dome to completion in 1590, the last year of the reign of Sixtus V . His successor, Gregory XIV , saw Fontana complete the lantern and had an inscription to the honour of Sixtus V placed around its inner opening. The next pope, Clement VIII , had the cross raised into place, an event which took all day, and was accompanied by the ringing of the bells of all the city's churches. In the arms of the cross are set two lead caskets, one containing a fragment of the True Cross and a relic of St. Andrew and the other containing medallions of the Holy Lamb.

[ 27 ] In the mid-18th century, cracks appeared in the dome, so four iron chains were installed between the two shells to bind it, like the rings that keep a barrel from bursting. As many as ten chains have been installed at various times, the earliest possibly planned by Michelangelo himself as a precaution, as Brunelleschi did at Florence Cathedral.

[ citation needed ] Around the inside of the dome is written, in letters 1.4 metres (4.6 ft) high: TV ES PETRVS ET SVPER HANC PETRAM AEDIFICABO ECCLESIAM MEAM ET TIBI DABO CLAVES REGNI CAELORVM ("... you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church. ... and I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven ..." Vulgate , Matthew 16:18–19 .) Beneath the lantern is the inscription: S. PETRI GLORIAE SIXTVS PP. V. A. M. D. XC. PONTIF. V.

(To the glory of St Peter; Sixtus V, pope, in the year 1590, the fifth of his pontificate.) Discovery of Michelangelo draft [ edit ] On 7 December 2007, a fragment of a red chalk drawing of a section of the dome of the basilica, almost certainly by the hand of Michelangelo, was discovered in the Vatican archives.

[ 53 ] The drawing shows a small precisely drafted section of the plan of the entablature above two of the radial columns of the cupola drum. Michelangelo is known to have destroyed thousands of his drawings before his death.

[ 54 ] The rare survival of this example is probably due to its fragmentary state and the fact that detailed mathematical calculations had been made over the top of the drawing.

[ 53 ] Addition of nave and facade [ edit ] Michelangelo's plan extended with Maderno's nave and narthex On 18 February 1606, under Pope Paul V , the dismantling of the remaining parts of the Constantinian basilica began.

[ 27 ] The marble cross that had been set at the top of the pediment by Pope Sylvester and Constantine the Great was lowered to the ground. The timbers were salvaged for the roof of the Borghese Palace and two rare black marble columns, the largest of their kind, were carefully stored and later used in the narthex . The tombs of various popes were opened, treasures removed and plans made for re-interment in the new basilica.

[ 27 ] The Pope had appointed Carlo Maderno in 1602. He was a nephew of Domenico Fontana and had demonstrated himself as a dynamic architect. Maderno's idea was to ring Michelangelo's building with chapels, but the Pope was hesitant about deviating from the master's plan, even though he had been dead for forty years. The Fabbrica or building committee , a group drawn from various nationalities and generally despised by the Curia who viewed the basilica as belonging to Rome rather than Christendom, were in a quandary as to how the building should proceed. One of the matters that influenced their thinking was the Counter-Reformation which increasingly associated a Greek Cross plan with paganism and saw the Latin Cross as truly symbolic of Christianity.

[ 27 ] The central plan also did not have a "dominant orientation toward the east." [ 55 ] Another influence on the thinking of both the Fabbrica and the Curia was a certain guilt at the demolition of the ancient building. The ground on which it and its various associated chapels, vestries and sacristies had stood for so long was hallowed. The only solution was to build a nave that encompassed the whole space. In 1607 a committee of ten architects was called together, and a decision was made to extend Michelangelo's building into a nave. Maderno's plans for both the nave and the facade were accepted.

The building of the nave began on 7 May 1607, and proceeded at a great rate, with an army of 700 labourers being employed. The following year, the façade was begun, in December 1614 the final touches were added to the stucco decoration of the vault and early in 1615 the partition wall between the two sections was pulled down. All the rubble was carted away, and the nave was ready for use by Palm Sunday .

[ 56 ] Maderno's facade [ edit ] Maderno's façade, with the statues of Saint Peter (left) and Saint Paul (right) flanking the entrance stairs The facade designed by Maderno, is 114.69 metres (376.3 ft) wide and 45.55 metres (149.4 ft) high and is built of travertine stone, with a giant order of Corinthian columns and a central pediment rising in front of a tall attic surmounted by thirteen statues: Christ flanked by eleven of the Apostles (except Saint Peter, whose statue is left of the stairs) and John the Baptist .

[ note 7 ] The inscription below the cornice on the 1 metre (3.3 ft) tall frieze reads: IN HONOREM PRINCIPIS APOST PAVLVS V BVRGHESIVS ROMANVS PONT MAX AN MDCXII PONT VII (In honour of the Prince of Apostles , Paul V Borghese, a Roman, Supreme Pontiff, in the year 1612, the seventh of his pontificate) (Paul V (Camillo Borghese), born in Rome but of a Sienese family, liked to emphasize his "Romanness".) The facade is often cited as the least satisfactory part of the design of St. Peter's. The reasons for this, according to James Lees-Milne, are that it was not given enough consideration by the Pope and committee because of the desire to get the building completed quickly, coupled with the fact that Maderno was hesitant to deviate from the pattern set by Michelangelo at the other end of the building. Lees-Milne describes the problems of the façade as being too broad for its height, too cramped in its details and too heavy in the attic story. The breadth is caused by modifying the plan to have towers on either side. These towers were never executed above the line of the facade because it was discovered that the ground was not sufficiently stable to bear the weight. One effect of the facade and lengthened nave is to screen the view of the dome, so that the building, from the front, has no vertical feature, except from a distance.

[ 27 ] Bernini's Towers [ edit ] Pope Urban had long been a critic of Bernini's predecessor, Carlo Maderno. His disapproval of the architect's work stemmed largely from  Maderno's design for the longitudinal nave of St. Peters, which was widely condemned for obscuring Michelangelo's dome. When the Pope gave the commission to Bernini he therefore requested that a new design for the facade's bell towers to be submitted for consideration. Baldinucci describes Bernini's tower as consisting of "two orders of columns and pilasters, the first order being Corinthian " and "a third or attic story formed of pilasters and two columns on either side of the open archway in the center".

Pope Urban desired the towers to be completed by a very specific date: 29 June 1641, the feast day dedicated to Saints Peter and Paul . To this end an order was issued which stated that "all work should take a second seat to that of the campanile". The south tower was completed on time even in spite of these issues, but records show that in the wake of the unveiling the Pope was not content with what he saw and he ordered the top level of Bernini's tower removed so that the structure could be made even grander. The tower continued to grow, and as the construction began to settle, the first cracks started to appear followed by Urban's infamous public admonishment of his architect.

In 1642 all work on both towers came to a halt. Bernini had to pay the cost for the demolition; eventually the idea of completing the bell towers was abandoned.

The narthex Narthex and portals [ edit ] Behind the façade of St. Peter's stretches a long portico or " narthex " such as was occasionally found in Italian churches. This is the part of Maderno's design with which he was most satisfied. Its long barrel vault is decorated with ornate stucco and gilt, and successfully illuminated by small windows between pendentives, while the ornate marble floor is beamed with light reflected in from the piazza. At each end of the narthex is a theatrical space framed by ionic columns and within each is set a statue, an equestrian statue of Charlemagne (18th century) by Cornacchini in the south end and The Vision of Constantine (1670) by Bernini in the north end.

Five portals, of which three are framed by huge salvaged antique columns, lead into the basilica. The central portal has a bronze door created by Antonio Averulino c. 1440 for the old basilica [ 57 ] and somewhat enlarged to fit the new space.

Maderno's nave [ edit ] Maderno's nave, looking towards the chancel, as painted by Giovanni Paolo Pannini , 1731 To the single bay of Michelangelo's Greek Cross, Maderno added a further three bays. He made the dimensions slightly different from Michelangelo's bay, thus defining where the two architectural works meet. Maderno also tilted the axis of the nave slightly. This was not by accident, as suggested by his critics. An ancient Egyptian obelisk had been erected in the square outside, but had not been quite aligned with Michelangelo's building, so Maderno compensated, in order that it should, at least, align with the Basilica's façade.

[ 27 ] The nave has huge paired pilasters , in keeping with Michelangelo's work. The size of the interior is so "stupendously large" that it is hard to get a sense of scale within the building.

[ 27 ] [ note 8 ] The four cherubs who flutter against the first piers of the nave, carrying between them two holy water basins, appear of quite normal cherubic size, until approached. Then it becomes apparent that each one is over 2 metres high and that real children cannot reach the basins unless they scramble up the marble draperies. The aisles each have two smaller chapels and a larger rectangular chapel, the Chapel of the Sacrament and the Choir Chapel. These are lavishly decorated with marble, stucco, gilt , sculpture and mosaic . Remarkably, all of the large altarpieces, with the exception of the Holy Trinity by Pietro da Cortona in the Blessed Sacrament Chapel, have been reproduced in mosaic.  Two precious paintings from the old basilica, Our Lady of Perpetual Help and Our Lady of the Column are still being used as altarpieces.

Maderno's last work at St. Peter's was to design a crypt-like space or "Confessio" under the dome, where the cardinals and other privileged persons could descend in order to be nearer to the burial place of the apostle. Its marble steps are remnants of the old basilica and around its balustrade are 95 bronze lamps.

Influence on church architecture [ edit ] The design of St. Peter's Basilica, and in particular its dome, has greatly influenced church architecture in Western Christendom . Within Rome, the huge domed church of Sant'Andrea della Valle was designed by Giacomo della Porta before the completion of St Peter's Basilica, and subsequently worked on by Carlo Maderno. This was followed by the domes of San Carlo ai Catinari , Sant'Agnese in Agone , and many others.

Christopher Wren 's dome at St Paul's Cathedral ( London , England), the domes of Karlskirche ( Vienna , Austria), St. Nicholas Church ( Prague , Czech Republic), and the Pantheon ( Paris , France) all pay homage to St Peter's Basilica.

The 19th and early-20th-century architectural revivals brought about the building of a great number of churches that imitate elements of St Peter's to a greater or lesser degree, including St. Mary of the Angels in Chicago , St. Josaphat's Basilica in Milwaukee , Immaculate Heart of Mary in Pittsburgh and Mary, Queen of the World Cathedral in Montreal , which replicates many aspects of St Peter's on a smaller scale.

Postmodernism has seen free adaptations of St Peter's in the Basilica of Our Lady of Licheń , and the Basilica of Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro .

Bernini's furnishings [ edit ] The apse with St. Peter's Cathedral supported by four Doctors of the Church Pope Urban VIII and Bernini [ edit ] As a young boy Gian Lorenzo Bernini (1598–1680) visited St. Peter's with the painter Annibale Carracci and stated his wish to build "a mighty throne for the apostle". His wish came true. As a young man, in 1626, he received the patronage of Pope Urban VIII and worked on the embellishment of the Basilica for 50 years. Appointed as Maderno's successor in 1629, he was to become regarded as the greatest architect and sculptor of the Baroque period. Bernini's works at St. Peter's include the baldachin (baldaquin, from Italian: baldacchino ), the Chapel of the Sacrament, the plan for the niches and loggias in the piers of the dome and the chair of St. Peter .

[ 27 ] [ 47 ] Baldacchino and niches [ edit ] Main article: St. Peter's Baldachin Bernini's first work at St. Peter's was to design the baldacchino , a pavilion-like structure 28.74 metres (94.3 ft) tall and claimed to be the largest piece of bronze in the world, which stands beneath the dome and above the altar. Its design is based on the ciborium , of which there are many in the churches of Rome, serving to create a sort of holy space above and around the altar on which the Sacrament is laid for the Eucharist and emphasizing the significance of this ritual. These ciboria are generally of white marble, with inlaid coloured stone. Bernini's concept was for something very different. He took his inspiration in part from the baldachin or canopy carried above the head of the pope in processions, and in part from eight ancient columns that had formed part of a screen in the old basilica. Their twisted barley-sugar shape had a special significance as they were modelled on those of the Temple of Jerusalem and donated by the Emperor Constantine . Based on these columns, Bernini created four huge columns of bronze, twisted and decorated with laurel leaves and bees, which were the emblem of Pope Urban.

The altar with Bernini's baldacchino The baldacchino is surmounted not with an architectural pediment, like most baldacchini, but with curved Baroque brackets supporting a draped canopy, like the brocade canopies carried in processions above precious iconic images. In this case, the draped canopy is of bronze, and all the details, including the olive leaves, bees, and the portrait heads of Urban's niece in childbirth and her newborn son, are picked out in gold leaf. The baldacchino stands as a vast free-standing sculptural object, central to and framed by the largest space within the building. It is so large that the visual effect is to create a link between the enormous dome which appears to float above it, and the congregation at floor level of the basilica. It is penetrated visually from every direction, and is visually linked to the Cathedra Petri in the apse behind it and to the four piers containing large statues that are at each diagonal.

[ 27 ] [ 47 ] As part of the scheme for the central space of the church, Bernini had the huge piers, begun by Bramante and completed by Michelangelo, hollowed out into niches, and had staircases made inside them, leading to four balconies . There was much dismay from those who thought that the dome might fall, but it did not. On the balconies Bernini created showcases, framed by the eight ancient twisted columns, to display the four most precious relics of the basilica: the spear of Longinus , said to have pierced the side of Christ, the veil of Veronica , with the miraculous image of the face of Christ, a fragment of the True Cross discovered in Jerusalem by Constantine's mother, Helena , and a relic of Saint Andrew , the brother of Saint Peter. In each of the niches that surround the central space of the basilica was placed a huge statue of the saint associated with the relic above. Only Saint Longinus is the work of Bernini.

[ 27 ] (See below) Cathedra Petri and Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament [ edit ] Main article: Chair of Saint Peter Bernini's Cathedra Petri and Gloria Bernini then turned his attention to another precious relic, the so-called Cathedra Petri or "throne of St. Peter" a chair which was often claimed to have been used by the apostle, but appears to date from the 12th century. As the chair itself was fast deteriorating and was no longer serviceable, Pope Alexander VII determined to enshrine it in suitable splendor as the object upon which the line of successors to Peter was based. Bernini created a large bronze throne in which it was housed, raised high on four looping supports held effortlessly by massive bronze statues of four Doctors of the Church , Saints Ambrose and Augustine representing the Latin Church and Athanasius and John Chrysostom , the Greek Church. The four figures are dynamic with sweeping robes and expressions of adoration and ecstasy. Behind and above the cathedra, a blaze of light comes in through a window of yellow alabaster , illuminating, at its centre, the Dove of the Holy Spirit. The elderly painter, Andrea Sacchi , had urged Bernini to make the figures large, so that they would be seen well from the central portal of the nave. The chair was enshrined in its new home with great celebration of 16 January 1666.

[ 27 ] [ 47 ] Bernini's final work for St. Peter's, undertaken in 1676, was the decoration of the Chapel of the Sacrament.

[ 58 ] To hold the sacramental Host, he designed a miniature version in gilt bronze of Bramante's Tempietto , the little chapel that marks the place of the death of St. Peter. On either side is an angel, one gazing in rapt adoration and the other looking towards the viewer in welcome. Bernini died in 1680 in his 82nd year.

[ 27 ] St. Peter's Piazza [ edit ] Main article: St. Peter's Square St. Peter's Basilica and the piazza at night To the east of the basilica is the Piazza di San Pietro , ( St. Peter's Square ). The present arrangement, constructed between 1656 and 1667, is the Baroque inspiration of Bernini who inherited a location already occupied by an Egyptian obelisk which was centrally placed, (with some contrivance) to Maderno's facade.

[ note 9 ] The obelisk, known as "The Witness", at 25.31 metres (83.0 ft) and a total height, including base and the cross on top, of 40 metres (130 ft), is the second largest standing obelisk, and the only one to remain standing since its removal from Egypt and re-erection at the Circus of Nero in 37 AD, where it is thought to have stood witness to the crucifixion of Saint Peter.

[ 59 ] Its removal to its present location by order of Pope Sixtus V and engineered by Domenico Fontana on 28 September 1586, was an operation fraught with difficulties and nearly ended in disaster when the ropes holding the obelisk began to smoke from the friction. Fortunately this problem was noticed by Benedetto Bresca, a sailor of Sanremo , and for his swift intervention, his town was granted the privilege of providing the palms that are used at the basilica each Palm Sunday .

[ 27 ] One of the two fountains which form the axis of the piazza The other object in the old square with which Bernini had to contend was a large fountain designed by Maderno in 1613 and set to one side of the obelisk, making a line parallel with the facade. Bernini's plan uses this horizontal axis as a major feature of his unique, spatially dynamic and highly symbolic design. The most obvious solutions were either a rectangular piazza of vast proportions so that the obelisk stood centrally and the fountain (and a matching companion) could be included, or a trapezoid piazza which fanned out from the facade of the basilica like that in front of the Palazzo Pubblico in Siena . The problems of the square plan are that the necessary width to include the fountain would entail the demolition of numerous buildings, including some of the Vatican, and would minimize the effect of the facade. The trapezoid plan, on the other hand, would maximize the apparent width of the facade, which was already perceived as a fault of the design.

[ 47 ] Evening aerial view of the piazza and facade Bernini's ingenious solution was to create a piazza in two sections. That part which is nearest the basilica is trapezoid, but rather than fanning out from the facade, it narrows. This gives the effect of countering the visual perspective. It means that from the second part of the piazza, the building looks nearer than it is, the breadth of the facade is minimized and its height appears greater in proportion to its width. The second section of the piazza is a huge elliptical circus which gently slopes downwards to the obelisk at its centre. The two distinct areas are framed by a colonnade formed by doubled pairs of columns supporting an entablature of the simple Tuscan Order .

The part of the colonnade that is around the ellipse does not entirely encircle it, but reaches out in two arcs, symbolic of the arms of "the Catholic Church reaching out to welcome its communicants".

[ 47 ] The obelisk and Maderno's fountain mark the widest axis of the ellipse. Bernini balanced the scheme with another fountain in 1675. The approach to the square used to be through a jumble of old buildings, which added an element of surprise to the vista that opened up upon passing through the colonnade. Nowadays a long wide street, the Via della Conciliazione , built by Mussolini after the conclusion of the Lateran Treaties , leads from the River Tiber to the piazza and gives distant views of St. Peter's as the visitor approaches, with the basilica acting as a terminating vista .

[ 27 ] Bernini's transformation of the site is entirely Baroque in concept. Where Bramante and Michelangelo conceived a building that stood in "self-sufficient isolation", Bernini made the whole complex "expansively relate to its environment".

[ 47 ] Banister Fletcher says "No other city has afforded such a wide-swept approach to its cathedral church, no other architect could have conceived a design of greater nobility ... (it is) the greatest of all atriums before the greatest of all churches of Christendom." [ 9 ] View of Rome from the Dome of St. Peter's Basilica Clocks [ edit ] The "Italian clock" above the northern corner of St. Peter’s facade [ 60 ] The top of the facade of St. Peter's Basilica has two clocks and several sculptures. The clocks were created to replace Bernini's bell towers which had to be torn down due to insufficient support. The left hand clock shows Rome time, the right hand one shows European mean time. The statues are Christ the Redeemer, St. John the Baptist and 11 Apostles. From the left: St. Thadeus, St. Matthew, St. Philip, St. Thomas, St. James the Greater, St. John the Baptist, The Redeemer, St. Andrew, St. John the Evangelist, St. James the Lesser, St. Bartholomew, St. Simeon, and St. Matthias. Above the Roman clock is the coat of arms for the city-state of Vatican City since 1931 held by two angels.

[ citation needed ] Bells [ edit ] The Basilica has 6 bells, placed in the room under the Roman clock, only 3 of them are visible from ground level while the rest are hidden behind the bourdon . They range from the smallest which is 235 kg to the massive bourdon that approximately weighs 9 tonnes.

[ 61 ] From 1931, the bells are operated electrically, thus permitting even the largest bell to be tolled from a distance. The oldest bell Rota dates from 1353, and the bourdon called Campanone is rung at Christmas and Easter, on the Solemnity of Sts. Peter and Paul, and every time the Pope imparts the " Urbi et Orbi " blessing to the city and to the world. Campanone also announces the death of the pope and an election of a new pope.

[ 62 ] Bell# Name Mass Date cast 1 Campanella 235 kg 1825 2 Ave Maria 250 kg 1932 3 Predica 830 kg 1909 4 Rota 1815 kg 1353 5 Campanoncino (Mezzana, Benedittina) 3640 kg 1725 6 Campanone 8950 kg 1785 Treasures [ edit ] Tombs and relics [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of extant papal tombs .

Air vents for the crypt in St. Peter's Basilica There are over 100 tombs within St. Peter's Basilica (extant to various extents), many located beneath the Basilica. These include 91 popes, Saint Ignatius of Antioch , Holy Roman Emperor Otto II , and the composer Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina . Exiled Catholic British royalty James Francis Edward Stuart and his two sons, Charles Edward Stuart and Henry Benedict Stuart , Cardinal Bishop of Frascati, are buried here, having been granted asylum by Pope Clement XI . Also buried here are Maria Clementina Sobieska , wife of James Francis Edward Stuart , Queen Christina of Sweden , who abdicated her throne in order to convert to Catholicism , and Countess Matilda of Tuscany , supporter of the Papacy during the Investiture Controversy . The most recent interment was Pope Benedict XVI , on 5 January 2023. Beneath, near the crypt , is the recently discovered vaulted fourth-century " Tomb of the Julii ". (See below for some descriptions of tombs).

Artworks [ edit ] Towers and narthex [ edit ] In the towers to either side of the facade are two clocks. The clock on the left has been operated electrically since 1931. Its oldest bell dates from 1288.

One of the most important treasures of the basilica is a mosaic set above the central external door. Called the "Navicella", it is based on a design by Giotto (early 14th century) and represents a ship symbolizing the Christian Church.

[ 11 ] The mosaic is mostly a 17th-century copy of Giotto's original.

At each end of the narthex is an equestrian figure, to the north Constantine the Great by Bernini (1670) and to the south Charlemagne by Cornacchini (18th century).

[ 11 ] Of the five portals from the narthex to the interior, three contain notable doors. The central portal has the Renaissance bronze door by Antonio Averulino (called Filarete) (1455), enlarged to fit the new space. The southern door, the Door of the Dead , was designed by 20th-century sculptor Giacomo Manzù and includes a portrait of Pope John XXIII kneeling before the crucified figure of Saint Peter.

The northernmost door is the "Holy Door" which, by tradition, is walled-up with bricks, and opened only for holy years such as the Jubilee year by the Pope. The present door is bronze and was designed by Vico Consorti in 1950 and cast in Florence by the Ferdinando Marinelli Artistic Foundry . Above it are inscriptions commemorating the opening of the door: PAVLVS V PONT MAX ANNO XIII and GREGORIVS XIII PONT MAX.

Recently installed commemorative plaques read above the door as follows: PAVLVS VI PONT MAX HVIVS PATRIARCALIS VATICANAE BASILICAE PORTAM SANCTAM APERVIT ET CLAVSIT ANNO IVBILAEI MCMLXXV (Paul VI, Pontifex Maximus, opened and closed the holy door of this patriarchal Vatican basilica in the jubilee year of 1975.) IOANNES PAVLVS II P.M. PORTAM SANCTAM ANNO IVBILAEI MCMLXXVI A PAVLO PP VI RESERVATAM ET CLAVSAM APERVIT ET CLAVSIT ANNO IVB HVMANE REDEMP MCMLXXXIII–MCMLXXXIV (John Paul II, Pontifex Maximus, opened and closed again the holy door closed and set apart by Pope Paul VI in 1976 in the jubilee year of human redemption 1983–1984.) IOANNES PAVLVS II P.M. ITERVM PORTAM SANCTAM APERVIT ET CLAVSIT ANNO MAGNI IVBILAEI AB INCARNATIONE DOMINI MM–MMI (John Paul II, Pontifex Maximus, again opened and closed the holy door in the year of the great jubilee, from the incarnation of the Lord 2000–2001.) FRANCISCVS PP. PORTAM SANCTAM ANNO MAGNI IVB MM–MMI A IOANNE PAVLO PP. II RESERVATAM ET CLAVSAM APERVIT ET CLAVSIT ANNO IVB MISERICORDIAE MMXV–MMXVI (Pope Francis opened and closed again the holy door, closed and set apart by Pope John Paul II in the year of the great jubilee 2000–2001, in the jubilee year of Mercy 2015–2016.) Older commemorative plaques are removed to make way for the new plaque when the holy door is opened and sealed.

Nave [ edit ] On the first piers of the nave are two Holy Water basins held by pairs of cherubs each 2 metres high, commissioned by Pope Benedict XIII from designer Agostino Cornacchini and sculptor Francesco Moderati, (1720s).

Along the floor of the nave are markers showing the comparative lengths of other churches, starting from the entrance.

On the decorative pilasters of the piers of the nave are medallions with relief depicting 56 of the first popes.

In niches between the pilasters of the nave are statues depicting 39 founders of religious orders.

Set against the north east pier of the dome is a statue of Saint Peter Enthroned , sometimes attributed to late 13th-century sculptor Arnolfo di Cambio , with some scholars dating it to the fifth century. One foot of the statue is largely worn away by pilgrims kissing it for centuries.

The sunken Confessio leading to the Vatican Grottoes (see above) contained a large kneeling statue by Canova of Pope Pius VI , who was captured and mistreated by Napoleon Bonaparte's army.  This has now been moved to the back (eastern) end of the grottoes.

In the Confessio is the Niche of the Pallium ("Niche of Stoles") which contains a bronze urn, donated by Pope Benedict XIV , to contain white stoles embroidered with black crosses and woven with the wool of lambs blessed on the feastday of St. Agnes.

The High Altar is surmounted by Bernini's baldachin . (See above) Set in niches within the four piers supporting the dome are the larger-than-life statues associated with the basilica's primary holy relics: Saint Helena holding the True Cross and the Holy Nails , by Andrea Bolgi ; Saint Longinus holding the spear that pierced the side of Jesus , by Bernini (1639); Saint Andrew with the St. Andrew's Cross , by Francois Duquesnoy and Saint Veronica holding her veil with the image of Jesus' face , by Francesco Mochi .

Saint Helena by Andrea Bolgi Saint Longinus by Bernini Saint Andrew by Francois Duquesnoy Saint Veronica by Francesco Mochi North aisle [ edit ] In the first chapel of the north aisle is Michelangelo's Pietà .

[ note 10 ] On the first pier in the right aisle is the monument of Queen Christina of Sweden , who abdicated in 1654 in order to convert to Catholicism.

The second chapel, dedicated to Saint Sebastian , contains the statues of popes Pius XI and Pius XII . The space below the altar used to be the resting place of Pope Innocent XI but his remains were moved to the Altar of the Transfiguration on 8 April 2011. This was done to make way for the body of Pope John Paul II . His remains were placed beneath the altar on 2 May 2011.

The large chapel on the right aisle is the Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament which contains the tabernacle by Bernini (1664) resembling Bramante's Tempietto at San Pietro in Montorio supported by two kneeling angels and with behind it a painting of the Holy Trinity by Pietro da Cortona .

Near the altar of Our Lady of Succour are the monuments of popes Gregory XIII by Camillo Rusconi (1723) and Gregory XIV .

At the end of the aisle is an altar containing the relics of Saint Petronilla and with an altarpiece The Burial of St Petronilla by Guercino (Giovanni Francesco Barbieri), 1623.

South aisle [ edit ] The first chapel in the south aisle is the baptistry, commissioned by Pope Innocent XII and designed by Carlo Fontana , (great nephew of Domenico Fontana). The font was carved from the lid of the purple porphyry sarcophagus which had once held the remains of the Emperor Hadrian , and is surmounted with a gilt-bronze figure of the " Lamb of God ". Fontana's reworked porphyry sarcophagus lid font replaced an earlier font, which was re-purposed from the sarcophagus of Probus , the fourth-century Prefect of Rome , and which was used for baptisms from the 15th century until the late 17th century, when Fontana's work was completed.

Against the first pier of the aisle is the Monument to the Royal Stuarts : James Stuart , known as the "Old Pretender" and his sons, Charles Edward , known as "Bonnie Prince Charlie", and Henry , a cardinal. The tomb is a Neo-Classical design by Canova unveiled in 1819. Opposite it is the memorial of James Francis Edward Stuart's wife, Maria Clementina Sobieska .

The second chapel is that of the Presentation of the Virgin and contains the memorials of Pope Benedict XV and Pope John XXIII .

Against the piers are the tombs of Pope Pius X and Pope Innocent VIII .

The large chapel off the south aisle is the Choir Chapel which contains the altar of the Immaculate Conception .

At the entrance to the Sacristy is the tomb of Pope Pius VIII The south transept contains the altars of Saint Thomas , Saint Joseph and the Crucifixion of Saint Peter .

The tomb of Fabio Chigi, Pope Alexander VII , towards the end of the aisle, is the work of Bernini and called by Lees-Milne "one of the greatest tombs of the Baroque Age". It occupies an awkward position, being set in a niche above a doorway into a small vestry, but Bernini has utilized the doorway in a symbolic manner. Pope Alexander kneels upon his tomb, facing outward. The tomb is supported on a large draped shroud in patterned red marble, and is supported by four female figures, of whom only the two at the front are fully visible. They represent Charity and Truth . The foot of Truth rests upon a globe of the world, her toe being pierced symbolically by the thorn of Protestant England. Coming forth, seemingly, from the doorway as if it were the entrance to a tomb, is the skeletal winged figure of Death , its head hidden beneath the shroud, but its right hand carrying an hourglass stretched upward towards the kneeling figure of the pope.

[ 27 ] The Holy Door is opened only for great celebrations.

The tomb of Alexander VII, by Gian Lorenzo Bernini , 1671–1678 [ 63 ] The bronze statue of Saint Peter holding the keys of heaven, attributed to Arnolfo di Cambio The Pietà by Michelangelo , 1498–1499, is in the north aisle.

Archpriests since 1053 [ edit ] Cardinals at Mass in Saint Peter's Basilica two days before a papal conclave , 16 April 2005 List of archpriests of the Vatican Basilica: [ 64 ] [ 65 ] The inauguration of Pope Francis in 2013 Giovanni (1053) Deusdedit (1092) Azzo (1103–1104) Rustico de' Rustici ( c.

1128 – c.

1131 ) Griffone (1138–1139) Pietro ( c.

1140 ?–1144) Bernard (1145?–1176?) Giovanni da Sutri (1176/78–1180) Ugolino di Segni ( c.

1191 – c.

1200–1206 ) Guido Pierleoni (1206/7–1228) Stefano Conti (1229–1254) Riccardo Annibaldi (1254–1276) Giovanni Gaetano Orsini (1276–1277) Matteo Rosso Orsini (1278–1305) Napoleone Orsini Frangipani (1306–1342) Annibaldo di Ceccano (1342–1350) Guillaume de La Jugie (1362–1365) Rinaldo Orsini (1366–1374) Hugues de Saint-Martial (1374–1378) Philippe d'Alençon (1378–1397) Cristoforo Maroni (1397–1404) Angelo Acciaioli (1404–1408) Antonio Calvi (1408–1411) Pedro Fernandez de Frias (1412–1420) Antonio Correr (1420–1429) Lucido Conti (1429–1434) Giordano Orsini (1434–1438) Giuliano Cesarini (1439–1444) Pietro Barbo (1445–1464) Richard Olivier (1464–1470) Giovanni Battista Zeno (1470–1501) Juan López (1501) Ippolito d'Este (1501–1520) Marco Cornaro (1520) Franciotto Orsini (1520–1530) Francesco Cornaro (1530–1543) Alessandro Farnese (1543–1589) Giovanni Evangelista Palotta (1589–1620) Scipione Caffarelli-Borghese (1620–1633) Francesco Barberini (1633–1667) Carlo Barberini (1667–1704) Francesco Nerli (iuniore) (1704–1708) Annibale Albani (1712–1751) Henry Benedict Stuart (1751–1807) Romualdo Braschi-Onesti (1807–1817) Alessandro Mattei (1817–1820) Pietro Francesco Galleffi (6 May 1820 – 18 June 1837) Giacomo Giustiniani (1 July 1837 – 24 February 1843) Mario Mattei (11 March 1843 – 7 October 1870) Niccola Paracciani Clarelli (8 October 1870 – 7 July 1872) Edoardo Borromeo (10 July 1872 – 30 November 1881) Edward Henry Howard (12 December 1881 – 16 September 1892) Francesco Ricci Paracciani (6 October 1892 – 9 March 1894) Mariano Rampolla del Tindaro (21 March 1894 – 16 December 1913) Rafael Merry del Val (12 January 1914 – 26 February 1930) Eugenio Pacelli (25 March 1930 – 2 March 1939) Federico Tedeschini (14 March 1939 – 2 November 1959) Domenico Tardini (14 November 1959 – 30 July 1961) Paolo Marella (14 August 1961 – 8 February 1983) Aurelio Sabattani (8 February 1983 – 1 July 1991) [ 66 ] Virgilio Noè (1 July 1991 [ 66 ] – 24 April 2002) [ 67 ] Francesco Marchisano (24 April 2002 [ 67 ] – 31 October 2006) [ 68 ] Angelo Comastri (31 October 2006 [ 68 ] – 20 February 2021) [ 69 ] Comastri was named Coadjutor Archpriest on 5 February 2005 [ 70 ] Mauro Gambetti (20 February 2021 [ 69 ] – present) Specifications [ edit ] Crepuscular rays are seen in St. Peter's Basilica at certain times each day.

Cost of construction of the basilica: more than 46,800,052 ducats [ 71 ] Geographic orientation: chancel west, nave east Total length: 730 feet (220 m) Total width: 500 feet (150 m) Interior length including vestibule: 693.8 feet (211.5 m), [ 3 ] more than 1 ⁄ 8 mile.

Length of the transepts in interior: 451 feet (137 m) [ 3 ] Width of nave: 90.2 feet (27.5 m) [ 3 ] Width at the tribune: 78.7 feet (24.0 m) [ 3 ] Internal width at transepts: 451 feet (137 m) [ 3 ] Internal height of nave: 151.5 feet (46.2 m) high [ 3 ] Total area: 227,070 square feet (21,095 m 2 ), more than 5 acres (20,000 m 2 ).

Internal area: 163,182.2 square feet (3.75 acres; 15,160.12 m 2 ) [ 3 ] Height from pavement to top of cross: 448.1 feet (136.6 m) [ 2 ] Façade: 167 feet (51 m) high by 375 feet (114 m) wide Vestibule: 232.9 feet (71.0 m) wide, 44.2 feet (13.5 m) deep, and 91.8 feet (28.0 m) high [ 3 ] The internal columns and pilasters: 92 feet (28 m) tall The circumference of the central piers: 240 feet (73 m) Outer diameter of dome: 137.7 feet (42.0 m) [ 3 ] The drum of the dome: 630 feet (190 m) in circumference and 65.6 feet (20.0 m) high, rising to 240 feet (73 m) from the ground The lantern: 63 feet (19 m) high The ball and cross: 8 and 16 feet (2.4 and 4.9 m), respectively St. Peter's Square: 1,115 feet (340 m) long, 787.3 feet (240.0 m) wide [ 3 ] Each arm of the colonnade: 306 feet (93 m) long, and 64 feet (20 m) high The colonnades have 284 columns, 88 pilasters, and 140 statues [ 3 ] Obelisk: 83.6 feet (25.5 m). Total height with base and cross, 132 feet (40 m).

Weight of obelisk: 360.2 short tons (326,800 kg; 720,400 lb) [ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Silhouette of St. Peter's Basilica at sundown (view from Castel Sant'Angelo ).

Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Architecture of Rome History of early modern period domes List of tallest domes Index of Vatican City-related articles List of basilicas in Italy List of oldest church buildings List of Roman Catholic basilicas List of tallest buildings in Rome List of tallest structures built before the 20th century List of tourist attractions in Rome Notes [ edit ] ^ Claims made that the Basilica of Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro in Côte d'Ivoire is larger appear to be spurious, as the measurements include a rectorate, a villa and probably the forecourt. Its dome, based on that of St. Peter's Basilica, is lower but carries a taller cross, and thus claims to be the tallest domed church.

[ citation needed ] ^ Benedict XVI 's theological act of renouncing the title of " Patriarch of the West " had as a consequence that Catholic Roman Rite patriarchal basilicas are today officially known as Papal basilicas .

^ Quarrying of stone for the Colosseum had, in turn, been paid for with treasure looted at the Siege of Jerusalem and destruction of the temple by the emperor Vespasian 's general (and the future emperor) Titus in 70 AD.

[ 34 ] ^ Julius II's tomb was left incomplete and was eventually erected in the Church of St Peter ad Vincola.

^ This claim has recently been made for Yamoussoukro Basilica, the dome of which, modelled on St. Peter's, is lower but has a taller cross.

[ citation needed ] ^ The dome of Florence Cathedral is depicted in a fresco at Santa Maria Novella that pre-dates its building by about 100 years.

^ Another view of the façade statues . From left to right: ① Thaddeus, ② Matthew, ③ Philip, ④ Thomas, ⑤ James the Elder, ⑥ John the Baptist (technically a 'precursor' and not an apostle); ⑦ Christ (centre, the only one with a halo); ⑧ Andrew, ⑨ John the Apostle , ⑩ James the Younger, ⑪ Bartholomew, ⑫ Simon and ⑬ Matthias. ( "Unofficial architecture site" .

saintpetersbasilica.org . Retrieved 1 June 2011 .

) ^ The word "stupendous" is used by a number of writers trying to adequately describe the enormity of the interior. These include James Lees-Milne and Banister Fletcher.

^ The obelisk was originally erected at Heliopolis by an unknown pharaoh of the Fifth dynasty of Egypt ( c.

2494 BC – 2345 BC).

^ The statue was damaged in 1972 by Lazlo Toft, a Hungarian-Australian, who considered that the veneration shown to the statue was idolatrous. The damage was repaired and the statue subsequently placed behind glass.

References [ edit ] ^ "Take Amazing 360° Tour of St. Peter's in Vatican City" .

National Geographic . 19 July 2015. Archived from the original on 23 February 2021 . Retrieved 12 September 2024 .

^ a b "St. Peter's Basilica - Dome" (in Italian). Vatican City State.

Archived from the original on 19 July 2020 . Retrieved 12 July 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Baumgarten 1913 ^ a b Banister Fletcher , the renowned architectural historian calls it "the greatest creation of the Renaissance" and "... the greatest of all churches of Christendom" in Fletcher 1921 , p. 588.

^ James Lees-Milne describes St. Peter's Basilica as "a church with a unique position in the Christian world" in Lees-Milne 1967 , p. 12.

^ "St. Peter's Basilica (Basilica di San Pietro) in Rome, Italy" .

reidsitaly.com .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2015 . Retrieved 22 February 2015 .

^ Giuliani, Giovanni (1995).

"Altar of the Confession" .

Guide to Saint Peter's Basilica .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2023 . Retrieved 17 August 2021 .

^ "Papal Mass" .

Papal Audience . Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 28 February 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g h Fletcher 1921 ^ Noreen (19 November 2012).

"St. Peter's Basilica in Vatican Is Not The Official Church Of The Pope" .

Today I Found Out .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2019 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e Pio V. Pinto, pp. 48–59 ^ "St. Peter's Square – Statue of St. Paul" . saintpetersbasilica.org.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2022 . Retrieved 22 December 2010 .

^ https://stpetersbasilica.info/Statues/StAndrew/StAndrew.htm [ bare URL ] ^ Masson, Georgina (2001).

The Companion Guide to Rome . Companion Guides. pp.

615– 6.

^ Pope Gregory XVI, Breve Ad Beatissimi , in Italian, Holy See , published on 17 July 1835, accessed on 5 April 2025 ^ Ralph Waldo Emerson, 7 April 1833 ^ Williamson, Benedict (1929).

The Treaty of the Lateran . London, England: Burns, Oates, and Washbourne Limited. pp.

42– 66. Archived from the original on 23 May 2018 . Retrieved 25 March 2015 .

^ "St. Peter's Basilica – Interior of the Basilica" .

Internet Portal of the Vatican City State . p. 2. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009 . Retrieved 2 January 2009 .

^ "Vatican City" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2017 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 .

^ "The Nave" .

St. Peter's . Archived from the original on 16 July 2012 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 .

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Basilica of St. Peter" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Ellis, Edward Robb (21 December 2004).

The Epic of New York City: A Narrative History . Basic Books. p. 413.

ISBN 978-0-7867-1436-0 .

^ Fodor's Travel Guides (2014).

Fodor's Italy 2015 . Travel Distribution.

ISBN 978-0-8041-4291-5 .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2024 . Retrieved 28 October 2020 – via Google Books .

^ Rasch 1985 , p. 118 ^ Based on " Outline of St. Peter's, Old St. Peter's, and Circus of Nero ".

^ "Jerome, De Viris Illustribus (On Illustrious Men)" .

New Advent .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2019 . Retrieved 27 May 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z Lees-Milne 1967 ^ Frank J. Korn, Hidden Rome Paulist Press (2002) ^ Hijmans, Steven.

"University of Alberta Express News" .

In search of St. Peter's Tomb . Archived from the original on 25 January 2006 . Retrieved 25 December 2006 .

^ Cunningham, Lawrence (2010), Cultures and Values , US: Clark Baxter, p. 671 ^ Peter Partner (1972).

The Lands of St. Peter: The Papal State in the Middle Ages and the Early Renaissance, Volume 10 . University of California Press. p. 57.

ISBN 9780520021815 .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2024 . Retrieved 6 April 2019 .

excavation has revealed that the tomb of the apostle was wantonly smashed ^ Dietz, Helen (2005).

"The Eschatological Dimension of Church Architecture" .

Sacred Architecture Journal .

10 .

Archived from the original on 9 July 2017 . Retrieved 10 July 2008 .

^ Boorsch, Suzanne (Winter 1982–1983). "The Building of the Vatican: The Papacy and Architecture".

The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin .

40 (3): 4– 8.

^ Claridge, Amanda (1998).

Rome: An Oxford Archaeological Guide (First ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1998. pp. 276–282.

ISBN 0-19-288003-9 .

^ Betts 1993 , pp. 6–7 ^ " Johann Tetzel ", Encyclopædia Britannica , 2007: "Tetzel's experiences as a preacher of indulgences, especially between 1503 and 1510, led to his appointment as general commissioner by Albrecht, archbishop of Mainz, who, deeply in debt to pay for a large accumulation of benefices, had to contribute a considerable sum toward the rebuilding of St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. Albrecht obtained permission from Pope Leo X to conduct the sale of a special plenary indulgence (i.e., remission of the temporal punishment of sin), half of the proceeds of which Albrecht was to claim to pay the fees of his benefices. In effect, Tetzel became a salesman whose product was to cause a scandal in Germany that evolved into the greatest crisis (the Reformation) in the history of the Western church." ^ Mares, Courtney.

"Discover history of St. Peter's Basilica in new AI-enhanced 3D model" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 21 March 2025 .

^ Mares, Courtney.

"New Minecraft edition has students restore St. Peter's Basilica" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 21 March 2025 .

^ Farrant, Theo (19 March 2025).

"You can now tour the Vatican's St. Peter's Basilica in Minecraft" .

euronews . Retrieved 21 March 2025 .

^ a b Hartt 2006 ^ Bramante's plan, Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2005 , p. 458 ^ Golzio, Vincenzo (1969).

The Complete Work of Raphael . New York: Reynal and Co., William Morrow and Company . pp.

593– 594.

^ Raphael's plan, Fletcher 1921 , p. 586 ^ Peruzzi's plan, Fletcher 1921 , p. 586 ^ a b Sangallo's plan, Fletcher 1921 , p. 586 ^ Goldscheider 1996 ^ a b c d e f g h i Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2005 ^ Michelangelo's plan, Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2005 , p. 458 ^ a b c Eneide Mignacca, Michelangelo and the architecture of St. Peter's Basilica , lecture, Sydney University, (1982) ^ De la Croix, Horst; Tansey, Richard G.; Kirkpatrick, Diane (1991).

Gardner's Art Through the Ages (9th ed.). Thomson/Wadsworth. p.

641 .

ISBN 0-15-503769-2 .

^ De la Croix, Horst; Tansey, Richard G.; Kirkpatrick, Diane (1991).

Gardner's Art Through the Ages (9th ed.). Thomson/Wadsworth. p.

663 .

ISBN 0-15-503769-2 .

^ Alghisi, Galasso; Thebaldius, Dominicus (1563).

Galassi Alghisii Carpens., apud Alphonsum II. Ferrariae Ducem architecti, opus .

Archived from the original on 3 April 2023.

pp. 44, 147 of Google PDF download.

^ a b "Michelangelo 'last sketch' found" .

BBC News . 7 December 2007.

Archived from the original on 20 June 2017 . Retrieved 8 December 2007 .

^ "Rare Michelangelo sketch for sale" .

BBC . 14 October 2005.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2022 . Retrieved 9 February 2008 .

^ Pile 2005 , p. 131 ^ Lees-Milne 1967 , " Maderno's Nave " ^ Decker, Heinrich (1969) [1967].

The Renaissance in Italy: Architecture • Sculpture • Frescoes . New York: The Viking Press. p. 279.

^ Kilby, Peter.

"St Peter's Basilica (Basilica di San Pietro)" .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 27 July 2011 .

^ "St. Peter's, the Obelisk" .

saintpetersbasilica.org .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2017 . Retrieved 22 December 2010 .

^ "Italian clock" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 26 May 2025 .

^ "Altre informazioni" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 26 May 2025 .

^ "Bells" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 26 May 2025 .

^ "The Seminarian GuidesNorth American College, Rome" .

saintpetersbasilica.org .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2017 . Retrieved 29 July 2009 .

^ "Essay of a General List of Cardinals (494-2022)" .

The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church . Salvador Miranda.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2021 . Retrieved 22 February 2024 .

^ Maleczek, Werner (1984).

Papst und Kardinalskolleg von 1191 bis 1216 : die Kardinäle unter Coelestin III. und Innocenz III [ Pope and College of Cardinals from 1191 to 1216: the cardinals under Celestine III. and Innocence III ] (in German). Wien [Vienna]: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften [Publishing house of the Austrian Academy of Sciences].

ISBN 978-3-7001-0660-9 – via Internet Archive .

corrections of Miranda for the period before 1190 until 1254 ^ a b Acta Apostolicae Sedis (PDF) . Vol. LXXXIII. 1991. p. 631.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 June 2020 .

^ a b "Rinunce e Nomine, 24.04.2002" (Press release) (in Italian). Holy See Press Office. 24 April 2002.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2023 . Retrieved 30 June 2020 .

^ a b "Rinunce e Nomine, 31 October 2006" (Press release) (in Italian). Holy See Press Office. 31 October 2006.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2023 . Retrieved 30 June 2020 .

^ a b "Resignations and Appointments, 20.02.2021" (Press release). Holy See Press Office. 20 February 2021.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2021 .

^ "Rinunce e Nomine, 05.02.2005" (Press release) (in Italian). Holy See Press Office. 5 February 2005.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2023 . Retrieved 30 June 2020 .

^ "Since Nicholas V twenty-seven popes over a span of 178 years had imagined this day. They had already spent 46 800 052 ducats (...) And still the building was not done. The basic construction was complete, but the last genius (Bernini) to put his signature on the Basilica was just beginning his work." in Scotti 2007 , p. 241.

Bibliography [ edit ] Bannister, Turpin (1968). "The Constantinian Basilica of Saint Peter at Rome".

Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians .

27 (1): 3– 32.

doi : 10.2307/988425 .

JSTOR 988425 .

OCLC 19640446 .

(subscription required) Baumgarten, Paul Maria (1913).

"Basilica of St. Peter" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Betts, Richard J. (1993). "Structural Innovation and Structural Design in Renaissance Architecture".

Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians .

52 (1): 5– 25.

doi : 10.2307/990755 .

JSTOR 990755 .

Boorsch, Suzanne (1982). "The Building of the Vatican: The Papacy and Architecture".

The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin .

XL (3). New York: 4– 64.

doi : 10.2307/3258914 .

JSTOR 3258914 .

OCLC 39642638 .

Dzyubanskyy, Taras (2010).

The Development of the Cult of St. Peter in the Vatican: from the poor man's grave to the largest basilica in the world . Lviv: Artos.

ISBN 9789662154535 .

Finch, Margaret (1991). "The Cantharus and Pigna at Old Saint Peter's".

Gesta .

30 (1): 16– 26.

doi : 10.2307/767006 .

JSTOR 767006 .

S2CID 155861160 .

(subscription required) Fletcher, Banister F.

(1921) [1896].

History of Architecture on the Comparative Method for the student, craftsman, and amateur (6th, enlarged ed.). London: Batsford.

Archived from the original on 1 January 2024 . Retrieved 22 February 2024 .

Frommel, Christoph (1986).

"Papal Policy: The Planning of Rome during the Renaissance in The Evidence of Art: Images and Meaning in History" (PDF) .

Journal of Interdisciplinary History .

17 (1). Cambridge: 39– 65.

doi : 10.2307/204124 .

ISSN 0022-1953 .

JSTOR 204124 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 July 2020 . Retrieved 6 September 2020 .

(subscription required) Gardner, Helen ; Kleiner, Fred S.; Mamiya, Christin J. (2005).

Gardner's Art through the Ages: The Western Perspective . Vol. 2 (12th ed.). Belmont: Wadsworth. pp.

499– 500, 571– 575.

ISBN 978-0-495-00479-0 .

Goldscheider, Ludwig (1996).

Michelangelo (6th ed.). Oxford: Phaidon.

ISBN 978-0-7148-3296-8 .

Hartt, Frederick (2006).

History of Italian Renaissance Art (6th ed.). Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-188247-8 .

Hintzen-Bohlen, Brigitte; Sorges, Jürgen (2001).

Rome and the Vatican City . Köln: Könemann.

ISBN 978-3-8290-3109-7 .

Korn, Frank J. (2002).

Hidden Rome . New York: Paulist Press.

ISBN 978-0-8091-4109-8 .

Lanciani, Rodolfo (1892).

"Chapter III: Christian Churches" .

Pagan and Christian Rome . Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 20 February 2021 .

Lees-Milne, James (1967).

Saint Peter's – the story of Saint Peter's Basilica in Rome . London: Hamish Hamilton.

OCLC 1393052 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2015 . Retrieved 13 May 2015 .

McClendon, Charles (1989). "The History of the Site of St. Peter's Basilica, Rome".

Perspecta: The Yale Architectural Journal .

25 : 32– 65.

doi : 10.2307/1567138 .

ISSN 0079-0958 .

JSTOR 1567138 .

Pevsner, Nikolaus (1963).

An Outline of European Architecture (7th ed.). Baltimore: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-020109-3 .

OCLC 2208913 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Pile, John F. (2005).

A History of Interior Design (second ed.). London: Laurence King Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-856-69418-6 .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2024 . Retrieved 19 October 2019 .

Pinto, Pio (1975).

The Pilgrim's Guide to Rome . San Francisco: Harper & Row.

ISBN 978-0-06-013388-7 .

Scotti, R. A. (2007).

Basilica: the Splendor and the Scandal – Building of St. Peter's . New York: Plume.

ISBN 978-0-452-28860-7 .

Rasch, Jürgen (1985), "Die Kuppel in der römischen Architektur. Entwicklung, Formgebung, Konstruktion", Architectura , vol. 15, pp.

117– 139 "Inside the Vatican" .

National Geographic News .

National Geographic Society . 28 October 2010 [2004]. Archived from the original on 20 November 2001 . Retrieved 30 December 2008 .

"Saint Peter's – Truth Unveiled: Bernini's Bell Towers and the Allegory of Truth: Urban VIII's Bell Towers" . Archived from the original on 10 June 2014.

External links [ edit ] Official website (in Italian) "Virtual Reality Tour of the Basilica of Saint Peter" St Peter's Basilica.info ‒ unofficial website on the basilica, with images and text from different books.

360 Degree Photographs Inside Saint Peter's Basilica Google Maps : Vatican ‒ Satellite image of the Basilica "Beggar's Rome" - A self-directed virtual tour of St. Peter's Basilica and other Roman churches Confessio by Carlo Maderno Records Unknown Tallest building in Rome 1626–2012 136.6 metres (448 ft) Succeeded by Torre Eurosky Unknown Tallest dome 1626–present 136.6 metres (448 ft) Current holder v t e Michelangelo List of works ✻ attributed †lost Sculptures Florence, c.

1488–1492 Head of a Faun † Madonna of the Stairs Battle of the Centaurs Crucifix Bologna, 1494–1495 Additions to the Arca di San Domenico Saint Petronius Saint Proculus Angel Rome, 1496–1500 Sleeping Cupid † Bacchus Standing Cupid † Pietà Florence, 1501–1505 David Madonna of Bruges Additions to the Piccolomini Altarpiece Saints Peter , Paul , Pius and Gregory Pitti Tondo Taddei Tondo Saint Matthew Rothschild Bronzes Tomb of Julius II , 1505–1545 Moses Rebellious Slave Dying Slave Young Slave Bearded Slave Atlas Slave Awakening Slave The Genius of Victory Rachel Leah Florence, 1516–1534 Christ Carrying the Cross Medici Chapel Giuliano de' Medici, Duke of Nemours Night Day Dusk Dawn Medici Madonna Apollo Crouching Boy Rome, 1534–1564 Brutus Florentine Pietà Palestrina Pietà ✻ Rondanini Pietà Paintings Panel paintings The Torment of Saint Anthony Manchester Madonna The Entombment Doni Tondo Leda and the Swan † Salone dei Cinquecento Battle of Cascina † Sistine Chapel (ceiling gallery) Ceiling Separation of Light from Darkness The Creation of the Sun, Moon, and Plants The Creation of Adam Prophet Daniel Prophet Isaiah Prophet Jeremiah Prophet Joel Prophet Jonah The Last Judgment Pauline Chapel The Crucifixion of Saint Peter The Conversion of Saul Architecture Florence New Sacristy and Laurentian Library in the Basilica of San Lorenzo Rome Capitoline Museums Piazza del Campidoglio Palazzo Farnese St. Peter's Basilica Tor San Michele ✻ San Giovanni dei Fiorentini Porta Pia Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri Works on paper, milieu, etc.

Works on paper Study of a Kneeling Nude Girl for The Entombment Male Back with a Flag Studies for the Libyan Sibyl The Punishment of Tityus The Fall of Phaeton Pietà for Vittoria Colonna Epifania Milieu Cecchino dei Bracci Tommaso dei Cavalieri Vittoria Colonna Ascanio Condivi Gherardo Perini Sebastiano del Piombo Febo di Poggio Luigi del Riccio Related Art patronage of Julius II Casa Buonarroti Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects Michelangelo and the Medici Replicas of David Replicas of the Pietà Restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes The Titan: Story of Michelangelo (1950 documentary) The Agony and the Ecstasy (1961 novel, 1965 film) A Season of Giants (1990 TV film) Pietà vandalism Michelangelo (crater) Michelangelo quadrangle v t e Donato Bramante Church buildings Santa Maria presso San Satiro , Milan (c. 1476–1482) (with Giovanni Antonio Amadeo ) Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan (1492–1498) (cloister and apse) San Pietro in Montorio (The Tempietto), Rome (c. 1502) Santa Maria della Pace , Rome (1504) (cloister) St. Peter's Basilica , Rome (original design, 1503, ground breaking, 1506) Santa Maria della Consolazione, Todi (original project attributed, ground breaking 1508) San Giovanni in Oleo (original project attributed, c. 1509) Basilica of San Magno, Legnano (1504–1513) Secular buildings Cortile del Belvedere , Rome (1504–1505) Palazzo Caprini , Rome (original design c. 1501; demolished in the 17th century) Paintings Christ at the Column (c. 1490) ( attribution ) Frescoes Palazzo Visconti frescoes v t e Carlo Maderno Churches and religious buildings Trinità dei Monti (co-autorship, late 16th-century) Santa Maria sopra Minerva (façade and other works, 1600) Santa Susanna (reconstruction project, 1595–1603) Sant'Andrea della Valle (new project, 1608) San Giacomo in Augusta (original project by Francesco Capriani; completion in 1604–1609) St. Peter's Basilica (façade and nave, 1602–1615) San Giovanni dei Fiorentini (direction of the works, 1602–1620) Santa Maria della Vittoria, Rome (1605–1620) Sant'Ignazio, Rome (possible collaboration, 1620s) Chapels Cerasi Chapel , in Santa Maria del Popolo (c. 1601–1605) Secular buildings Palazzo Mattei (1598–1618) Villa Aldobrandini (co-autorship with Giacomo della Porta and Giovanni Fontana ; involvement, 1603–1623) Palazzo Barberini (co-autorship with Francesco Borromini and Gian Lorenzo Bernini , 1627–1633) Related Baroque architecture San Giacomo degli Incurabili Domenico Fontana (oncle) Giovanni Fontana (oncle) Stefano Maderno (possible brother) Francesco Borromini (collaborator) Gian Lorenzo Bernini (collaborator) v t e Francesco Borromini Churches and religious buildings Santa Lucia in Selci (restoration, 1638–1639; decoration of the Trinity Chapel, 1628–1639) San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane (ground break, 1638; dedication, 1646; works continued afterwards) Oratorio dei Filippini (1637–1651) Santa Maria dei Sette Dolori, Rome (1643–1655) Sant'Agnese in Agone (involvement, 1653–1657) San Giovanni in Oleo (remodelling, 1658) Sant'Ivo alla Sapienza (1642–1660) Sant'Andrea delle Fratte (project and direction, 1653–1667; continued by Mattia de Rossi ) Secular buildings Palazzo Barberini (co-autorship with Carlo Maderna and Gian Lorenzo Bernini , 1627–1633) Villa Falconieri (expansion commissioned, 1628) Palazzo Spada (remodelling, 1632) Palazzo Falconieri (remodelling, 1646, façade and loggia) Palazzo Giustiniani, Rome (worked in the 1650s; co-autorship with Giovanni Fontana and Domenico Fontana ) Palazzo di Propaganda Fide (1644–1667; co-autorship with Gian Lorenzo Bernini , involved in 1620s–1644) Other works Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran (renovation of the interior) St. Peter's Baldachin (possible collaboration with Gian Lorenzo Bernini ) St. Peter's Basilica (gates of the Blessed Sacrament Chapel and possibly parts of baldachin) San Giovanni dei Fiorentini (choir project) Santi Apostoli, Naples (Filomarino Family Chapel design, 1646) Santa Maria alla Porta, Milan (portal and tympanum) Related Baroque architecture Carlo Maderno (collaborator) Gian Lorenzo Bernini (collaborator) La Sapienza (2015 film) v t e High Renaissance Principal proponents Donato Bramante Giorgione Michelangelo Raphael Titian Leonardo da Vinci Other artists Mariotto Albertinelli Pellegrino Aretusi Fra Bartolomeo Ludovico Beretta Moretto da Brescia Gasparo Cairano Giulio Clovio Antonio da Correggio Piero di Cosimo Bernardino delle Croci Girolamo Genga Lorenzo Lotto Maffeo Olivieri Baldassare Peruzzi Sebastiano del Piombo Antonio da Sangallo the Younger Andrea del Sarto Il Sodoma Tamagnino Palma Vecchio Antonio Vassilacchi Major works The Last Supper ( c.

1492–1498 ) Pietà (1498–1499) San Pietro in Montorio (1500) David (1501–1504) Mona Lisa ( c.

1502–1516 ) St. Peter's Basilica (1506–1513) Sistine Chapel ceiling (1508–1512) Raphael Rooms (1509–1524) Transfiguration (1516–1520) The Last Judgment (1536–1541) Related Art patronage of Julius II Jacob Burckhardt Johann Joachim Winckelmann Leonardeschi Giorgio Vasari The Lives v t e Vatican City articles Index Outline Holy See Properties Pope : Leo XIV List of sovereigns Vicar General for Vatican City History History of the papacy " Prisoner in the Vatican " Circus of Nero Old St. Peter's Basilica Papal tombs Navicella Leonine City Cortile del Belvedere Santo Stefano degli Ungheresi Lateran Treaty Borgo Nuovo Borgo Vecchio Piazza Scossacavalli Geography Major basilica St. Peter's Basilica Chair of Saint Peter Door of the Dead Monument to the Royal Stuarts St. Peter's Baldachin Saint Longinus Pietà Vatican Necropolis Saint Peter's tomb Papal tombs Tomb of the Julii Vatican Grottoes Apostolic Palace Redemptoris Mater Chapel Borgia Apartments Clementine Hall Loggias Papal apartments Stufetta del cardinal Bibbiena Cappella Paolina Raphael Rooms Niccoline Chapel Sala Ducale Sala Regia Scala Regia The Vision of Constantine Sistine Chapel altarpiece ceiling Room of Tears Vatican Museums Historical Paintings Modern and Contemporary Art Pio-Clementino Chiaramonti Gregoriano Etrusco Gregoriano Egiziano Pio Cristiano Ethnographic Bramante Staircase Maps Gregorian Tower Casina Pio IV Sant'Anna dei Palafrenieri Domus Sanctae Marthae Holy Spirit Chapel Gardens Santa Maria della Pietà in Camposanto dei Teutonici Collegio Teutonico Teutonic Cemetery Mater Ecclesiae Monastery Sant'Egidio in Borgo Santi Martino e Sebastiano degli Svizzeri Paul VI Audience Hall The Resurrection Passetto di Borgo San Pellegrino in Vaticano St. Peter's Square Via della Conciliazione Fountains Porta San Pellegrino Ricciolo d'Italia Saint John's Tower Santo Stefano degli Abissini Vatican Pharmacy Vatican Hill Politics Elections Foreign relations Vicar General Law Crime Fundamental Law Governance Pope Leo XIV Cardinal Secretary of State Vacant Government Roman Curia Apostolic Camera Commissions For Vatican City State Councils Congregations Dicasteries Military Corps of Gendarmerie Swiss Guard See also: Corps of Firefighters Economy Banking Vatican euro coins Communications .va [Internet domain] Poste Vaticane Postage stamps and postal history Homelessness Secretariat for the Economy Tourism Infrastructure Transport Heliport Rail Culture Academy of Sciences AT telescope observatory Architecture Archives Apostolic Archive Climate Forest Demographics Languages Library film Music Sistine Chapel Choir Philatelic and Numismatic Office Public holidays Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Information Service Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Radio Vatican Television Center Vatican News App Vatican Publishing House Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio L'Osservatore Romano Pope2you Religion Catholic Church Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flag Sports Amateur Sports Association Cricket team National football team (Men) National football team (Women) Vatican Athletics Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Basilicas in the Diocese of Rome Roman Catholic ecclesiastical province of Rome Holy See Major Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Basilica of Saint Peter Vatican Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Basilica of Saint Mary Major Minor S. Lorenzo fuori le mura S. Agnese fuori le mura S. Agostino S. Anastasia al Palatino S. Andrea delle Fratte S. Andrea della Valle S. Antonio da Padova in Via Merulana S. Apollinare alle Terme Ss. Apostoli S. Balbina S. Bartolomeo all'Isola Ss. Bonifacio ed Alessio S. Camillo de Lellis S. Carlo al Corso S. Cecilia in Trastevere Ss. Celso e Giuliano S. Clemente Ss. Cosma e Damiano S. Crisogono S. Croce in Via Flaminia S. Croce in Gerusalemme S. Eugenio S. Eustachio S. Francesca Romana S. Giovanni a Porta Latina S. Giovanni Bosco in Via Tuscolana S. Giovanni dei Fiorentini Ss. Giovanni e Paolo S. Giuseppe al Trionfale S. Lorenzo in Damaso S. Lorenzo in Lucina S. Maria Ausiliatrice S. Marco S. Maria degli Angeli S. Maria in Cosmedin S. Maria in Domnica S. Maria in Aracoeli S. Maria del Popolo S. Maria sopra Minerva S. Maria in Trastevere S. Maria in Via S. Maria in Via Lata S. Maria della Vittoria S. Martino ai Monti Ss. Nereo e Achilleo S. Nicola in Carcere S. Pancrazio Pantheon S. Pietro in Vincoli S. Prassede S. Pudenziana Ss. Quattro Coronati S. Saba S. Sabina Sacro Cuore di Maria Sacro Cuore di Cristo Re Sacro Cuore di Gesù a Castro Pretorio S. Sebastiano fuori le mura S. Silvestro in Capite S. Sisto Vecchio S. Sofia a Via Boccea S. Stefano Rotondo S. Teresa S. Vitale Basilicas list Catholicism portal v t e Roman Curia of the Holy See Secretariat Secretariat of State Section for General Affairs Section for Relations with States Secretary for Pontifical Representations Dicasteries Evangelization Doctrine of the Faith Service of Charity Eastern Churches Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments Causes of Saints Bishops Clergy Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Laity, Family and Life Christian Unity Interreligious Dialogue Culture and Education Integral Human Development Legislative Texts Communication Tribunals Apostolic Penitentiary Apostolic Signatura Roman Rota Economics Council for the Economy Secretariat for the Economy Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See Office of the Auditor General Commission for Confidential Matters Committee for Investments Offices Prefecture of the Papal Household Office for the Liturgical Celebrations of the Supreme Pontiff Apostolic Camera Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church Institutes Labour Office of the Apostolic See Vatican Apostolic Archive Vatican Apostolic Library Fabric of Saint Peter Pontifical Commission for Sacred Archaeology AVEPRO Supervisory and Financial Information Authority Domus Vaticanae Interdicasterial commissions Particular Churches Church in Eastern Europe Consecrated Religious Candidates to Sacred Order Revision of the General Regulations of the Roman Curia Commissions and committees International Eucharistic Congresses Historical Sciences Advocates Swiss Guard Disciplinary Financial Security Commission of Cardinals overseeing the Institute for Works of Religion Activities of Public Juridical Persons of the Church in the Healthcare Sector Verification and Application of Mitis Iudex in the Churches of Italy Other organizations Councils, commissions, and offices Evangelization International Council for Catechesis Doctrine of the Faith Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors International Theological Commission Pontifical Biblical Commission College for the review of appeals by clergy accused of delicta reservata Bishops Pontifical Commission for Latin America Clergy Pontifical Work for Priestly Vocations Christian Unity Commission for Religious Relations with the Jews Interreligious Dialogue Commission for Religious Relations with Muslims Culture and Education Pontifical Work for Ecclesiastical Vocations Communication Vatican Publishing House Vatican Media Vatican Radio L'Osservatore Romano Holy See Press Office Pontifical academies Arcadia Alphonsian Ecclesiastical Fine Arts and Letters of the Virtuosi al Pantheon Sciences Theology Archaeology Martyrs Saint Thomas Aquinas Immaculate Conception Mary Life Social Sciences Latin Papal See of Rome Vicar General for the Vatican City State Vicar General for the Vicariate of Rome Auxiliary Bishops of the Vicariate of Rome Prelate Secretary of the Vicariate of Rome History Roman Inquisition (1542) Reform by Sixtus V (1588) Reform by Paul VI (1967) Reform by John Paul II (1988) Reform by Francis (2022) Former dicasteries Congregation for Borders Congregation for Catholic Education Congregation of Ceremonies Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples Sacred Congregation of the Index Congregation of the Vatican Press Sacred Congregation of the Consulta Congregation for Indulgences and Sacred Relics Congregation of Rites Apostolic Chancery Apostolic Dataria Office of Papal Charities Secretariate of Briefs to Princes and of Latin Letters Special Administration of the Holy See Pontifical Council for Culture Pontifical Commission for the Cultural Heritage of the Church Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei Pontifical Council for Promoting the New Evangelization Pontifical Council for Social Communications Pontifical Council for the Family Pontifical Council for the Laity Pontifical Council Cor Unum Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Migrants and Itinerant People Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Health Care Workers Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Papacy Episcopate of the bishop of Rome Jurisdiction Holy See ( full communion ) Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome primacy history Vatican City ( index , outline ) Enclaved in Rome , Italy Lateran Treaty , 1929 along with extraterritorial properties of the Holy See Headquarters Vatican City : Apostolic Palace papal apartments Sistine Chapel Italy : Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ( cathedra ) Major basilicas Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran St. Peter's Basilica Basilica of Saint Mary Major Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Titles ( Papal names ) His Holiness Bishop of Rome Vicar of Jesus Christ Successor of the Prince of the Apostles Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church Patriarch of the West Primate of Italy Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman Province Sovereign of the Vatican City State Servant of the servants of God Symbols Coats of arms Coat of arms of the Holy See Cross Keys of Heaven Regalia and insignia Rota Umbraculum Proclamations Infallibility Apostolic constitution Bull list Encyclical Apostolic exhortation Ecclesiastical letter Interdict Activities Arbitration deposition Blessing " pontifical " Urbi et Orbi Conclave list Coronation Consistory Diplomacy Inauguration Mass High Mass Travel Vestments Camauro Falda Fanon Ferula Flabellum Mantle Mitre Mozzetta Pallium Ring of the Fisherman Shoes slippers Subcinctorium Tiara list Zucchetto Transportation Popemobile Sedia gestatoria Shepherd One Household Camerlengo Commander of the Swiss Guard Chaplain Palatinus papal majordomo Gentlemen Preacher Prefect Prelate of Honour Prince assistant Theologian Staff College of Cardinals cardinals list Roman Curia Apostolic Camera commissions for Vatican City State councils congregations dicasteries Synods Cappella Giulia Sistine Chapel Choir Related Antipope Western Schism Canonised popes Fat pope, thin pope Gammarelli Legends Orders, decorations, and medals Papabile Papal nobility " Black " Pontifical academy Pontifical colleges in Rome Major Seminary Pontifical university in Rome Popes by country Sexually active popes St. Peter's Square Swiss Guard Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Holy See Apostolic see of Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome Sovereignty of Vatican City Legal status of the Holy See History Apostolic see Primacy of Peter History of papal primacy Patrimony of Saint Peter Old St. Peter's Basilica Lateran Palace Museum Duchy of Rome Donation of Sutri Donation of Pepin Avignon Papacy Papal States Temporal power Investiture Controversy Age of Revolution " Prisoner in the Vatican " Savoyard era Vatican City Lateran Treaty World War II Warsaw Pact Sovereign judicial entity under international law ( Legal status ) Officials Pope Leo XIV Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Parolin Cardinals List Advisers Governance Secretariat of State College of Cardinals Conclave Government Roman Curia Apostolic Camera Commissions For Vatican City State Councils Congregations Dicasteries Foreign affairs ( Multilateral policy ) Section for Relations with States To the Holy See Of the Holy See Heads Italy United Nations Permanent Observer in Geneva European Union Permanent Observer to the Council of Europe Apostolic nunciature Nuncio Treaties Concordats Diocese of Rome with universal full communion ( Papal primacy ) Synods Ordinary general assemblies Extraordinary general assemblies Special assemblies Ecclesiastical province of Rome ( Vicariate : Rome , Vatican City ) Suburbicarian sees Ostia Velletri–Segni Porto–Santa Rufina Frascati Palestrina Albano Sabina–Poggio Mirteto Territorial abbeys Monte Cassino Subiaco Suffragan dioceses Gaeta Anagni-Alatri Civita Castellana Civitavecchia-Tarquinia Frosinone-Veroli-Ferentino Latina-Terracina-Sezze-Priverno Rieti Sora-Cassino-Aquino-Pontecorvo Tivoli Viterbo Properties including extra- territoriality Inside Rome Major basilicas St. Peter's Basilica Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Santa Maria Maggiore Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Lateran Palace Lateran University Scala Sancta Sancta Sanctorum Adjoining buildings Palace of Saint Callixtus Gianicolo Hill area Pontifical Urban University Pontifical North American College Bambino Gesù Hospital Palazzo della Cancelleria Palace of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples Palace of the Holy Office Palace of the Congregation for the Oriental Churches Palazzo Pio Palazzo Maffei Marescotti (Palace of the Vicariate} Pontifical Roman Minor Seminary Collegio Teutonico Teutonic Cemetery Benedictine monastery Pontifical Oratory of San Paolo Beda College Paul VI Audience Hall St. Peter's Square Non- extraterritorial Palace of the Holy Apostles Palace of San Carlo ai Catinari Collegio Bellarmino Archaeological Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Pontifical Lombard Seminary Russian College Two Palaces of Sant'Apollinare House of Retreat for the Clergy of Saints John and Paul Nympheum of Nero Outside Rome Palace of Castel Gandolfo Papal farm Gardens of the Villa Cybo Villa Barberini Adjacent gardens Pontifical College Josephinum Summer estate of Pontificio Collegio Urbano de Propaganda Fide Vatican Radio antennae area of Santa Maria di Galeria Non- extraterritorial Basilica della Santa Casa Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua See also Acta Apostolicae Sedis Awards Papal household Peter's Pence Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Apostolic Signatura Swiss Guard Vatican.va Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Landmarks of Rome Walls and gates Aurelian Walls Ardeatina Asinaria Latina Maggiore Metronia Nomentana Pia Pinciana Popolo Portese San Pancrazio San Paolo San Giovanni San Sebastiano Settimiana Tiburtina Leonine Wall Cavalleggeri Pertusa Santo Spirito Castra Praetoria Janiculum Wall Terreus Wall Romuli Wall Servian Wall Caelimontana Capena Collina Dolabella Esquilina Fontinalis Gallienus Viminale Naevia Querquetulana Trigemina Ancient obelisks Lateran Obelisk Flaminian Obelisk Obelisk of Minerveo Obelisk of Montecitorio Art Apollo Belvedere Augustus of Prima Porta Colossus of Constantine La Bocca della Verità Laocoön and His Sons Ludovisi Battle sarcophagus Ecstasy of Saint Teresa Pietà Portonaccio sarcophagus Raphael Rooms Sistine Chapel ceiling Velletri Sarcophagus Ancient Roman landmarks Triumphal arches Arch of Constantine Arch of Dolabella Arch of Drusus Arch of Gallienus Arch of Janus Arch of Septimius Severus Arch of Titus Arcus Novus Aqueducts Aqua Appia Aqua Alexandrina Aqua Anio Vetus Aqua Anio Novus Aqua Claudia Aqua Julia Aqua Marcia Aqua Tepula Sewers Cloaca Maxima Cloaca Circi Maximi Public baths Baths of Agrippa Baths of Caracalla Baths of Diocletian Baths of Nero Baths of Trajan Religious Ara Pacis Temple of Antoninus and Faustina Temple of Apollo Palatinus Temple of Apollo Sosianus Temple of Hadrian Temple of Hercules Victor Temple of Janus Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus Temple of Jupiter Tonans Temple of Minerva Medica Temple of Portunus Temple of Saturn Temple of Vesta House of the Vestals Largo di Torre Argentina Lupercal Pantheon Porta Maggiore Basilica Fora Roman Forum Imperial fora Forum of Augustus Forum of Caesar Forum of Nerva Forum of Vespasian Trajan's Forum Forum Boarium Forum Holitorium Civic Basilica Argentaria Basilica Julia Basilica of Junius Bassus Basilica of Maxentius Basilica of Neptune Basilica Ulpia Comitium Curia Julia Portico Dii Consentes Porticus Octaviae Tabularium Entertainment Circus Maximus Circus of Maxentius Circus of Nero Colosseum Ludus Magnus Gardens of Maecenas Gardens of Sallust Stadium of Domitian Theatre of Marcellus Theatre of Pompey Palaces and villae Domus Augustana Domus Aurea Domus Transitoria Flavian Palace House of Augustus Palace of Domitian Villa Gordiani Villa of Livia Insula dell'Ara Coeli Villa of the Quintilii Villa of the sette bassi Column monuments Column of Antoninus Pius Column of Marcus Aurelius " Column of Phocas " Trajan's Column Five-Columns Monument Commerce Porticus Aemilia Trajan's Market Tombs Casal Rotondo Catacombs of Domitilla Catacombs of Rome Catacombs of San Sebastiano Columbarium of Pomponius Hylas Mausoleum of Augustus Mausoleum of Helena Mausoleum of Maxentius Pyramid of Cestius Tomb of Eurysaces the Baker Tomb of Hilarus Fuscus Tomb of the Haterii Tomb of the Scipios Tombs of Via Latina Tomb of Priscilla Vigna Randanini Bridges Pons Cestius Pons Fabricius Ponte Milvio Ponte Sant'Angelo Roman Catholic basilicas Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Basilica of Saint Mary Major Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Basilica of Saint Peter in the Vatican S. Lorenzo fuori le mura S. Agnese fuori le mura S. Agostino S. Anastasia al Palatino S. Andrea delle Fratte S. Andrea della Valle S. Antonio da Padova in Via Merulana S. Apollinare alle Terme Ss. Apostoli S. Balbina S. Bartolomeo all'Isola Ss. Bonifacio ed Alessio S. Camillo de Lellis S. Carlo al Corso S. Cecilia in Trastevere Ss. Celso e Giuliano S. Clemente Ss. Cosma e Damiano S. Crisogono S. Croce in Via Flaminia S. Croce in Gerusalemme S. Eugenio S. Eustachio S. Francesca Romana S. Giovanni a Porta Latina S. Giovanni dei Fiorentini Ss. Giovanni e Paolo S. Lorenzo in Damaso S. Lorenzo in Lucina S. Maria Ausiliatrice S. Marco S. Maria degli Angeli S. Maria dei Miracoli S. Maria in Montesanto S. Maria in Cosmedin S. Maria in Domnica S. Maria in Aracoeli S. Maria del Popolo S. Maria sopra Minerva S. Maria in Trastevere S. Maria in Via S. Maria in Via Lata S. Maria della Vittoria S. Martino ai Monti Ss. Nereo e Achilleo S. Nicola in Carcere S. Pancrazio Pantheon S. Pietro in Vincoli S. Prassede S. Pudenziana Ss. Quattro Coronati S. Saba S. Sabina Sacro Cuore di Maria Sacro Cuore di Cristo Re Sacro Cuore di Gesù a Castro Pretorio S. Sebastiano fuori le mura S. Silvestro in Capite S. Sisto Vecchio S. Sofia a Via Boccea S. Stefano Rotondo S. Teresa S. Vitale Other churches List of churches in Rome Castles and palaces Arx Casa dei Cavalieri di Rodi Castel Sant'Angelo Domus Internationalis Paulus VI Palazzo Aragona Gonzaga Palazzo Barberini Palazzo Barberini ai Giubbonari Palazzo Borghese Palazzo della Cancelleria Palazzo Chigi Palazzo Colonna Palazzo della Consulta Palazzo Farnese Palazzo Fusconi-Pighini Palazzo Giustinani Lateran Palace Palazzo Madama Palazzo Malta Palazzo di Giustizia Palazzo Massimo alle Colonne Palazzo Mattei Palazzo del Quirinale Palazzo Pamphilj Palazzo Poli Palazzo Riario Palazzo Ruspoli Palazzo Spada Palazzo Valentini Palazzo Vidoni-Caffarelli Palazzo del Viminale Palazzo Wedekind Palazzo Zuccari Villa Farnesina Villa Giulia Villa Madama Fountains Api Acqua Felice Acqua Paola Babuino Barcaccia Il Facchino Marforio Moro Nasone Navicella Neptune Nettuno del Pantheon Pianto di Piazza d'Aracoeli di Piazza Colonna di Piazza Farnese della Piazza dei Quiriti di Piazza Nicosia in Piazza Santa Maria in Trastevere di Ponte Sisto Quattro Fiumi Quattro Fontane Tartarughe Trevi Fountain Tritons Tritone Other landmarks Altare della Patria ( Tomb of the Unknown Soldier of Italy ) Campo Verano Capocci Tower Column of the Immaculate Conception Conti Tower Hospital of the Holy Spirit Milizie Tower Sisto Bridge Spanish Steps Squares , streets and public spaces Appian Way Campo de' Fiori Clivus Capitolinus Piazza Colonna Piazza d'Aracoeli Piazza del Popolo Piazza della Minerva Piazza della Repubblica Piazza dei Cinquecento Piazza Farnese Piazza Navona Piazza San Pietro Piazza di Spagna Piazza Venezia Via dei Coronari Via del Corso Via della Conciliazione Via dei Fori Imperiali Via Sacra Via Veneto Parks, gardens and zoos Bioparco Villa Ada Villa Borghese gardens Villa Doria Pamphili Villa Medici Villa Torlonia Parco degli Acquedotti Museums and art galleries Boncompagni Ludovisi Decorative Art Museum Capitoline Museums Casa di Goethe Galleria Borghese Galleria Comunale d'Arte Moderna Galleria Doria Pamphilj Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Antica Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna Giorgio de Chirico House Museum Galleria Spada Jewish Museum of Rome Keats–Shelley Memorial House MAXXI Museo Archeologico Ostiense Museo di Scultura Antica Giovanni Barracco Museo Civico di Zoologia Museo delle anime del Purgatorio Museo delle Mura Museo di Roma Museo di Roma in Trastevere Museo nazionale del Palazzo di Venezia Museo Nazionale Etrusco Museo Nazionale Romano Museo Storico Nazionale dell'Arte Sanitaria Museum of Contemporary Art of Rome Museum of Roman Civilization Museum of the Ara Pacis Museum of the Liberation of Rome National Museum of Oriental Art Palazzo Colonna Palazzo delle Esposizioni Pigorini National Museum Porta San Paolo Railway Museum Santa Cecilia Musical Instruments Museum Venanzo Crocetti Museum Landscape Seven Hills Aventine Caelian Capitoline Esquiline Palatine Quirinal Viminal Tiber Island Monte Testaccio Metropolitan City of Rome Capital Appian Way Regional Park Capo di Bove Castello Orsini-Odescalchi Frascati Hadrian's Villa Ostia Antica Villa Aldobrandini Villa d'Este Villa Farnese Events and traditions Festa della Repubblica Rome Quadriennale Rome Film Festival Enclave Vatican City Portals : Catholicism Vatican City Architecture Italy St. Peter's Basilica at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Texts from Wikisource Travel guides from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Australia Czech Republic Spain Latvia Vatican Israel Catalonia Geographic Structurae MusicBrainz place Pleiades People Trove Other IdRef Kulturenvanteri monument Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐k87tv
Cached time: 20250817210731
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.770 seconds
Real time usage: 2.086 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15047/1000000
Revision size: 125848/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 612597/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 58990/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 37/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 374135/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.957/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22436462/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1580.681      1 -total
 20.89%  330.276      3 Template:Infobox
 19.25%  304.289      1 Template:Infobox_church
 18.84%  297.775      2 Template:Reflist
  9.98%  157.743     24 Template:Cite_web
  9.27%  146.469     26 Template:Cite_book
  6.20%   98.011      2 Template:Unbulleted_list
  5.71%   90.211      2 Template:Native_name
  5.46%   86.283     10 Template:NoteTag
  5.30%   83.853      1 Template:Michelangelo Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:73188:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817210731 and revision id 1306452630. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=St._Peter%27s_Basilica&oldid=1306452630 " Categories : St. Peter's Basilica Roman Catholic churches in Vatican City Coronation church buildings Church buildings with domes Terminating vistas Renaissance architecture in Rome Baroque architecture in Rome Tourist attractions in Vatican City Churches completed in 1626 Tombs of apostles Burial places of popes 1626 establishments in the Papal States Pope Julius II Donato Bramante church buildings Michelangelo church buildings Carlo Maderno buildings Gian Lorenzo Bernini church buildings Major basilicas 17th-century Roman Catholic church buildings in Italy Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from March 2024 Use dmy dates from May 2025 Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Pages with numeric Bible version references Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 errors: ISBN date Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 21:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents St. Peter's Basilica 121 languages Add topic

