Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Extant 2.2 Lost 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Al-Qifti 10 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano مصرى Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Qaraqalpaqsha Русский اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 13th century Egyptian historian and biographer Al-Qifti Born Jamāl al-Dīn Abū al-Ḥasan 'Alī ibn Yūsuf ibn Ibrāhīm ibn 'Abd al-Wahid al-Shaybānī c. 1172 Qift , Upper Egypt Died 1248 Aleppo , Syria Nationality Egyptian Arab Occupation(s) Historian, Biographer, Encyclopedist, Administrator Employer Ayyubid rulers of Aleppo Title Vizier Parent Yūsuf al-Qifṭī (father) Academic work Era Ayyubid period Notable works Kitāb Ikhbār al-'Ulamā' bi Akhbār al-Ḥukamā ( History of Learned Men ) Jamāl al-Dīn Abū al-Ḥasan 'Alī ibn Yūsuf ibn Ibrāhīm ibn 'Abd al-Wahid al-Shaybānī ( جمال الدين أبو الحسن علي بن يوسف بن ٳبراهي بن عبد الواحد الشيباني ), [ 1 ] [ 2 ] called al-Qifṭī ( القفطي ; c.

1172 – 1248), was an Egyptian Arab historian, biographer, encyclopedist and administrator under the Ayyubid rulers of Aleppo .

[ 1 ] His biographical dictionary Kitāb Ikhbār al-'Ulamā' bi Akhbār al-Ḥukamā ( إخبار العلماء بأخبار الحكماء , tr. 'History of Learned Men') is an important source of Islamic biography. Much of his vast literary output is lost, including his histories of the Seljuks , Buyids and the Maghreb , and biographical dictionaries of philosophers and philologists.

Life [ edit ] 'Alī al-Qifṭī, known as Ibn al-Qifṭī, was a native of Qift , Upper Egypt , the son of al- Qāḍī al-Ashraf , Yūsuf al-Qifṭī (b.548/1153), and the grandson of Ibrāhīm ibn 'Abd al-Wāḥid, al-Qāḍī al-Awḥad in the Ayyūbid court. Alī succeeded his father and grandfather into court administration but displayed scholarly inclinations. When the family left Qift in 1177, following the rising of a Fāṭimid Pretender , his father, Yūsuf, took up official posts in Upper Egypt and 'Alī completed his early education in Cairo.

In 583/1187 Yūsuf al-Qifṭī was appointed deputy to al-Qāḍī al-Fāḍil , chancellor and adviser to Ṣalāh al-Dīn at Jerusalem, and patron and benefactor of Maimonides , [ 3 ] Al-Qifṭī spent many years studying and collecting material for his later works. When Ṣalāh al-Dīn died in 598/1201 and his brother, Malik al-'Ādil, usurped his nephew's position to occupy Jerusalem, Ibn al-Qifṭī's father fled to Ḥarran into the service of Ṣalāh al-Dīn's son Ashraf . Ibn al-Qifṭī sought patronage in Aleppo as secretary to the former governor of Jerusalem and Nablus, Fāris al-Din Maimūn al Qaṣrī, the then vizier to the Ayyubid emir Ṣalāh al-Dīn's third son, Malik aẓ-Ẓāhir Ghāzi . He was recognised as an effective administrator of the fiefs and when the vizier died in 610/1214 aẓ-Ẓāhir appointed him khāzin of the Dīwān of Finance, despite his own preference for study. On aẓ-Ẓāhir's death in 613/1216 al-Qifti retired but was re-appointed three years later by aẓ-Ẓāhir's successor. He remained in office until 628/1231. According to his protégé and biographer, Yaqūt , writing before 624/1227 [ 4 ] al-Qifti already held the honorific title "al-Qāḍī 'l-Akram al-Wazir" (most noble judge chief minister).

[ 2 ] After a five-year sabbatical al-Qifṭī took up the office of vizier in 633/1236 and held it up to his death in 646/1248.

[ 5 ] During that time he was also a member, along with Shams al-Din Lu'lu' al-Amini , of the regency council that governed on behalf of an-Nasir Yusuf .

[ 6 ] Throughout his life al-Qifṭī advocated scholarship and sought to pursue a literary career despite heavy constraints of high office. When Yaqūt had fled the Mongol invasion to Aleppo, he had received shelter from al-Qifti, who had assisted him in the compilation of his great geographical and biographical encyclopedia, known as Irshad .

Yaqut lists al-Qifṭī's pre-620 works (some were then incomplete).

Al-Ṣafadī copied this list in his Wāfī fi 'l-Wafayāt and Al-Kutubī 's Fawāt al-Wafayat (1196) borrowed from it, but his copy is corrupted by many errors.

Works [ edit ] Al-Qifṭī wrote mainly historical works and of 26 recorded titles just two survive. Most were destroyed during the Mongol invasion .

[ 7 ] Extant [ edit ] Kitāb Ikhbār al-'Ulamā' bi Akhbār al-Ḥukamā ( إخبار العلماء بأخبار الحكماء ); abbrev.

Ta'rikh al-Ḥukama ( تاريخ الحكماء ), 'The biographies and the books of the great philosophers'; a biographical dictionary of 414 physicians, philosophers and astronomers; the most important source of exact sciences and Hellenistic tradition in Islām and sole literary witness of many accounts by ancient Greek scholars.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Inbā ar-Rawat 'alā 'Anbā an-Nuhat (3 vol.); synopsis (647/1249) by Muḥammad ibn 'Alī az-Zawanī.

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] Lost [ edit ] Precious Pearls of the Account of the Master ( Ad-Dur ath-Thamin fi 'Akhbar al-Mutīmīn ) ( الدر الثمين في أخبار المتيمين ) Report of the Muhammad Poets, ( Akhbar al-Muhammadin min al-Shuara ), (posthumous); only fragments [ 11 ] History of Maḥmūd b. Sübüktigin (Sabuktakin) and His Sons'( wabanīhi , in al-Kubutī wabakīyat ) History of the Seljuks, from the Beginning to the End of the Dynasty ( Baqiat Tārīkh as-Siljūqīa ) ( بقية تاريخ السلجوقية ) Apostles of Poets; arranged by al-Aba' up to Muḥammad bin Sa'īd; posthumous work written by al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham ; History of the Poets ; only poets named Muḥammad extant) (Kitāb al-Muhmidīn min ash-Shu'ra'i; ratibah 'alā al-Ābā' wa balagh bīhī Muḥammad bin Sa'id.) ( كتاب المحمدين من الشعراء. رتبه على الآباء وبلغ به محمد بن سعيد ) (wa Katab 'an al-Hasan bin al-Haythm) ( وكتب عن الحسن بن الهيثم ) History of the Mirdasids ( Akhbar al-Mirdas ) ( أخبار آلمرداس ) The Biographies and Books of the Great Philosophers ( Akhbar al-Alama bi Akhyar al-Hukama )( إخبار العلماء بأخيار الحكماء ) [ 12 ] Account of the Grammarians ( Akhbar an-Nahwiyyin ) ( إخبار النحوين ); survives only in abstract by Muh. b. Ahmad al-Dhahabi .

Account of the Writers and their Writings ( Akhbar al-Musanafin wa ma Sanafuh ) ( أخبار المصنفين وما صنفوه ) [ 13 ] History of the Yemen ( Tarikh al-Yemen ) ( تاريخ اليمن ) Egypt; in six parts ('Akhbār Misr, fi sitta 'Ajza') ( أخبار مصر، في ستة أجزاء ):: including History of Cairo until the reign of Salah al-Din; identical to Comprehensive Tarikh al-Qifti contained in the epitome of Ibn Maktum (d. 749/1348) [ citation needed ] History of the Buyids History of the Maghreb Correction of Errors by al-Jawhari ( Islāh Khilal as-Sahāhi, lil-Jawhrī ) ( إصلاح خلل الصحاح، للجوهري، ) Nahza al-Khater in Literature ( Nahazat al-Khāṭr >> fi-l-Adab ) ( نهزة الخاطر» في الأدب ); History of Scholarship (the Shaykhs of al-Kindi), a supplement to the Ansab of al-Baladhuri, etc.

Biographies of Ibn Rashiq, Abu Sa'id al-Sirafi See also [ edit ] Muslim historiography References [ edit ] Citations ^ a b Henry Louis Gates Jr.; Emmanuel Akyeampong; Mr. Steven J. Niven (2 February 2012).

Dictionary of African Biography . OUP USA. pp.

105– 106.

ISBN 978-0-19-538207-5 .

^ a b Thomas, David (24 Mar 2010).

"Al-Qifti" .

Brill Reference . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ Bernard Lewis (15 April 2011).

Islam in History: Ideas, People, and Events in the Middle East . Open Court. p. 175.

ISBN 978-0-8126-9757-5 .

^ Yaqūt, Mu'jam al-Buldān , iv p.152 ^ Dietrich 1971 .

^ Humphreys 1977 , p. 229.

^ "Kifti" .

New International Encyclopedia . Vol. XI. 1905. p. 487.

^ a b Lippert , Ibn al-Qifṭīs Ta'rikh al-Ḥukamā , 1903 ^ Al-Qifṭī, 'Alī ibn Yūsuf (2005). Shams al-Dīn, Ibrāhīm (ed.).

Ikhbār al-'Ulamā' bi-akhbār al-ḥukamā' (tr. The biographies and the books of the great philosophers) (in Arabic) (1st ed.). Lebanon: Dar al-kotob al-Ilmiyah. p. 328.

^ ed. Abu 'l-Fadl Ibrahim ^ MS. Paris arab. 3335 ^ al-Qifti ed. Shams-ad-Din, The Biographies and Books of the Great Philosophers ^ ed.

De Goeje &.

Juynboll Bibliography Lippert, J, ed. (1326) [1903], Ibn al-Qifṭīs Ta'rikh al-Ḥukamā', auf Grund der Arbeiten Aug. Müllers , Leipzig, Cairo Al-Qifti (2005), Shams-ad-Din, Ibrahim (ed.), The Biographies and the Books of the Great Philosophers (1 ed.), Lebanon: Dar al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah De Goeje; Juynboll, Th. W. (eds.), "History of the Grammarians (synopsis in al-Dhahabi 's autograph)", Cat. Codd. Ar. Bibl. Acad. Lugduno-Batavae , iii (xlviii) (26 ed.) Abū 'l-Fadl Ibrāhīm, Muḥammad, ed. (1374) [1369], Inbah al-Ruwat 'ala Anbah al-Nuhat , vol. iii, Cairo al-Hamawi, Yāqūt, Margoliouth (ed.), Irshād al-Arīb , vol. vi, G.M.S., pp.

447– 494 aṣ-Ṣafadī, Wāfī fi 'l-Wafayāt , pp.

233– 234 al-Kutubī (1299), Fawāt al-Wafayāt , Cairo, p. 1197 as-Suyūṭī, Bughyat al-Wu'āt , p. 358 ibid., Ḥusn al-Muḥāḍara , vol. i, p. 319 Leclerc (ed.), Hist. de la méd. ar.

, vol. ii, pp.

193– 198 Steinschneider (1877), "Polemische und apologetische Literatur", Ab für die Kunde des Morg.

(111): 129 Wüstenfeld, Ferdinand, Geschichtsschreiber der Araber , p. 331 Brockelmann, Carl (ed.), Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur (G.A.L.) , vol. i, p. 325 Müller, A, ed. (1891), "Über das sogenannte Tar'ikh al-ḥukamā' des Ibn al-Qifṭī", Actes du 8e congrès internat. Des orient.

, i , Leyden: 15– 36 Dérenbourg, H (1905), "L'histoire des philosophes attribuée à Ibn al-Kifti", Opuscule , Paris: 37– 48 Houtsma, M. Th.; Wensinck, A. J.; Arnold, T. W.; Heffening, W.; Lévi-Provençal, E., eds. (1927), Encyclopaedia of Islam, Dictionary of the Geography, Ethnography & Biography of the Muhammadan Peoples, E-K , vol. ii, Leyden {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) al-Kutubī (1951), Dietrich, A (ed.), Fawat , vol. ii, Cairo, pp.

191– 3 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Dietrich, A. (1971).

"Ibn al-Ḳifṭī" . In Lewis, B.

; Ménage, V. L.

; Pellat, Ch.

& Schacht, J.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume III: H–Iram . Leiden: E. J. Brill. p. 840.

OCLC 495469525 .

Humphreys, R. Stephen (1977).

From Saladin to the Mongols: The Ayyubids of Damascus, 1193–1260 . State University of New York Press.

Yaqut, Mu'jam al-Udaba' , vol. xv, Cairo, pp.

175– 204 Yaqūt, Margoliouth (ed.), Irshad , vol. v, pp.

477– 94 ibid, Mu'jam al-Buldan , vol. iv, p. 152 Ibn Abi Usaybi'a, 'Uyun al-anba', (index) Barhebraeus, 'Alhani (ed.), Tarikh Mukhtasar ad-Duwal , p. 476 Suyutī (1326), Bughya , Cairo, p. 358 idem (1321), Husn al-Muhadara , vol. i, Cairo, p. 265 Ibn al-'Imad , Shadharat , vol. v, p. 236 Adfawi (1333), al-Tali' as-Sa'id , Cairo, p. 237 f Ibn Taghribirdi (1355), Nujum , vol. vi, Cairo, p. 361 Müller, A., ed. (1890), Actes du 8e Congres Internat. des Orientalistes , Leiden, pp.

15– 36 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Brockelmann, Carl (ed.), "S I", Ibn al-Ḳifṭī , vol. I2, p. 559 Sellheim, R, ed. (1955), Oriens , pp.

348– 352 External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of a 1905 New International Encyclopedia article about " Al-Qifti ".

English translation of a portion of Al-Qifti's Tarikh al-hukama - dealing with the destruction of the library of Alexandria .

v t e Muslim historians Historians 7th century Aban bin Uthman Urwah ibn Zubayr Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri 8th century Hisham ibn al-Kalbi Ibn Ishaq Al-Waqidi Abu Mikhnaf Sayf ibn Umar Al-Mada'ini Ibn Lahi'a Issa ibn Abi al-Muhajir 9th century Ibn ʽAbd al-Hakam Khalifah ibn Khayyat Ibn Hisham Ya'qubi Al-Tabari Al-Baladhuri Ibn Sa'd Al-Zubayr ibn Bakkar Al-Azraqi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ibn Qutaybah Al-Mada'ini 10th century Ibn al-Nadim Ibn Duraid Ibn al-Qūṭiyya Al-Masudi Miskawayh al-Suli Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu al-Arab Abu Muhammad al-Hamdani Al-Musabbihi al-Kindi Ibn al-Saghir 11th century Arabic Ibn Faradi Ibn Hayyan Said al-Andalusi Al-Udri Al-Bakri Ibn Hazm Hilal al-Sabi' Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi Al-Quda'i Ibn Bassam Persian Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu Sa'id Gardezi 12th century Arabic Mohammed al-Baydhaq Ibn al-Jawzi Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Ibn al-Qalanisi Ibn ʽAsakir Usama ibn Munqidh Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad Ibn Hammad Al-Jawwani Ibn al-Sam'ani Persian Muhammad bin Ali Rawandi 13th century Arabic Yaqut al-Hamawi 'Abd al-Wahid al-Marrakushi Ibn Amira Ibn Jubayr Ibn al-Kardabūs Ibn al-Adim Ibn al-Athir Sibt ibn al-Jawzi Ibn Khallikan Al-Qifti Ibn Abi Zar Persian Ibn Bibi Muhammad Aufi Ibn Isfandiyar Minhaj-i-Siraj Ata-Malik Juvayni Rashid-al-Din Hamadani 14th century Arabic Abu'l-Fida Ibn Idhari Al-Dhahabi Ibn Battuta Ibn al-Khatib Ibn Fadlallah al-Umari Ibn Kathir Ibn al-Tiqtaqa Ibn al-Furat Al-Mufaddal Ibn Khaldun al-ʽAsqalani Persian Hamdallah Mustawfi Wassaf Ziauddin Barani Hafiz-i Abru 15th century Arabic al-Maqrizi Ibn Taghribirdi Al-Sakhawi Al-Suyuti Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi Persian Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi Mirkhvand Mullah Nadiri Zahir al-Din Mar'ashi Fazlallah Khunji Isfahani Idris Bitlisi Yahya bin Ahmad Sirhindi Turkish Oruç Bey Aşıkpaşazade Enveri Ibn Kemal Neshri Tursun Beg 16th century Arabic Ibn Iyas Mujir al-Din Abd al-Aziz al-Fishtali Ibn al-Qadi Mar'i al-Karmi Persian Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak Muhammad Khwandamir ʽAbd al-Qadir Badayuni Nizamuddin Ahmad Firishta Iskandar Beg Munshi Sharafkhan Bidlisi Turkish Mustafa Âlî Lûtfi Pasha Matrakçı Nasuh Sadeddin Effendi Mustafa Selaniki Taşköprüzade 17th century Arabic Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari Katib Çelebi Ibn al-Imad al-Hanbali Persian Shaikh Inayat Allah Kamboh Muhammad Saleh Kamboh Abd al-Fattah Fumani Mohsin Fani Turkish Ottoman Ibrahim Petchevi Solakzade Mehmed Hemdemi Kâtip Çelebi Munejjim Bashi Silahdar Findiklili Mehmed Agha Osman Aga of Temesvar Mustafa Naima Al-Hasan al-Burini Abdi Pasha Chagatai Abu al-Ghazi Bahadur Kurdish Ahmad Khani 18th century Arabic Mohammed al-Ifrani Mohammed al-Qadiri Khalil al-Muradi al-Zayyani al-Jabarti Persian Mirza Mehdi Khan Astarabadi Abol-Hasan Golestaneh Turkish Ahmed Resmî Efendi 19th century Arabic Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Nasiri Mohammad Farid Ahmad ibn Abi Diyaf Jurji Zaydan Persian Jalal al-Din Mirza Qajar Agha Ahmad Ali Reza-Qoli Khan Hedayat Turkish Ottoman Ali Amiri Ahmed Cevdet Pasha Ahmed Cevad Pasha Azerbaijani Mirza Adigozal bey Ahmad bey Javanshir Karim agha Shakikhanov Kurdish Mahmud Bayazidi Mastoureh Ardalan Notable works The Meadows of Gold History of the Prophets and Kings Mu'jam al-Buldan Concise History of Humanity The Complete History Al-Bidaya wa'l-Nihaya The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Futuh al-Buldan Kitab al-I'tibar Al-Milal wa al-Nihal History of the Caliphs Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Tarikh al-Yaqubi Muqaddimah Book of Idols Rihla Concepts Isnad Islamic calendar Biographical evaluation Biographical dictionary Hadith studies Tabaqat Isra'iliyyat Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Israel Academics CiNii zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Qifti&oldid=1283996941 " Categories : 1170s births 1248 deaths 12th-century Muslims 13th-century biographers 13th-century Egyptian historians Egyptian historians of Islam Egyptian biographers Egyptian encyclopedists 12th-century Egyptian historians Encyclopedists of the medieval Islamic world Historians from the Ayyubid Sultanate Viziers in the medieval Islamic world Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 CS1 maint: location missing publisher Year of birth unknown Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 4 April 2025, at 23:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Al-Qifti 10 languages Add topic

