Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mechanism 2 Benefits 3 Applications 4 Standards 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Electropolishing 12 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Nederlands 日本語 Polski Slovenčina 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Electrochemical process Electropolishing principle: 1. Electrolyte 2. Cathode 3. Workpiece to polish (Anode) 4. Particle moving from the work-piece to the cathode 5. Surface before polishing 6. Surface after polishing Electropolishing , also known as electrochemical polishing , anodic polishing , or electrolytic polishing (especially in the metallography field), is an electrochemical process that removes material from a metallic workpiece, reducing the surface roughness by levelling micro-peaks and valleys, improving the surface finish .

[ 1 ] Electropolishing is often compared to, but distinctly different from, electrochemical machining . It is used to polish , passivate , and deburr metal parts. It is often described as the reverse of electroplating .

[ citation needed ] It may be used in lieu of abrasive fine polishing in microstructural preparation.

[ 2 ] Mechanism [ edit ] Typically, the workpiece is immersed in a temperature-controlled bath of electrolyte and serves as the cathode .  At the cathode, a reduction reaction occurs, which normally produces hydrogen. The tiny hydrogen bubbles forming on the surface of the workpiece exert a scrubbing action which can be used to clean and polish the part.  Electrolytes used for electropolishing are most often concentrated acid solutions such as mixtures of sulfuric acid and phosphoric acid . Other electropolishing electrolytes reported in the literature include mixtures of perchloric acid with acetic anhydride (which has caused fatal explosions), and methanolic solutions of sulfuric acid.

[ 3 ] To electropolish a rough surface, the protruding parts of a surface profile must dissolve faster than the recesses. This process, referred to as anodic leveling , can be subject to incorrect analysis when measuring the surface topography.

[ 4 ] Anodic dissolution under electropolishing conditions deburrs metal objects due to increased current density on corners and burrs.
Most importantly, successful electropolishing should operate under diffusion limited constant current plateau, achieved by following current dependence on voltage (polarisation curve), under constant temperature and stirring conditions.

Benefits [ edit ] The results are aesthetically pleasing.

Creates a clean, smooth surface that is easier to sterilise.

Can polish areas that are inaccessible by other polishing methods.

Removes a small amount of material (typically 20-40 micrometre in depth in the case of stainless steel) from the surface of the parts, while also removing small burrs or high spots. It can be used to reduce the size of parts when necessary.

Stainless steel preferentially removes iron from the surface and enhances the chromium/nickel content for the most superior form of passivation for stainless steel.

Electropolishing can be used on a wide range of metals including stainless steel, aluminum, copper, brass and titanium.

Applications [ edit ] Due to its ease of operation and its usefulness in polishing irregularly-shaped objects, electropolishing has become a common process in the production of semiconductors.

As electropolishing can also be used to sterilize workpieces, the process plays an essential role in the food, medical, and pharmaceutical industries.

[ 5 ] It is commonly used in the post-production of large metal pieces such as those used in drums of washing machines, bodies of ocean vessels and aircraft, and automobiles.

While nearly any metal may be electropolished, the most-commonly polished metals are 300- and 400-series stainless steel , aluminum, copper, titanium, and nickel- and copper-alloys.

Ultra-high vacuum (UHV) components are typically electropolished in order to have a smoother surface for improved vacuum pressures, out-gassing rates, and pumping speed.

Electropolishing is commonly used to prepare thin metal samples for transmission electron microscopy and atom probe tomography [ 6 ] because the process does not mechanically deform surface layers like mechanical polishing does.

Standards [ edit ] ISO .15730:2000 Metallic and other Inorganic Coatings - Electropolishing as a Means of Smoothing and Passivating Stainless Steel ASME BPE Standards for Electropolishing Bioprocessing Equipment SEMI F19, Electropolishing Specifications for Semiconductor Applications ASTM B 912-02 (2008), Passivation of Stainless Steels Using Electropolishing ASTM E1558, Standard Guide for Electrolytic Polishing of Metallographic Specimens See also [ edit ] Corrosion – Gradual destruction of materials by chemical reaction with its environment Electroetching Passivation (chemistry) – Physico-chemical processes of protecting a surface from a chemical reaction Polishing (metalworking) – Abrasive process for creating smooth finished surfaces Stainless steel – Steel alloy resistant to corrosion References [ edit ] ^ "Electropolishing | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2024-10-31 .

^ Vander Voort, G.F. ed. (2004) "Chemical and Electrolytic Polishing," ASM Handbook, Vol. 9: Metallography and Microstructures , ASM International , pp. 281-293, ISBN 978-0-87170-706-2 .

^ "The "Then & Now" of Electropolishing" (PDF) .

Anopol Limited/Surface World . Archived from the original on November 7, 2014 . Retrieved 20 March 2017 .

^ "Surface Texture: Electroplishing and Ra" (PDF) .

Anopol Limited/British Stainless Steel Association . Retrieved 20 March 2017 .

^ Cutchin, Johnson H. Sr. (October 27, 2015).

"Electropolishing applications and techniques" .

The Fabricator .

^ F. Kelly, Thomas; K. Miller, Michael (2007).

"Atom probe tomography" .

Review of Scientific Instruments .

78 (3): 031101.

doi : 10.1063/1.2709758 .

PMID 17411171 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Electropolishing&oldid=1303042185 " Categories : Chemical processes Metallurgical processes Metalworking Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 20:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Electropolishing 12 languages Add topic

