Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 In the Middle Ages Toggle In the Middle Ages subsection 2.1 In literature 3 In the Catholic Church 4 Church of England 5 See also 6 Citations 7 General and cited references 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Simony 49 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Act of selling church offices and roles For other uses, see Simony (disambiguation) .

Political corruption Forms and concepts Abuse of power Bribery Censorship Banned politics Political repression Political violence Cronyism Economics of corruption Election interference Electoral fraud Elite capture Influence peddling Insider trading Iron triangle Judicial Kleptocracy In local government Mafia state Malfeasance Misfeasance Nepotism Politically exposed person Pyrrhic defeat theory Revolving door Political machine Political scandal Slush fund Simony Suspicious activity report State capture State-corporate crime Throffer Anti-corruption International Anti-Corruption Court Group of States Against Corruption International Anti-Corruption Academy International Anti-Corruption Day United Nations Convention against Corruption Corruption by country Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Burkina Faso Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Côte d'Ivoire Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Ethiopia Gambia Ghana Guinea-Bissau Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Kazakhstan Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Oman Palestine Pakistan Philippines Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Northern Ireland Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom North America Canada Mexico United States Central America Costa  Rica Cuba El Salvador Haiti Honduras Nicaragua South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia Fiji Micronesia New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa v t e Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e Simony ( / ˈ s ɪ m ə n i / ) is the act of selling church offices and roles or sacred things. It is named after Simon Magus , [ 1 ] who is described in the Acts of the Apostles as having offered two disciples of Jesus payment in exchange for their empowering him to impart the power of the Holy Spirit to anyone on whom he would place his hands .

[ 2 ] The term extends to other forms of trafficking for money in "spiritual things".

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Origin [ edit ] The earliest church legislation against simony may be that of the forty-eighth canon of the Synod of Elvira ( c.

305 ), against the practice of making a donation following a baptism.

[ 5 ] : 60 Following the Edict of Milan (313), the increased power and wealth of the church hierarchy attracted simony.

[ 5 ] : 30 There are several accusations of simony (not by that name) against Arians , from Athanasius of Alexandria , Hilary of Poitiers , Pope Liberius and Gregory of Nazianzus .

[ 5 ] : 34–36 Many Church Fathers, such as Ambrose , spoke out against the selling of ministries.

[ 5 ] : 56 Anti-simony provisions in Church Council canons (and papal bulls ) became common: the First Council of Nicaea (325) , the Synod of Antioch (341) , and the Councils of Serdica (343–344), Chalcedon (451) , and Orléans (533) , etc.

[ 5 ] : 62, 66, 121 The purchase or sale of ecclesiastical office was associated with the figure of Simon Magus in the Acts of the Apostles and his name came into use as a term.

[ 2 ] Important in popularizing the word 'Simony' was Pope Gregory I (590–604), who called such exchanges the "simoniac heresy".

[ 6 ] In the Middle Ages [ edit ] Although considered a serious offense against canon law , simony is thought to have become widespread in the Catholic Church during the 9th and 10th centuries.

[ 7 ] In the eleventh century, it was the focus of a great deal of debate.

[ 8 ] Central to this debate was the validity of simoniacal orders: that is, whether a cleric who had obtained their office through simony was validly ordained.

[ 9 ] The Corpus Juris Canonici , the Decretum [ 10 ] and the Decretals of Gregory IX [ 11 ] all dealt with the subject. The offender, whether simoniacus (the perpetrator of a simoniacal transaction) or simoniace promotus (the beneficiary of a simoniacal transaction), was liable to deprivation of his benefice and deposition from orders if a secular priest , or to confinement in a stricter monastery if a regular . No distinction seems to have been drawn between the sale of an immediate and of a reversionary interest. The innocent simoniace promotus was, apart from dispensation, liable to the same penalties as though he were guilty.

[ 12 ] [ clarification needed ] In 1494, a member of the Carmelite order, Adam of Genoa, was found murdered in his bed with twenty wounds after preaching against the practice of simony.

[ 13 ] Abbot practising simony (France, 12th century) Girolamo and cardinal Marco Corner investing Marco, abbot of Carrara, with his benefice, Titian , c.

1520 In literature [ edit ] Dante speaks to Pope Nicholas III , committed to the Inferno for his simony, in Gustave Doré 's 1861 wood engraving (portrait of the Third Bolgia of the Eighth Circle of Hell) In the 14th century, Dante Alighieri depicted the punishment of many "clergymen, and popes and cardinals" in hell for being avaricious or miserly.

[ 14 ] He also criticised certain popes and other simoniacs: [ 15 ] Rapacious ones, who take the things of God, that ought to be the brides of Righteousness, and make them fornicate for gold and silver!

The time has come to let the trumpet sound for you; ...

In the Catholic Church [ edit ] Simony remains prohibited in Roman Catholic canon law. In the Code of Canon Law, Canon 149.3 notes that "Provision of an office made as a result of simony is invalid by the law itself." [ 16 ] Church of England [ edit ] The Church of England struggled with the practice after its separation from Rome. For the purposes of English law , simony is defined by William Blackstone as "obtain[ing] orders, or a licence to preach, by money or corrupt practices" [ 17 ] or, more narrowly, "the corrupt presentation of any one to an ecclesiastical benefice for gift or reward".

[ 18 ] While English law recognized simony as an offence, [ 19 ] it treated it as merely an ecclesiastical matter, rather than a crime, for which the punishment was forfeiture of the office or any advantage from the offence and severance of any patronage relationship with the person who bestowed the office. Both Edward VI and Elizabeth I promulgated statutes against simony, in the latter case through the Simony Act 1588 ( 31 Eliz. 1 . c. 6) and Simony Act 1688 . The cases of Bishop of St. David's Thomas Watson in 1699 [ 20 ] and of Dean of York William Cockburn in 1841 were particularly notable.

[ 21 ] By the Benefices Act 1892 , [ which?

] a person guilty of simony is guilty of an offence for which he may be proceeded against under the Clergy Discipline Act 1892 ( 55 & 56 Vict.

c. 32). An innocent clerk is under no disability, as he might be by the canon law. Simony may be committed in three ways – in promotion to orders, in presentation to a benefice, and in resignation of a benefice. The common law (with which the canon law is incorporated, as far as it is not contrary to the common or statute law or the prerogative of the Crown ) has been considerably modified by statute. Where no statute applies to the case, the doctrines of the canon law may still be of authority.

[ 12 ] As of 2011 [update] , simony remains an offence.

[ 22 ] [ better source needed ] An unlawfully bestowed office can be declared void by the Crown, and the offender can be disabled from making future appointments and fined up to £1,000.

[ 23 ] Clergy are no longer required to make a declaration as to simony on ordination , but offences are now likely to be dealt with under the Clergy Discipline Measure 2003 (No. 3).

[ 24 ] [ full citation needed ] [ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Civil law (common law) Concordat of Worms Corruption in religion Gregorian Reform Indulgence , a Church doctrine widely abused in the late medieval period For papal simony, see Papal selection before 1059 § Ostrogothic rule (493–537) Simony Act 1688 Simony Act 1713 Citations [ edit ] ^ The Reader's Encyclopedia (1965), New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, vol.2, p .932, "Simon." ^ a b Acts of the Apostles 8:9–24 ^ Smith 1880 .

^ Halsbury 2002 , 832 .

^ a b c d e Weber, N. A. (1909).

A History of Simony in the Christian Church: from the beginning to the death of Charlemagne (814) (PDF) . Baltimore: J. H. Furst.

^ Rosé, Isabelle (2017).

Simon le Magicien hérésiaque ?

. Presses universitaires de Rennes.

ISBN 978-2-7535-5904-2 .

^ Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions, edited by Wendy Doniger, 1999 ^ Reuter, Timothy (2001).

"Gifts And Simony" .

Medieval Transformations: Texts, Power, and Gifts in Context : 157– 168.

doi : 10.1163/9789004476400_011 .

ISBN 9789004476400 .

^ West, Charles (2022).

"The Simony Crisis of the Eleventh Century and the 'Letter of Guido' " .

The Journal of Ecclesiastical History .

73 (2): 229– 253.

doi : 10.1017/S0022046921000063 .

S2CID 239635858 .

^ Chisholm 1911 , p. 133 cites Pt. ii. cause i. quest. 3 ^ Chisholm 1911 , p. 133 cites Bk. v. tit. 3.

^ a b Chisholm 1911 , p. 133.

^ Burckhardt, Jacob (1878).

The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy . University of Toronto - Robarts Library: Vienna Phaidon Press. p.

60 .

^ Inferno , Canto VII, line 47, Mandelbaum translation.

^ Inferno , Canto XIX, lines 2–6, Mandelbaum translation ^ "Code of Canon Law - Title IX - Ecclesiastical Offices (Cann. 145-196)" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 26 April 2022 .

^ Blackstone, William (1765).

Commentaries on the Laws of England vol I . Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp.

376– 7.

^ Blackstone, William (1769).

Commentaries on the Laws of England vol IV . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 62.

^ 3 Coke's Institutes 153–156 ^ Handley 2004 .

^ The Times , 10 April 1841, p. 6 col.b, reprinted from the Cambridge Advertiser ^ Halsbury 2002 , 832 & 1359 ^ Simony Act 1588 , s.4 ^ 2003 No. 3 ^ r.8.

Halsbury 2002 , 1359 General and cited references [ edit ] Clashfern, Lord Mackay of, ed. (2002).

Halsbury's Laws of England . Vol. 14 (4 ed.). "Ecclesiastical Law", 832 "Penalties and disability on simony"; 1359 "Simony".

See also current updates.

Handley, S. (2004). "Watson, Thomas (1637–1717)".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/28868 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) Smith, W. (1880).

"Simony" .

A Dictionary of Christian Antiquities: Being a Continuation of the 'Dictionary of the Bible' . J.B. Burr Pub. Co.

Attribution: This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Simony ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

133– 134.

Further reading [ edit ] Aquinas, Thomas .

"Summa Theologica: Simony (Secunda Secundae Partis, Q. 100)" .

New Advent . Retrieved 14 December 2023 .

Macdonell, George Paul (1885).

"Ayliffe, John" .

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 2. pp.

279– 281.

Weber, N.A. (1912).

"Simony" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 14.

External links [ edit ] Look up simony in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX v t e Investiture Controversy People Atto (archbishop of Milan) Pope Callixtus II Antipope Clement III Erlembald Gotofredo da Castiglione Pope Gregory VII Guido da Velate Henry I of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor Matilda of Tuscany Pope Paschal II Rudolf of Rheinfelden Documents and events Concordat of Worms Dictatus papae Donation of Constantine Excommunication First Battle of Langensalza First Council of the Lateran In nomine Domini Saxon revolt of 1077–1088 Gregorian Reform Norman conquest of southern Italy Sack of Rome Walk to Canossa Concepts Canon law Church and state in medieval Europe Clerical celibacy College of Cardinals Divine right of kings Dominium mundi Holy Roman Empire Investiture Papacy Papal States Donation of Pepin Separation of church and state Simony See also Libellus de imperatoria potestate in urbe Roma Catholicism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Simony&oldid=1292059365 " Categories : Simony Investiture Controversy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2013 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2025 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from June 2020 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 00:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Simony 49 languages Add topic

