Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Facsimiles in the age of mechanical reproduction 2 Facsimiles and conservation 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Facsimile 42 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego Hrvatski Ido Interlingua Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Copy or reproduction of an original work For other uses, see Facsimile (disambiguation) .

1823 facsimile of the United States Declaration of Independence made by William Stone A facsimile (from Latin fac simile , "to make alike") is a copy or reproduction of an old book , manuscript , map , art print , or other item of historical value that is as true to the original source as possible. It differs from other forms of reproduction by attempting to replicate the source as accurately as possible in scale, color, condition, and other material qualities. For books and manuscripts, this also entails a complete copy of all pages; hence, an incomplete copy is a "partial facsimile". Facsimiles are sometimes used by scholars to research a source that they do not have access to otherwise, and by museums and archives for media preservation and conservation . Many are sold commercially, often accompanied by a volume of commentary.

The term " fax " is a shortened form of "facsimile", though most faxes are not reproductions of the quality expected in a true facsimile.

Facsimiles in the age of mechanical reproduction [ edit ] Advances in the art of facsimile are closely related to advances in printmaking . Maps, for instance, were the focus of early explorations in making facsimiles, although these examples often lack the rigidity to the original source that is now expected.

[ 1 ] An early example is the Abraham Ortelius map (1598).

[ 1 ] Innovations during the 18th century, especially in the realms of lithography and aquatint , facilitated an explosion in the number of facsimiles of old master drawings that could be studied from afar.

[ 2 ] Facsimile of Edgar Allan Poe 's original manuscript for The Murders in the Rue Morgue In the past, techniques and devices such as the philograph (tracing an original through a transparent plane), photostat , hectograph , or lithograph were used to create facsimiles. More recently, facsimiles have been made by the use of some form of photographic technique. For documents, a facsimile most often refers to document reproduction by a photocopy machine. In the digital age, an image scanner , a personal computer , and a desktop printer can be used to make a facsimile.

A separate category consists of the so-called digital facsimiles, which are meant to be stored, viewed, and sometimes edited or annotated on a computer. These are often available online in repositories that consist of manuscripts from a particular location or collection.

[ 3 ] Such digital facsimiles are considered separate objects from the manuscripts or books that they represent.

[ 4 ] They are an important research aid, especially for historians.

Facsimiles and conservation [ edit ] Important illuminated manuscripts like Les Très Riches Heures du duc de Berry are not only on display to the public as facsimiles, but available in high quality to scholars.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] However, unlike normal book reproductions, facsimiles remain truer to the original colors—which is especially important for illuminated manuscripts—and preserve defects.

[ 7 ] Facsimiles are best suited to printed or hand-written documents, and not to items such as three-dimensional objects or oil paintings with unique surface texture.

[ 8 ] Reproductions of those latter objects are often referred to as replicas .

See also [ edit ] Record type , a family of typefaces designed to allow the publication of medieval manuscripts in semi-facsimile References [ edit ] ^ a b C. Koeman, "An Increase in Facsimile Reprints", Imago Mundi , vol. 18 (1964), pp. 87-88.

^ Craig Hartley, "Aquatint", The Oxford Companion to Western Art , ed. Hugh Brigstocke.

Oxford University Press , 2001; Grove Art Online , Oxford University Press, 2005. [accessed 20 April 2008].

^ "e-codices. Virtual Manuscript Library of Switzerland" .

www.e-codices.unifr.ch . Retrieved 2024-04-12 .

^ Fafinski, Mateusz (2021-04-01).

"Facsimile narratives: Researching the past in the age of digital reproduction" .

Digital Scholarship in the Humanities .

37 (1): 94– 108.

doi : 10.1093/llc/fqab017 .

ISSN 2055-7671 .

^ "Facsimile Editions - Our Books in Public Institutions" .

www.facsimile-editions.com . Archived from the original on 2017-07-16 . Retrieved 2019-05-23 .

^ Paul Lewis, "Preservation takes rare manuscripts from the public", New York Times - 25 January 1987 [accessed 19 April 2008].

^ Bronwyn Stocks, "The Facsimile and the Manuscript" , - an exhibition in the Leigh Scott Gallery, University of Melbourne (on-line catalogue with additional images).

^ Richard Godfrey, "Reproduction reproductive prints", The Oxford Companion to Western Art , ed. Hugh Brigstocke.

Oxford University Press , 2001; Grove Art Online , Oxford University Press, 2005. [accessed 20 April 2008].

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Facsimile&oldid=1301606941 " Categories : Book terminology Illuminated manuscripts Museology Copying Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 19:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Facsimile 42 languages Add topic

