Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Overview of major works 3 Selected publications 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Chandra Talpade Mohanty 11 languages Català Español Français 한국어 Italiano עברית مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian-American Feminism and women's studies professor Chandra Talpade Mohanty Chandra Talpade Mohanty (2011) Self portrait of Chandra Mohanty Born Chandra Talapade Mohanty 1955 Bombay , Bombay State (now Mumbai , Maharashtra ), India Academic background Alma mater University of Delhi ; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Academic work Discipline Women's Studies, Feminism Institutions Oberlin College ; Hamilton College ; Syracuse University Notable works Under Western eyes: Feminist scholarship and colonial discourses Website Official Website Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Chandra Talpade Mohanty (born 1955) is a Distinguished Professor of Women's and Gender Studies, Sociology, and the Cultural Foundations of Education and Dean's Professor of the Humanities at Syracuse University . Mohanty, a postcolonial and transnational feminist theorist, has argued for the inclusion of a transnational approach in exploring women’s experiences across the world. She is author of Feminism Without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity (Duke University Press, 2003 and Zubaan Books, India, 2004; translated into Korean, 2005, Swedish, 2007, and Turkish, 2009, Japanese, 2012 and Italian, 2012), and co-editor of Third World Women and the Politics of Feminism (Indiana University Press, 1991), Feminist Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures (Routledge, 1997), Feminism and War: Confronting U.S. Imperialism , (Zed Press, 2008), The Sage Handbook on Identities (coedited with Margaret Wetherell, 2010), and Feminist Freedom Warriors: Genealogies, Justice, Politics, and Hope (co-edited with Linda Carty, Haymarket Press, 2018).

Her work focuses on transnational feminist theory, anti-capitalist feminist praxis, anti-racist education, and the politics of knowledge. Central to Mohanty’s transnational mission is the project of building a "non-colonizing feminist solidarity across the borders," through an intersectional analysis of race, nation, colonialism, sexuality, class and gender.

Early life and education [ edit ] Chandra Talpade Mohanty was born in 1955, in present-day Mumbai , Maharashtra , India .

[ citation needed ] She has spent time in Nigeria and London. She became a US citizen and continued her education in the United States.

[ 1 ] Mohanty graduated in 1974 with honors and a Bachelor's degree in English from the University of Delhi in India. She continued her education, earning a Master's degree in English in 1976. She attended the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign , from where she earned a master's degree in Education, specifically in teaching English in 1980. She continued her education in Illinois, earning a Ph.D.

from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 1987. She is additionally the recipient of an Honorary Doctorate, Faculty of Social Sciences, Lund University Sweden, presented in 2008, [ 2 ] and an Honorary Doctorate in humanities from the College of Wooster , Ohio, awarded in 2012.

[ 3 ] As of 2013 [update] , Mohanty has served as the women's studies department chair at Syracuse University . Earlier, she served as a professor of women's studies at Oberlin College in Oberlin, Ohio and Hamilton College in Clinton, New York .

[ 2 ] She is a member of the advisory boards of the Centre for Feminist Foreign Policy , [ 4 ] Center for Intersectional Justice , [ 5 ] Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society , Transformations, The Journal of Inclusive Pedagogy and Scholarship, Feminist Africa (South
Africa), Asian Women (Korea), Feminist Economics , and the Caribbean Review of Gender Studies.

[ 6 ] Overview of major works [ edit ] She became known after the publication of her 1984 essay, "Under Western Eyes: Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourses", [ 7 ] in which she states, The relationship between 'Woman'—a cultural and ideological composite Other constructed through diverse representational discourses (scientific, literary, juridical, linguistic, cinematic, etc.)—and 'women'—real, material subjects of their collective histories—is one of the central questions the practice of feminist scholarship seeks to address." [ 8 ] In this essay, Mohanty critiques the political project of Western feminism and its discursive construction of the category of the " Third World woman" as a generic, homogenous, victimized stereotype that Western feminists must save. Mohanty states that Western feminisms have tended to gloss over the differences between Southern women , but that the experience of oppression is incredibly diverse, and contingent upon  historical, cultural, and individual reasons.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Her paper was a key work, highlighting the difficulties faced by feminists from the Third World in being heard within the broader feminist movement, and it led to a "redefining of power relationships" between feminists within the First and Third worlds.

[ 7 ] In 2003, Mohanty released her book Feminism Without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity . In this work, she argues for a bridging of theory and praxis , and the personal and the political. Major themes addressed include the politics of difference, transnational solidarity building, and anticapitalist struggle against neoliberal globalization . As well as reprinting "Under Western Eyes", in the final section, "Reorienting Feminism", Mohanty offers a response to criticism of the essay, and "reiterates her belief in the possibility, indeed necessity, of building common political projects between Third World and Western feminisms".

[ 10 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Mohanty, Chandra Talpade; Russo, Anne; and Lourdes M. Torres (1991).

Third World Women and the Politics of Feminism , Indiana University Press, 338 pages.

ISBN 978-0253206329 Mohanty, Chandra Talpade; and M. Jacqui Alexander (1996).

Feminist Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures , Routledge Press, 464 pages.

ISBN 978-0415912112 Mohanty, Chandra Talpade (2003).

Feminism Without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity , Duke University Press Books , 300 pages.

ISBN 978-0822330219 Mohanty, Chandra Talpade; Riley, Robin L.; and Minnie Bruce Pratt (2008).

Feminism and War: Confronting U.S. Imperialism , Zed Books, 280 pages.

ISBN 978-1848130180 Mohanty, Chandra Talpade; Wetherell, M. (2010).

Sage Handbook of Identities , U.K: Sage Publications.

ISBN 978-1412934114 Carty, Linda E. and Mohanty, Chandra Talpade, editors (2018).

Feminist Freedom Warriors: Genealogies, Justice, Politics, and Hope Haymarket Books, 200 pages.

ISBN 978-1608468973 See also [ edit ] Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak Postcolonial Feminism Postcolonialism References [ edit ] ^ Formes, Malia. (2005) " Review of Mohanty, Chandra Talpade, Feminism without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity ". H-Women, H-Net Reviews. Retrieved 28 April 2013.

^ a b "Chandra Talpade Mohanty" .

as-cascade.syr.edu . Syracuse University. Archived from the original on 4 July 2013 . Retrieved 27 April 2013 .

^ Finn, John. (15 May 2012). " College of Wooster's Class of 2012 Receives Final Instructions for the Journey Ahead ", Akron Beacon Journal . Retrieved 28 April 2013.

^ "Advisory Council" .

^ "Who we are" .

www.intersectionaljustice.org . Retrieved 12 July 2018 .

^ "Chandra Talpade Mohanty" (PDF) . Social Justice Initiative.

^ a b Dua, Ena; Trotz, Alissa. (2002). " Transnational Pedagogy: Doing Political Work in Women's Studies ".

Atlantis 26:2. p66" ^ a b Mohanty, Chandra Talpade. (1984). " Under Western Eyes: Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourses ".

Boundary 2 . 12:3-13:1. pp. 333-358.

^ Felski, Rita. (1997) "The Doxa of Difference".

Signs , 23:1. pp. 1-21 ^ Thobani, Sunera. (2005). "Feminism without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity (review)", Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy . 20:3. pp 221-224.

Further reading [ edit ] The book Carty, Linda E. and Mohanty, Chandra Talpade, editors (2018).

Feminist Freedom Warriors: Genealogies, Justice, Politics, and Hope Haymarket Books, 200 pages.

ISBN 978-1608468973 is in part description and transcripts of selected interviews from the digital media site.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Chandra Talpade Mohanty .

Official website Feminist Freedom Warriors digital archive Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Latvia Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chandra_Talpade_Mohanty&oldid=1285748357 " Categories : Feminist studies scholars 1955 births Living people Indian anti-capitalists Syracuse University faculty Multicultural feminism Postcolonial theorists Delhi University alumni University of Illinois College of Education alumni Hamilton College (New York) faculty Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2018 Use Indian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements Official website not in Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 April 2025, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chandra Talpade Mohanty 11 languages Add topic

