Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Installation 3 Gesamtkunstwerk 4 Art and Objecthood 5 Interactive installations 6 Immersive virtual reality 7 Gallery 8 See also 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Installation art 3 languages العربية فارسی Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Three-dimensional work of art See also: Interactive art This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rachel Whiteread , Embankment at Tate Modern , London An installation art of Mad crab created with waste plastics and similar non-biodegradable wastes at Fort Kochi , India.

Installation art is an artistic genre of three-dimensional works that are often site-specific and designed to transform the perception of a space. Generally, the term is applied to interior spaces, whereas exterior interventions are often called public art , land art or art intervention ; however, the boundaries between these terms overlap.

History [ edit ] Visitors interact with a couple in bed, inside one of the many environments of La Menesunda (1965), one of the earliest large-scale installations in art history.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Installation art can be either temporary or permanent. Installation artworks have been constructed in exhibition spaces such as museums and galleries, as well as public and private spaces. The genre incorporates a broad range of everyday and natural materials, which are often chosen for their " evocative " qualities, as well as new media such as video , sound , performance , immersive virtual reality and the internet . Many installations are site-specific in that they are designed to exist only in the space for which they were created, appealing to qualities evident in a three-dimensional immersive medium. Artistic collectives such as the Exhibition Lab at New York's American Museum of Natural History created environments to showcase the natural world in as realistic a medium as possible. Likewise, Walt Disney Imagineering employed a similar philosophy when designing the multiple immersive spaces for Disneyland in 1955. Since its acceptance as a separate discipline, a number of institutions focusing on Installation art were created. These included the Mattress Factory , Pittsburgh, the Museum of Installation in London, and the Fairy Doors of Ann Arbor, MI , among others.

Installation art came to prominence in the 1970s but its roots can be identified in earlier artists such as Marcel Duchamp and his use of the readymade and Kurt Schwitters ' Merz art objects, rather than more traditional craft based sculpture . The "intention" of the artist is paramount in much later installation art whose roots lie in the conceptual art of the 1960s. This again is a departure from traditional sculpture which places its focus on form . Early non-Western installation art includes events staged by the Gutai group in Japan starting in 1954, which influenced American installation pioneers like Allan Kaprow .

Wolf Vostell shows his installation 6 TV Dé-coll/age in 1963 [ 3 ] at the Smolin Gallery in New York.

Installation [ edit ] Allan McCollum .

The Shapes Project , 2005/06 Installation as nomenclature for a specific form of art came into use fairly recently; its first use as documented by the Oxford English Dictionary was in 1969. It was coined in this context, in reference to a form of art that had arguably existed since prehistory but was not regarded as a discrete category until the mid-twentieth century.

Allan Kaprow used the term "Environment" in 1958 (Kaprow 6) to describe his transformed indoor spaces; this later joined such terms as "project art" and "temporary art." Essentially, installation/environmental art takes into account a broader sensory experience, rather than floating framed points of focus on a "neutral" wall or displaying isolated objects (literally) on a pedestal. This may leave space and time as its only dimensional constants, implying dissolution of the line between "art" and "life"; Kaprow noted that "if we bypass 'art' and take nature itself as a model or point of departure, we may be able to devise a different kind of art... out of the sensory stuff of ordinary life".

Gesamtkunstwerk [ edit ] The conscious act of artistically addressing all the senses with regard to a total experience made a resounding debut in 1849 when Richard Wagner conceived of a Gesamtkunstwerk , or an operatic work for the stage that drew inspiration from ancient Greek theater in its inclusion of all the major art forms: painting , writing , music , etc. (Britannica). In devising operatic works to commandeer the audience's senses, Wagner left nothing unobserved: architecture , ambience, and even the audience itself were considered and manipulated in order to achieve a state of total artistic immersion. In the book "Themes in Contemporary Art", it is suggested that "installations in the 1980s and 1990s were increasingly characterized by networks of operations involving the interaction among complex architectural settings, environmental sites and extensive use of everyday objects in ordinary contexts. With the advent of video in 1965, a concurrent strand of installation evolved through the use of new and ever-changing technologies, and what had been simple video installations expanded to include complex interactive, multimedia and virtual reality environments".

Art and Objecthood [ edit ] Guardians of Time , Manfred Kielnhofer , Festival of Lights (Berlin) French Cathedral, Berlin, Velotaxi 2011 In "Art and Objecthood", Michael Fried derisively labels art that acknowledges the viewer as " theatrical " (Fried 45). There is a strong parallel between installation and theater: both play to a viewer who is expected to be at once immersed in the sensory / narrative experience that surrounds him and maintain a degree of self-identity as a viewer. The traditional theater-goer does not forget that they have come in from outside to sit and take in a created experience; a trademark of installation art has been the curious and eager viewer, still aware that they are in an exhibition setting and tentatively exploring the novel universe of the installation.

The artist and critic Ilya Kabakov mentions this essential phenomenon in the introduction to his lectures "On the "Total" Installation": "[One] is simultaneously both a 'victim' and a viewer, who on the one hand surveys and evaluates the installation, and on the other, follows those associations, recollections which arise in him[;] he is overcome by the intense atmosphere of the total illusion". Here installation art bestows an unprecedented importance on the observer's inclusion in that which he observes. The expectations and social habits that the viewer brings with him into the space of the installation will remain with him as he enters, to be either applied or negated once he has taken in the new environment. What is common to nearly all installation art is a consideration of the experience in toto and the problems it may present, namely the constant conflict between disinterested criticism and sympathetic involvement.

Television and video offer somewhat immersive experiences, but their unrelenting control over the rhythm of passing time and the arrangement of images precludes an intimately personal viewing experience. Ultimately, the only things a viewer can be assured of when experiencing the work are his own thoughts and preconceptions and the basic rules of space and time. All else may be molded by the artist's hands.

The central importance of the subjective point of view when experiencing installation art, points toward a disregard for traditional Platonic image theory. In effect, the entire installation adopts the character of the simulacrum or flawed statue : it neglects any ideal form in favor of optimizing its direct appearance to the observer. Installation art operates fully within the realm of sensory perception, in a sense "installing" the viewer into an artificial system with an appeal to his subjective perception as its ultimate goal.

Interactive installations [ edit ] Marc Lee 10.000 Moving Cities , 2010-ongoing, National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art Seoul An urban interactive art installation by Maurizio Bolognini (Genoa, 2005), which everybody can modify by using a cell phone.

An interactive installation frequently involves the audience acting on the work of art or the piece responding to users' activity.

[ 4 ] There are several kinds of interactive installations that artists produce, these include web -based installations (e.g., Telegarden ), gallery -based installations, digital -based installations, electronic -based installations, mobile -based installations, etc. Interactive installations appeared mostly at end of the 1980s ( Legible City by Jeffrey Shaw , La plume by Edmond Couchot , Michel Bret...)  and became a genre during the 1990s, when artists became particularly interested in using the participation of the audiences to activate and reveal the meaning of the installation.

Paul Kuniholm Installation Art, for Storefronts, a Shunpike program Immersive virtual reality [ edit ] With the improvement of technology over the years, artists are more able to explore outside of the boundaries that were never able to be explored by artists in the past.

[ 5 ] The media used are more experimental and bold; they are also usually cross media and may involve sensors, which plays on the reaction to the audiences' movement when looking at the installations. By using virtual reality as a medium, immersive virtual reality art is probably the most deeply interactive form of art.

[ 6 ] By allowing the spectator to "visit" the representation, the artist creates "situations to live" vs "spectacle to watch".

[ 7 ] Gallery [ edit ] Firoz Mahmud , Sucker'wfp21 aircraft sculptural installation at Aichi Arts Center .

Maurice Benayoun , Neorizon , urban interactive art installation, eArts Festival Shanghai, 2008.

Georges Lentz , Cobar Sound Chapel , permanent sound installation, 2022.

Eberhard Bosslet , Anmaßend I , documenta 8, Kassel , Germany 1987.

Milton Becerra , Ale'ya , Durban Segnini Gallery, Miami , 2009.

[ 8 ] Vasiliy Ryabchenko , Big Bembi , 1994.

Ryoji Ikeda , data.tron at transmediale , Berlin , 2010.

Christian Boltanski , Signatures , 2011.

Pascal Dombis , Irrationnal Geometrics , 2008.

Jens Galschiøt , My Inner Beast , sculpture, 1993. Exhibited in twenty cities across Europe without permission of the authorities.

Carsten Höller .

Test Site , Tate Modern , 2006. Members of public slid down as much as five stories inside tubular slides.

Wolf Vostell , Auto-Fever , 1973, Museo Vostell Malpartida.

Jane Alexander , African Adventure ,1999-2002, Tate Modern , Bankside, London, England, November 2016.

David Spriggs , Vision II , 2017.

Ingvar Cronhammar , installation in Frederiksberg / Denmark 2015.

Menashe Kadishman , Shalechet ( Abscission ), Jewish Museum Berlin .

See also [ edit ] Appropriation (art) Art intervention Classificatory disputes about art Conceptual art Environmental sculpture Found object Interactive art Modern art Neo-conceptual art Performance art Sound art Sound installation Street installations Video installation References [ edit ] ^ "Journey through this maze-like installation and become a part of the art" .

Tate . Retrieved March 29, 2020 .

^ "Marta Minujín: Menesunda Reloaded" .

New Museum . June 26, 2019 . Retrieved March 29, 2020 .

^ Wolf Vostell, 6 TV Dé-coll/age , 1963 ^ Younis, Lauren (March 5, 2009).

"Hearts and Scissors Exhibit to Open" . Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 23 November 2014 .

"Installation art can facilitate a direct, immediate interaction with the viewer," [Cindy] Hinant said.

^ Joseph Nechvatal , Immersive Ideals / Critical Distances .

LAP Lambert Academic Publishing . 2009, p. 14 ^ Joseph Nechvatal , Immersive Ideals / Critical Distances .

LAP Lambert Academic Publishing . 2009, pp. 367-368 ^ Maurice Benayoun , Maurice Benayoun Open Art , Nouvelles éditions Scala, 2011, French version, ISBN 978-2-35988-046-5 ^ Milton Becerra Book Analysis of a process over time - 2007 - ISBN 980-6472-21-7 Bibliography [ edit ] Bishop, Claire. Installation Art a Critical History. London: Tate, 2005.

Coulter-Smith, Graham. Deconstructing Installation Art.

Online resource Ferriani, Barbara.

Ephemeral Monuments: History and Conservation of Installation Art . Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2013.

ISBN 978-1-60606-134-3 Fried, Michael.

Art and Objecthood . In Art and Objecthood: Essays and Reviews . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.

Grau, Oliver Virtual Art, from Illusion to Immersion , MIT Press 2004, ISBN 0-262-57223-0 "Installation [Environment].

Grove Art Encyclopedia . 2006. Grove Art Online. 30 January 2006 [1] .

"Installation." Oxford English Dictionary. 2006. Oxford English Dictionary Online. 30 January 2006 [2] .

"Install, v." Oxford English Dictionary . 2006. Oxford English Dictionary Online. 30 January 2006 [3] .

Murray, Timothy, Derrick de Kerckhove , Oliver Grau , Kristine Stiles , Jean-Baptiste Barrière, Dominique Moulon , Jean-Pierre Balpe, Maurice Benayoun Open Art , Nouvelles éditions Scala, 2011, French version, ISBN 978-2-35988-046-5 Kabakov, Ilya. On the "Total" Installation. Ostfildern, Germany: Cantz, 1995, 243-260.

Kaprow, Allan. "Notes on the Creation of a Total Art." In Essays on the Blurring of Art and Life, ed. Jeff Kelley. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003.

ISBN 0-520-24079-0 Mondloch, Kate.

Screens: Viewing Media Installation Art . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010.

ISBN 978-0-8166-6522-8 Nechvatal, Joseph , Immersive Ideals / Critical Distances .

LAP Lambert Academic Publishing . 2009.

"Opera" .

Britannica Student Encyclopedia (Encyclopædia Britannica Online ed.). 15 February 2006.

Reiss, Julie H.

From Margin to Center: The Spaces of Installation Art . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.

ISBN 0-262-68134-X Rosenthal, Mark.

Understanding Installation Art: From Duchamp to Holzer . Munich: Prestel Verlag, 2003.

ISBN 3-7913-2984-7 Suderburg, Erika. Space, Site, Intervention: Situating Installation Art. Minneapolis London: University of Minnesota Press, 2000.

ISBN 0-8166-3159-X External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Installation art .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Installation art .

Dossier: Site-specific Installations in Germany Installation artists and art...the-artists.org Museum of Installation (London): Interview with directors Nico de Oliveira & Nicola Oxley (2008) .

Sculpture / artdesigncafe .

Public Art Installation Of Paul Kuniholm Installation art definition from the Tate Art Glossary Contemporary installation organizations and museums Dia-Beacon Riggio Galleries The Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art The Mattress Factory Art Museum Installation art Electronic Language International Festival Interactive art installations and New media art.

Media art center, Karlsruhe Germany one of the biggest center with a permanent collection of interactive installations.

v t e Visual arts and the art world Artwork Appropriation Collage Conceptual art Cultural artifact Drawing Fine art Fine-art photograph Found object Installation art Kinetic art Mixed media bricolage Mural fresco graffiti New media art history digital virtual Painting Performance art Plastic arts Portrait Printmaking Public art street art Sculpture carving relief statue tallest Site-specific art Social sculpture Soft sculpture Stained glass Artwork title Roles Artist Collector Conservator-restorer paintings frescos Critic Curator Dealer Model Patron Visual arts education Europe Places and events Art auction Art colony Art commune Art exhibition alternative exhibition space Art gallery Contemporary art gallery Art museum Single-artist museum Art school Europe Arts centre Arts festival Artist collective Artist cooperative Artist-in-residence program Artist-run initiative Artist-run space Biennale Commission Sculpture garden Sculpture trail Virtual museum History of art Timeline of art Art history (academic study) Art manifesto Art movements Criticism feminist History of painting outline Periods in Western art history Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America Related Art market The arts Catalogue raisonné Classificatory disputes Museum collection management deaccessioning Conservation-restoration paintings Cultural policy Depiction Destination painting Eclecticism in art Economics of art art finance art valuation Elements of art Forgery Index of painting-related articles Outline of the visual arts painting sculpture Provenance Sociology of art Style Unfinished work Lists Art magazines Art media Art techniques Art movements Art museums largest most visited sculpture parks single artist Art reference books Colossal sculptures in situ Contemporary artists Contemporary art galleries Modern artists National galleries Painters by name by nationality Photographers Sculptors female Stolen paintings Most expensive paintings , sculptures , works by living artists Painting portal Visual arts portal Arts portal v t e Visual arts Architecture Art Body art Ceramics Comics Computer art Craft pallet crafts Decorative arts Design Drawing Digital art Filmmaking Light art Painting Photography Printmaking Public art Rock art Sculpture Site-specific art Street art List of artistic media v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Sculpture Types of sculpture Architectural sculpture Assemblage Bas relief Bust Chalk carving Effigy Gas sculpture Earth art Environmental sculpture Figurine Installation art Kinetic sculpture Mobile Monumental Pedimental Soap carving Soft sculpture Statue Stele Styles of sculpture Baroque Classical Detonography Jain sculpture Modern sculpture Relief Renaissance Elements in sculpture Mass Negative space Space Volume Traditional materials Wood Marble Limestone Granite Porphyry Diorite Jade Ivory Clay Terracotta Bronze Gold Silver Butter Soapstone Modern materials Steel Ice Jesmonite Acrylic Concrete Plastic Fiberglass Glass Aluminium Fabric Paper Found object Notable sculptures Venus of Hohle Fels (c. 40–42,000 BP) Lion-man (c. 35–41,000 BP) Venus of Willendorf ( c. 24–26,000 BP) Great Sphinx of Giza (c. 2558–2532 BCE) Nefertiti Bust (c. 1345 BCE) Mask of Tutankhamun (c. 1323 BCE) Abu Simbel temples (c. 1264 BCE) Discobolus (c. 450 BCE) Elgin Marbles from the Parthenon (438 BCE) Colossus of Rhodes (c. 292 BCE) Lion Capital of Ashoka (c. 250 BCE) Terracotta Army (246–210 BCE) Winged Victory of Samothrace (c. 2nd century BCE) Laocoön and His Sons (c. 200 BCE – 70 CE) Venus de Milo (130–100 BCE) Augustus of Prima Porta (c. 1st century CE) Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius (175 CE) Buddhas of Bamiyan (507–554 CE) Great Budda of Nara (752 CE) Borobudur (c. 780-833 CE) Bayon (c. 12th or 13th century CE) Angkor Wat (1150 CE) Chartes Cathedral (c. 1194–1250 CE) Konark Sun Temple (1250 CE) Moai , Easter Islands (1250–1500 CE) Pietà (1498–1499) David (1501–1504) Aztec sun stone (1502–1520) Ecstasy of Saint Teresa (1647–1652) Veiled Christ (1753) Jadeite Cabbage (19th century) Nelson's Column (1843) Lion of Belfort (1880) The Kiss (1882) Liberty Enlightening the World , Statue of Liberty (1886) The Gates of Hell (1890–1917) The Thinker (1904) Abraham Lincoln (1920) Mount Rushmore Shrine of Democracy (1927–1941) Christ the Redeemer (1927–1931) The Motherland Calls (1967) Fallen Astronaut (1971) Mother Ukraine (1981) Genghis Khan Equestrian Statue (2008) Statue of Unity (2018) Category Outline Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Installation_art&oldid=1302461175 " Categories : Installation art Contemporary art movements Visual arts genres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2024 All articles lacking in-text citations Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 14:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Installation art 3 languages Add topic

