Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design 2 Flights Toggle Flights subsection 2.1 Uncrewed 2.2 Crewed 2.3 Cancelled 3 Results 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Voskhod programme 30 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés বাংলা Català Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Slovenčina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Voskhod program ) Soviet spaceflight program Part of a series of articles on the Soviet space program Soviet crewed lunar programs Luna program Human spaceflight programs Vostok Voskhod Soyuz Salyut Apollo–Soyuz (joint) Mir Zond (lunar Soyuz 7K-L1) N1-L3 (Moon landing) TMK (Mars flyby) Spiral Almaz / TKS Energia / Buran Space probes Sputnik program Kosmos Bion GLONASS Molniya Meteor Zenit Luna program Zond program Lunokhod program Mars program Phobos program Marsnik program Astron (spacecraft) Orion 1 and Orion 2 Space Observatories RELIKT-1 Venera Vega program Expendable launch vehicles Kosmos-3M Molniya-M Proton K Soyuz U Zenit 2 Energia Kosmos 1 2I 3 3M N1 R-7 Luna Molniya Polyot Soyuz L M U2 Soyuz/Vostok Sputnik Voskhod Vostok L K 2 2M Tsyklon 2 3 Notable figures Konstantin Tsiolkovsky Friedrich Zander Mstislav Keldysh Sergei Korolev Laika Yuri Gagarin Alexander Kemurdzhian Valentina Tereshkova Alexei Leonov Konstantin Feoktistov Mikhail Tikhonravov Mikhail Yangel Valentin Glushko Vladimir Chelomey Kerim Kerimov Vasily Mishin Boris Chertok Cosmonauts List of Soviet and Russian cosmonauts v t e Voskhod 1 and 2 spacecraft The Voskhod programme ( Russian : Восход , IPA: [vɐsˈxot] , Ascent or Dawn ) was the second Soviet human spaceflight project. Two one-day crewed missions were flown using the Voskhod spacecraft and rocket , one in 1964 and one in 1965, and two dogs flew on a 22-day mission in 1966.

Voskhod development was both a follow-on to the Vostok programme and a recycling of components left over from that programme's cancellation following its first six flights. The Voskhod programme was superseded by the Soyuz programme .

Design [ edit ] The Voskhod spacecraft was basically a Vostok spacecraft that had a backup, solid-fueled retrorocket added to the top of the descent module. As it was much heavier, the launch vehicle would be the 11A57, a Molniya 8K78M with the Blok L stage removed and later the basis of the Soyuz booster. The ejection seat was removed and two or three crew couches were added to the interior at a 90-degree angle to that of the Vostok crew position. However, the position of the in-flight controls was not changed, so the crew had to crane their heads 90° to see the instruments.

In the case of Voskhod 2, an inflatable exterior airlock was also added to the descent module opposite the entry hatch. The airlock was jettisoned after use. This apparatus was needed because the vehicle avionics and environmental systems were air-cooled, and depressurization in orbit would cause overheating. A solid-fueled braking rocket was also added to the parachute lines to provide for a softer landing at touchdown. This was necessary because, unlike the Vostok, the Voskhod descent module landed with the crewmen still inside.

Unlike Vostok and the later Soyuz, Voskhod had no launch abort system, meaning that the crew lacked any means of escape from a malfunctioning launch vehicle.

Voskhod had a solid-fueled backup retrorocket on top of the capsule in case the main one failed (as it did on Voskhod 2 ). While Vostok lacked this feature, it was not considered a problem since the spacecraft would decay from orbit within 10 days. Relatively lightweight, Voskhod was well below the 11A57 booster's lift capacity, meaning that it launched into a much higher orbit and would not decay as quickly.

Flights [ edit ] The Voskhod flights, with launch dates: Uncrewed [ edit ] Kosmos 47 – Uncrewed test flight of the Voskhod hardware.

Kosmos 57 – Uncrewed test flight, unsuccessful.

Kosmos 110 – Uncrewed, sent two dogs, Veterok and Ugolyok , on a 22-day flight, launched 22 February 1966 and landed 16 March.

Crewed [ edit ] Order Mission Launch Duration Landing Crew Notes 1 Voskhod 1 12 October 1964 1 d 0 h 17 m 3 s 13 October 1964 Vladimir Komarov Konstantin Feoktistov Boris Yegorov First multiman spacecraft.

2 Voskhod 2 18 March 1965 1 d 2 h 2 m 17 s 19 March 1965 Pavel Belyayev Alexei Leonov First spacewalk .

Cancelled [ edit ] Voskhod 3 – 19-day two-man mission to study long-term weightlessness with artificial gravity, medical, military and other experiments [ 1 ] Voskhod 4 – 20-day single-man mission to study long-term weightlessness with artificial gravity, medical, military, and other experiments [ 2 ] Voskhod 5 – 10-day two-woman mission with medical and other experiments and first female EVA-spacewalk [ 3 ] Voskhod 6 – 15-day two-man mission with military and other experiments and multiple spacewalks to test new EVA jet belt [ 4 ] Results [ edit ] While the Vostok programme was dedicated more toward understanding the effects of space travel and microgravity on the human body, Voskhod's two flights were more aimed towards spectacular firsts. Although achieving the first EVA ("spacewalk") became the main success of the programme, beating the American Project Gemini to put the first multiman crew in orbit was the objective that initially motivated the programme. After those goals were realized, the programme planned to focus on other advances the spacecraft could accomplish, such as longer duration and a second female flight. However, there were delays preparing for Voskhod 3, and during that time the Gemini programme accomplished most of what had been planned for future Voskhods.

[ 5 ] In the end, the Voskhod programme was abandoned, aided by a change in Soviet leadership which was less concerned about stunt and prestige flights, and this allowed the Soviet designers to concentrate on the Soyuz programme .

References [ edit ] ^ Astronautix, Voskhod 3 ^ Astronautix, Voskhod 4 ^ Astronautix, Voskhod 5 ^ Astronautix, Voskhod 6 ^ "Voskhod 3" . Archived from the original on 2010-02-07 . Retrieved 2010-03-31 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Voskhod program .

Voskhod manned space project on Encyclopedia Astronautica v t e Voskhod programme Uncrewed Kosmos 47 Kosmos 57 Kosmos 110 (two dogs, Veterok and Ugolyok ) Crewed Voskhod 1 ( Vladimir Komarov , Konstantin Feoktistov , and Boris Yegorov ) Voskhod 2 ( Pavel Belyayev and Alexey Leonov ) Planned Voskhod 3, 4, 5, and 6 v t e Soviet and Russian government human spaceflight programs Active Soyuz ISS (joint) Russian Orbital Segment In development Orel Past Vostok Voskhod Salyut Almaz (incorporated into Salyut program) / TKS Apollo–Soyuz (joint) Mir Shuttle-Mir (joint) Cancelled Moon: Zond (7K-L1) , N1-L3 , LK-700 , Zvezda Interplanetary: TMK , Aelita , Martian Piloted Complex Spaceplanes: Spiral , Energia / Buran , MAKS , Kliper , LKS , Tupolev Tu-2000 Capsules: Zvezda , Zarya Space Stations: OPSEK Related List of Soyuz missions List of Soviet human spaceflight missions List of Russian human spaceflight missions Cosmonaut ranks and positions v t e Soviet and Russian space program Roscosmos Launch sites Baikonur Cosmodrome (in Kazakhstan ) Dombarovsky Kapustin Yar Plesetsk Cosmodrome Svobodny Cosmodrome (defunct) Vostochny Cosmodrome Launch vehicles Angara Proton Soyuz Human spaceflight programs Past Vostok Voskhod Salyut Almaz (incorporated into Salyut program) / TKS Soyuz-Apollo (joint) Mir Shuttle–Mir (joint) Energia / Buran Cancelled Zond (7K-L1) (Moon flyby) Soviet crewed lunar programs (Moon landing) Zvezda (moonbase) TMK (Mars/Venus flyby) Spiral Zvezda Zarya MAKS Kliper Active International Space Station (joint) Russian Orbital Segment Soyuz In development Orel Robotic programs Past Dnepropetrovsk Sputnik (1961–1982) Prognoz (1972–1996) Luna (1958–1976) Venera (1961–1985) Zond (1964–1970) Astron (1983–1991) Vega (1984–1987) Phobos (failed) (1988–1989) Granat (1989–1998) Gamma (1990–1992) Mars 96 (failed) (1996) Resurs-DK No.1 (2006–2016) CORONAS (1994–2009) Fobos-Grunt (failed) (2011) Spektr-R (2011–2019) Luna 25 (failed) (2023) Cancelled Kazachok Active Bion-M Elektro–L Trace Gas Orbiter (joint) Meteor-M Resurs-P Spektr-RG In development Luna-Glob Luna 26 Luna 27 Luna 28 Spektr-UV Communications Sputnik (begun 1957) Sputnik 1 Sputnik 2 Sputnik 3 Sputnik 41 Sputnik 99 Luch Deep Space Network Concepts Baikal-Angara Laplace-P Mars-Grunt Mercury-P OPSEK Spektr-M Venera-D Sfera Images and artwork Mission patches Related List of cosmonauts Cosmonaut ranks and positions Pilot-Cosmonaut of the Russian Federation Soviet space dogs Laika Belka and Strelka Veterok and Ugolyok Ivan Ivanovich Soviet space exploration history on Soviet stamps Cosmonauts Alley Monument to the Conquerors of Space Memorial Museum of Cosmonautics Out of the Present (1995 documentary) Mission to Mir (1997 documentary) See also: Space industry of Russia Russian Aerospace Defence Forces Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Voskhod_programme&oldid=1252260919 " Categories : Human spaceflight programs Voskhod program Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with Russian IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Use British English from January 2014 This page was last edited on 20 October 2024, at 15:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Voskhod programme 30 languages Add topic

