Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Early life 3 Education 4 Early career 5 The Free Enterprise Institute Toggle The Free Enterprise Institute subsection 5.1 Courses V-50 and V-201 5.1.1 Volitional science 5.1.2 Property 6 Death 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Andrew Joseph Galambos 2 languages العربية Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian astrophysicist and philosopher (1924–1997) The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Andrew Joseph Galambos (AJG) (born Ifj. Galambos József András; June 27, 1924 in Hungary – April 10, 1997 in Orange County , California ) was an astrophysicist and philosopher .

He presented his theories of freedom and Volitional Science in oral lectures through his Free Enterprise Institute from 1961 to 1989 in Los Angeles, California. He developed over 117 courses for FEI's curriculum over a period of twenty-eight years. As Galambos' literary executor, William W. Martin completed the all encompassing "Book One" that the professor intended to have published in written form which Martin published under the title Sic Itur Ad Astra (Latin to English translation: "This is the way to the stars"). Within Sic Itur Ad Astra is the "roadmap to freedom" Course V-201: The Nature and Protection of Primary Property. Galambos explicitly instructed his trustee, Galambos' former lawyer Wayne Joyner, to provide funding from his estate to his literary executor, Martin, to edit, print, and publish his books. Instead, Joyner refused to fund the book and instead used the finances to fund unauthorized projects including the inaccurate, mistake ridden and incomplete Sic Itur Ad Astra Vol. 1 which he pulled off of the market in favor of even more inaccurate heavily edited "digitized courses." Martin was left to fund the project on his own and eventually completed the full book for the professor in the year 2003. Today the company that William W. Martin founded, Spaceland Publications, is carrying forward the ideas of Andrew J. Galambos and upholding his explicit instructions to publish and print Galambos' magnum opus Sic Itur Ad Astra and books of Galambos' other important courses.

Sic Itur Ad Astra is a fifteen volume, 6,118 page book containing the exact words of Andrew J. Galambos' most important live presentation lectures including courses V-50, V-50X, V-201 and the Joe Pyne Interview complete with a detailed index innovated by Martin which he named the Concordex .

Overview [ edit ] Galambos (AJG) defined "freedom" as the societal condition that exists when every individual has full (100%) control over his own property.

Early life [ edit ] Galambos was born in Hungary in 1924. His father, Joseph Galambos-Brown, had been an officer in the Austro-Hungarian army in World War I and then became a highly regarded architect. After the war, Galambos' father decided to emigrate to America to avoid his son becoming "cannon fodder" in a second world war, which he saw coming.

Despite his father's wish to keep his son out of war, Galambos volunteered to serve in the U.S. Army during WWII. After completing his undergraduate work at City College of New York, he moved to Minnesota in 1948 where he met his future wife, Suzanne Siegel, a fellow student at the University of Minnesota . They married in 1949.

Education [ edit ] Galambos earned degrees in physics from City College of New York and the University of Minnesota.

Early career [ edit ] Galambos moved to Los Angeles in 1952 to work for North American Aviation . Beginning in 1958, Galambos worked in the Space Technology Laboratory (STL) division of Ramo-Wooldridge Corporation , which later became TRW Space Technology Laboratories (STL). There, Galambos worked as an astrophysicist, calculating trajectories for Atlas ICBMs before the advent of high-speed digital computers.

As Galambos' ideas on freedom and proprietary government crystallized, he became disillusioned with his work at STL, which had evolved almost exclusively to focus on the development of inter-continental ballistic missiles for military purposes. Galambos did not want to work on weapons of war.

Around 1958–1959 Galambos formulated a proposal to the director of STL, George Mueller , for a project to develop rockets for space exploration, including lunar landings. Mueller turned it down. A few years later, however, Mueller took a position with NASA where he worked on the Apollo 11 human lunar landing project, the same type of project he had turned down when Galambos proposed it to him at STL.

In 1960, Galambos left the aerospace industry and joined the faculty of Whittier College to teach physics, astrophysics, and mathematics. While at Whittier, Galambos presented a popular extracurricular class entitled, "The Decline and Renaissance of Laissez-Faire Capitalism." He also taught previously at New York University, Brooklyn College, Stevens Institute of Technology of Hoboken, New Jersey, the University of Minnesota, and Carleton College of Northfield, Minnesota.

The Free Enterprise Institute [ edit ] In 1961, Galambos established The Free Enterprise Institute (FEI) which was the name he used for his teaching business. His initial course was entitled Course 100, Capitalism: The Key to Survival. He eventually taught courses on intellectual property, investments and insurance, financial planning, physics, and journalism, among others.

Galambos had an important colleague in Jay Stuart Snelson (1936–2011). Snelson was the senior lecturer for FEI from 1964 to 1978, teaching both V-50 and V-201. Snelson was later fired by Galambos for breaking his contract and plagiarizing his work. "Announcement of the Termination of Jay Snelson," Andrew J. Galambos, July 25, 1979.

Courses V-50 and V-201 [ edit ] On March 14, 1961 Andrew J. Galambos founded the Free Enterprise Institute in Los Angeles, CA. On the twentieth of April of that year, he delivered to a paying audience the first formal lecture of the Institute. That lecture and those to follow would constitute what Galambos called Course 100: “Capitalism—The Key to Survival!” That course soon became the antecedent to Course V-50: “Capitalism—The Liberal Revolution.” Course V-50 eventually consisted of sixteen sessions plus three workshops.

In the fall of 1964, Professor Galambos introduced a twelve-session course he called F-201: The Theory of Primary Property. This was later named “V-201,” in which he taught the nature of primary property (thoughts, ideas and actions) and how freedom, which was the product of total Capitalism, could be built for the first and only time in history. Whereas course V-50 was deemed by him to be the cosmological portion of the theory, course V-201 was the technological portion.

By the year 1968 Professor Galambos determined that his V-50 lectures had reached publishable maturity. But it would still take another nine years before he would discover how they should read in printed form.

Between 1964 and 1977 Galambos honed and perfected course V-201, which he deemed to be the technological roadmap, or blueprint, revealing the “natural republic”—a free society where each individual is in 100% control of their own property. This was a concept he introduced in course V-50 but took to a much higher level in course V-201.

At the end of the academic year of 1977, Galambos announced that V-201 had received its finishing touch. That oral presentation consisted of forty-eight sessions and three workshops. Together courses V-50 and V-201 constitute a unified theory called the theory of volition.

Volitional science [ edit ] Volitional Science is Galambos' term for so-called "social science," however, unlike social "science", which is not a true science at all, Volitional Science is a true science derived exclusively through the use of the scientific method. It is derived through physical science, physics, and he said that Volitional Science is the third science after physics and biology. It's a science in which Capitalism is a derivative and therefore an alternative to, and complete replacement of, all political mechanisms.

Property [ edit ] Galambos defined property as a volitional being’s life and all non-procreative derivatives thereof. This includes one’s physical being (primordial property), one’s thoughts, ideas and actions (primary property), and tangible derivatives of one’s life such as money, houses, automobiles, etc. (secondary property). Sic Itur Ad Astra, V-50: Session 1, Part A, pp. 22-24.

Death [ edit ] Galambos was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease and died on April 10, 1997.

External links [ edit ] https://spacelandpublications.com The Free Enterprise Institute Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Andrew_Joseph_Galambos&oldid=1282701567 " Categories : 1924 births 1997 deaths Copyright scholars Hungarian libertarians Libertarian theorists 20th-century Hungarian philosophers Hungarian emigrants to the United States Carleton College alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from August 2020 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes This page was last edited on 28 March 2025, at 02:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Andrew Joseph Galambos 2 languages Add topic

