Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Morphology 2 Seedless vascular plants 3 Gymnosperms 4 Angiosperms 5 Embryogenesis 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Microspore 17 languages Bosanski Català Español فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Small land plant spores that develop into male gametophytes Microscopic photo of spores (in red) of Selaginella . The large three spores at the top are megaspores whereas the numerous smaller red spores at the bottom are microspores.

Microspores are land plant spores that develop into male gametophytes , whereas megaspores develop into female gametophytes.

[ 1 ] The male gametophyte gives rise to sperm cells, which are used for fertilization of an egg cell to form a zygote . Megaspores are structures that are part of the alternation of generations in many seedless vascular cryptogams , all gymnosperms and all angiosperms . Plants with heterosporous life cycles using microspores and megaspores arose independently in several plant groups during the Devonian period.

[ 2 ] Microspores are haploid , and are produced from diploid microsporocytes by meiosis .

[ 3 ] Morphology [ edit ] The microspore has three different types of  wall layers. The outer layer is called the perispore , the next is the exospore , and the inner layer is the endospore . The perispore is the thickest of the three layers while the exospore and endospore are relatively equal in width.

[ 4 ] Seedless vascular plants [ edit ] In heterosporous seedless vascular plants, modified leaves called microsporophylls bear microsporangia containing many microsporocytes that undergo meiosis , each producing four microspores. Each microspore may develop into a male gametophyte consisting of a somewhat spherical antheridium within the microspore wall. Either 128 or 256 sperm cells with flagella are produced in each antheridium.

[ 3 ] The only heterosporous ferns are aquatic or semi-aquatic, including the genera Marsilea , Regnellidium , Pilularia , Salvinia , and Azolla . Heterospory also occurs in the lycopods in the spikemoss genus Selaginella and in the quillwort genus Isoëtes .

Types of seedless vascular plants: Water ferns Spikemosses Quillworts Gymnosperms [ edit ] In seed plants the microspores develop into pollen grains each containing a reduced, multicellular male gametophyte.

[ 5 ] The megaspores, in turn, develop into reduced female gametophytes that produce egg cells that, once fertilized, develop into seeds. Pollen cones or microstrobili usually develop toward the tips of the lower branches in clusters up to 50 or more. The microsporangia of gymnosperms develop in pairs toward the bases of the scales, which are therefore called microsporophylls . Each of the microsporocytes in the microsporangia undergoes meiosis, producing four haploid microspores. These develop into pollen grains, each consisting of four cells and, in conifers, a pair of external air sacs. The air sacs give the pollen grains added buoyancy that helps with wind dispersal.

[ 3 ] Types of Gymnosperms: Conifers Pines Ginkgos Cycads Gnetophytes Angiosperms [ edit ] As the anther of a flowering plant develops, four patches of tissue differentiate from the main mass of cells. These patches of tissue contain many diploid microsporocyte cells, each of which undergoes meiosis producing a quartet of microspores. Four chambers (pollen sacs) lined with nutritive tapetal cells are visible by the time the microspores are produced. 
After meiosis, the haploid microspores undergo several changes: The microspore divides by mitosis producing two cells. The first of the cells (the generative cell) is small and is formed inside the second larger cell (the tube cell).

The members of each part of the microspores separate from each other.

A double-layered wall then develops around each microspore.

These steps occur in sequence and when complete, the microspores have become pollen grains.

[ 3 ] Embryogenesis [ edit ] Although it is not the usual route of a microspore, this process is the most effective way of yielding haploid and double haploid plants through the use of male sex hormones.

[ 6 ] Under certain stressors such as heat or starvation, plants select for microspore embryogenesis. It was found that over 250 different species of angiosperms responded this way.

[ 6 ] In the anther , after a microspore undergoes microsporogenesis , it can deviate towards embryogenesis and become star-like microspores. The microspore can then go one of four ways: Become an embryogenic microspore, undergo callogenesis to organogenesis (haploid/double haploid plant), become a pollen-like structure or die.

[ 6 ] Microspore embryogenesis is used in biotechnology to produce double haploid plants, which are immediately fixed as homozygous for each locus in only one generation. The haploid microspore is stressed to trigger the embryogenesis pathway and the resulting haploid embryo either doubles its genome spontaneously or with the help of chromosome doubling agents. Without this double haploid technology, conventional breeding methods would take several generations of selection to produce a homozygous line.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Microsporangium Spore Megaspore References [ edit ] ^ Evert, Ray (2013).

Biology of Plants . New York: Peter Marshall.

ISBN 978-1-4292-1961-7 .

^ Bateman, R.M.; Dimichele, W.A. (1994). "Heterospory – the most iterative key innovation in the evolutionary history of the plant kingdom".

Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society .

69 (3): 345– 417.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-185x.1994.tb01276.x .

S2CID 29709953 .

^ a b c d Bidlack, James E.; Jansky, Shelley H. (2011).

Stern's Introductory Plant Biology . New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-304052-3 .

^ Lang, G (1995). "Quartäre Vegetationsgeschichte Europas".

Feddes Repertorium .

^ Bhatnagar, S.P. (1996).

Gymnosperms . New Age International. p. 8.

ISBN 978-8122407921 .

^ a b c Seguí-Simarro, José M.; Nuez, Fernando (1 September 2008). "How microspores transform into haploid embryos: changes associated with embryogenesis induction and microspore-derived embryogenesis".

Physiologia Plantarum .

134 (1): 1– 12.

doi : 10.1111/j.1399-3054.2008.01113.x .

ISSN 1399-3054 .

PMID 18507790 .

^ Testillano, Pilar (2019).

"Microspore embryogenesis: targeting the determinant factors of stress-induced cell reprogramming for crop improvement" .

Journal of Experimental Botany .

70 (11): 2965– 2978.

doi : 10.1093/jxb/ery464 .

hdl : 10261/176079 .

PMID 30753698 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Microspore&oldid=1296409014 " Category : Plant reproduction Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from October 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 21:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Microspore 17 languages Add topic

