Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Climate 1.2 Rising sea levels 2 Economic activities 3 History 4 Metropolitan areas 5 Transportation Toggle Transportation subsection 5.1 Road 5.1.1 Major Interstates 5.1.2 Major U.S. routes 5.1.3 Other significant routes 5.2 Air 5.2.1 International service 5.3 Rail 5.3.1 Amtrak service 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Gulf Coast of the United States 19 languages العربية Български Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål پنجابی Português Simple English Slovenčina Svenska اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Gulf coast ) Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 25 July 2025 .

Region of the US bordering the Gulf of Mexico "Gulf Coast" redirects here. For other uses, see Gulf Coast (disambiguation) .

Coastline in the United States Gulf Coast Coastline States that border the gulf are shown in red.

Country United States States Alabama Florida Louisiana Mississippi Texas Principal cities Houston Tampa Mobile New Orleans Pensacola Gulfport Tallahassee Largest city Houston Largest metropolitan area Greater Houston Population • Total 64,008,345 [ citation needed ] The Gulf Coast of the United States , also known as the Gulf South or the South Coast , is the coastline along the Southern United States where they meet the Gulf of Mexico . The coastal states that have a shoreline on the Gulf of Mexico are Texas , Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama , and Florida , and these are known as the Gulf States .

[ 1 ] The economy of the Gulf Coast area is dominated by industries related to energy, petrochemicals, fishing, aerospace, agriculture, and tourism. The large cities of the region are (from west to east) Brownsville , Corpus Christi , Houston , Galveston , Beaumont , Lake Charles , Lafayette , Baton Rouge , New Orleans , Gulfport , Biloxi , Mobile , Pensacola , Panama City , St. Petersburg , and Tampa . All are the centers or major cities of their respective metropolitan areas and many contain large ports .

Geography [ edit ] Houston is the largest city and urban area along the Gulf Coast.

The Gulf Coast is made of many inlets , bays , and lagoons . The coast is intersected by numerous rivers, the largest of which is the Mississippi River . Much of the land along the Gulf Coast is, or was, marshland .

[ 2 ] Ringing the Gulf Coast is the Gulf Coastal Plain , which reaches from Southern Texas to the western Florida panhandle , while the western portions of the Gulf Coast are made up of many barrier islands and peninsulas , including the 130-mile (210 km) Padre Island along the Texas coast. These landforms protect numerous bays and inlets providing as a barrier to oncoming waves. The central part of the Gulf Coast, from eastern Texas through Louisiana, consists primarily of marshland. The eastern part of the Gulf Coast, predominantly Florida, is dotted with many bays and inlets.

Climate [ edit ] Night time astronaut image of the northern Gulf coast The Gulf Coast climate is humid subtropical, although Southwest Florida features a tropical climate. Much of the year is warm to hot along the Gulf Coast, while the three winter months bring periods of cool (or rarely, cold) weather mixed with mild temperatures. The area is highly vulnerable to hurricanes as well as floods and severe thunderstorms . Much of the Gulf Coast has a summer precipitation maximum, with July or August commonly the wettest month due to the combination of frequent summer thunderstorms produced by relentless heat and humidity, and tropical weather systems, including tropical depressions, tropical storms, and hurricanes , while winter and early spring rainfall also can be heavy.

This pattern is evident in southern cities such as Houston ; New Orleans ; Mobile, Alabama ; and Pensacola, Florida . However, the central and southern Florida peninsula and South Texas has a pronounced winter dry season, as at Tampa and Fort Myers . On the central and southern Texas coast, winter, early spring and mid-summer are markedly drier, and September is the wettest month on average at Corpus Christi and Brownsville, Texas .

Tornadoes are infrequent at the coast but do occur; however, they occur more frequently in inland portions of Gulf Coast states. Over most of the Gulf Coast from Houston , Texas, eastward, extreme rainfall events are a significant threat, commonly from tropical weather systems, which can bring 4 to 10 or more inches of rain in a single day. In August 2017, Hurricane Harvey made landfall along the central Texas coast, then migrated to and stalled over the greater Houston area for several days, producing extreme, unprecedented rainfall totals of over 40 inches (1,000 mm) in many areas, unleashing widespread flooding. Climate scientists predict more hurricanes for Florida [ 3 ] and the Texas coastline in particular.

[ 4 ] Earthquakes are extremely rare to the area, but a 6.0 earthquake in the Gulf of Mexico on September 10, 2006, could be felt from the cities of New Orleans to Tampa.

Rising sea levels [ edit ] Due to the release of greenhouse gas emissions, glaciers and ice sheets are melting and expanding the oceans. The United States coastlines are projected to rise 1 foot in three decades or between 10 and 12 inches on average by 2050.

[ 5 ] The Gulf Coast will likely see the biggest change, with sea levels expected to rise between 14 and 18 inches. The Global and Regional Sea Level Rise Report predicted more frequent, major and destructive high tide flooding events along with taller storm surges by 2050 after scientists determined high tide flooding has been "increasingly common" over the past few years due to the rising sea levels.

[ 5 ] The impacts are expected to be dramatic. Low-lying coastal areas are expected to experience multiple factors, including increased levels of flooding, accelerated erosion, loss of wetlands and low-lying terrestrial ecosystems, and seawater intrusion into freshwater sources. Rising sea level and erosion will also imperil critical habitats for many commercially important fisheries that depend on inshore waters for either permanent residence or nursery area.

[ 6 ] In 2021 alone rising sea levels cost the United States approximately $2.6 billion in relief efforts and caused at least seven deaths.

[ 5 ] By 2051, the cost of flood damage is expected to increase by 61%, or $32 billion.

[ 7 ] Economic activities [ edit ] NOAA map of the 3,856 oil and gas platforms extant off the Gulf Coast in 2006 The Gulf Coast is a major center of economic activity. The marshlands along the Louisiana and Texas coasts provide breeding grounds and nurseries for ocean life that drive the fishing and shrimping industries. The Port of South Louisiana ( Metropolitan New Orleans in Laplace ) and the Port of Houston are two of the ten busiest ports in the world by cargo volume.

[ 8 ] As of 2004, seven of the top ten busiest ports in the U.S. are on the Gulf Coast.

[ 9 ] The discovery of oil and gas deposits along the coast and offshore, combined with easy access to shipping, have made the Gulf Coast the heart of the U.S.

petrochemical industry . The coast contains nearly 4,000 oil platforms .

Besides the above, the region features other important industries including aerospace and biomedical research , as well as older industries such as agriculture and—especially since the development of the Gulf Coast beginning in the 1920s and the increase in wealth throughout the United States— tourism .

History [ edit ] Map of the Louisiana Purchase Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita have destroyed a number of museums and archives in the Gulf Coast. In 2008 floods in Iowa destroyed the local Flood Museum which held materials from the Great Mississippi and Missouri Rivers Flood of 1993 .

[ 10 ] Before European settlers arrived in the region, the Gulf Coast was home to several pre-Columbian kingdoms which had extensive trade networks with empires such as the Aztecs and the Mississippi Mound Builders. Shark and alligator teeth and shells from the Gulf have been found as far north as Ohio, in the mounds of the Hopewell culture.

[ 11 ] The first Europeans to settle the Gulf Coast were primarily the French and the Spanish . The Louisiana Purchase (1803), Adams–Onís Treaty (1819) and the Texas Revolution (1835–1836) made the Gulf Coast a part of the United States during the first half of the 19th century. As the U.S. population continued to expand its frontiers westward, the Gulf Coast was a natural magnet in the South providing access to shipping lanes and both national and international commerce. The development of sugar and cotton production (enabled by slavery ) allowed the South to prosper. By the mid-19th century the city of New Orleans , being situated as a key to commerce on the Mississippi River and in the Gulf, had become the largest U.S. city not on the Atlantic seaboard and the fourth largest in the U.S. overall.

Two major events were turning points in the earlier history of the Gulf Coast region. The first was the American Civil War , which caused severe damage to some economic sectors in the South , including the Gulf Coast. The second event was the Galveston Hurricane of 1900 . At the end of the 19th century Galveston was, with New Orleans, one of the most developed cities in the region. The city had the third busiest port in the U.S.

[ 12 ] and its financial district was known as the "Wall Street of the South".

[ 13 ] Hurricane Katrina Since then the Gulf Coast has been hit with numerous other hurricanes. On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast as a Category 3 hurricane.  It was the most damaging storm in the history of the United States, causing upwards of $80 billion in damages, and leaving over 1,800 dead. Again in 2008, the Gulf Coast was struck by a catastrophic hurricane. Due to its immense size, Hurricane Ike caused devastation from the Louisiana coastline all the way to the Kenedy County, Texas , region near Corpus Christi .

[ 14 ] In addition, Ike caused flooding and significant damage along the Mississippi coastline and the Florida panhandle .

[ 15 ] Ike killed 112 people and left upwards of 300 people missing, never to be found.

[ 16 ] Hurricane Ike was the third most damaging storm in the history of the United States, causing more than $25 billion [ 17 ] in damage along the coast, leaving hundreds of thousands of people homeless, and sparking the largest search-and-rescue operation in U.S. history.

[ 18 ] Other than the hurricanes, the Gulf Coast has redeveloped dramatically over the course of the 20th century. The gulf coast is highly populated. The petrochemical industry, launched with the major discoveries of oil in Texas and spurred on by further discoveries in the Gulf waters, has been a vehicle for development in the central and western Gulf which has spawned development on a variety of fronts in these regions.

Texas in particular has benefited tremendously from this industry over the course of the 20th century and economic diversification has made the state a magnet for population and home to more Fortune 500 companies than any other U.S. state.

Florida has grown as well, driven to a great extent by its long established tourism industry but also by its position as a gateway to the Caribbean and Latin America . As of 2024, Texas and Florida are the second and third most populous states in the nation, respectively. Other areas of the Gulf Coast have benefited less, though economic development fueled by tourism has greatly increased property values along the coast, and is now a severe danger to the valuable but fragile ecosystems of the Gulf Coast.

Since January 24, 2025, U.S.

federal government agencies are required to refer to the Gulf of Mexico as the "Gulf of America" .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Metropolitan areas [ edit ] The following table lists the 11 largest core-based statistical areas along the Gulf Coast.

Metropolitan statistical areas on the United States Gulf Coast Rank Metropolitan statistical area 2020 pop. (est.) 1 Houston-The Woodlands, TX Combined Statistical Area 7,340,823 2 Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area 3,243,963 3 New Orleans-Metairie-Hammond, LA-MS Combined Statistical Area 1,510,672 4 Cape Coral-Fort Myers-Naples, FL Combined Statistical Area 1,226,553 5 North Port-Sarasota, FL Combined Statistical Area 1,087,915 6 McAllen-Edinburg, TX Combined Statistical Area 939,466 7 Baton Rouge, LA Metropolitan Statistical Area 858,571 8 Mobile-Daphne-Fairhope, AL Combined Statistical Area 661,964 9 Lafayette-Opelousas-Morgan City, LA Combined Statistical Area 619,529 10 Pensacola-Ferry Pass, FL-AL Combined Statistical Area 547,784 11 Corpus Christi-Kingsville-Alice, TX Combined Statistical Area 536,258 Transportation [ edit ] Road [ edit ] Major Interstates [ edit ] I-45 and I-10 / U.S. 90 near Downtown Houston Highway Significant cities served Interstate 2 Harlingen , McAllen Interstate 4 Tampa Interstate 10 Houston , Baytown , Beaumont , Lake Charles , Lafayette , Baton Rouge , New Orleans , Slidell , Gulfport , Biloxi , Mobile , Pensacola Interstate 12 Baton Rouge , Hammond , Slidell Interstate 37 Corpus Christi Interstate 45 Galveston , Houston Interstate 49 New Orleans (future), Houma (future), Thibodaux (future), Lafayette Interstate 55 Hammond Interstate 59 Slidell Interstate 65 Mobile Interstate 69 Victoria (future), Houston Interstate 69E Brownsville , Harlingen , Corpus Christi , Victoria (future) Interstate 69W Victoria (future) Interstate 75 Naples , Fort Myers , North Port , Sarasota , Bradenton , St. Petersburg , Tampa Major U.S. routes [ edit ] Highway Significant cities served U.S. 11 New Orleans U.S. 17 Punta Gorda U.S. 19 St. Petersburg , Tampa U.S. 29 Pensacola U.S. 31 Spanish Fort U.S. 41 Naples , Fort Myers , Sarasota , Bradenton , St. Petersburg , Tampa U.S. 43 Mobile U.S. 45 Mobile U.S. 49 Biloxi , Gulfport U.S. 51 Hammond U.S. 59 Houston , Victoria U.S. 61 New Orleans U.S. 69 Beaumont , Port Arthur U.S. 77 Brownsville , Corpus Christi , Harlingen , Victoria U.S. 83 Brownsville , Harlingen U.S. 87 Port Lavaca , Victoria U.S. 90 Beaumont , Biloxi , Crestview , Houma , Houston , Lafayette , Lake Charles , Mobile , New Orleans , Pascagoula , Pensacola , Thibodaux U.S. 92 St. Petersburg , Tampa U.S. 96 Beaumont , Port Arthur U.S. 98 Fort Walton Beach , Mobile , Pensacola , Panama City Other significant routes [ edit ] Highway Significant cities served LA 1 Grand Isle , Port Fourchon , Thibodaux S.R. 85 Crestview , Fort Walton Beach S.H. 35 Houston , Bay City , Port Lavaca , Rockport , Corpus Christi S.H. 288 Air [ edit ] International service [ edit ] Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport International destinations George Bush Intercontinental Airport - Houston Argentina , Bahamas , Belize , Bonaire , Brazil , Canada , Cayman Islands , Chile , China , Colombia , Costa Rica , Dominican Republic , Ecuador , El Salvador , France , Germany , Guatemala , Honduras , Jamaica , Japan , Mexico , Netherlands , New Zealand , Nicaragua , Nigeria , Norway , Panama , Peru , Qatar , Russia , Singapore , Trinidad and Tobago , Turkey , Turks and Caicos Islands , UAE , United Kingdom , Venezuela Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport Canada , Honduras , Mexico , United Kingdom Southwest Florida International Airport Canada , Germany Tampa International Airport Bahamas , Canada , Cayman Islands , Cuba , Dominican Republic , Germany , Iceland , Jamaica , Mexico , Panama , Switzerland , United Kingdom William P. Hobby Airport - Houston Aruba , Belize , Cayman Islands , Costa Rica , Dominican Republic , Jamaica , Mexico Rail [ edit ] Amtrak service [ edit ] Sunset Limited at Houston Train Route Gulf Coast cities served City of New Orleans Chicago to New Orleans New Orleans Crescent New York City to New Orleans New Orleans , Picayune, MS , Slidell, LA Silver Star New York City to Miami Tampa , with connection available to Amtrak Thruway to Clearwater, FL , Bradenton, FL , Sarasota, FL , Port Charlotte, FL and Fort Myers, FL Sunset Limited Los Angeles to Orlando (temporarily New Orleans ) Bay St. Louis, MS , Beaumont, TX , Biloxi , Crestview, FL , Gulfport, MS , Houston , Lafayette, LA , Lake Charles, LA , Baton Rouge, LA , Mobile , New Orleans , Panama City, FL , Scriever, LA , Pascagoula, MS , Pensacola, FL See also [ edit ] United States portal East Coast of the United States West Coast of the United States Emerald Coast Florida Panhandle Geography of the United States Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Task Force Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission Houston List of ports in the United States Megaregions of the United States Mississippi Gulf Coast New Orleans Tampa West Florida Gulf Coast of Mexico Notes [ edit ] ^ For example: "Gulf Coast Energy Outlook" (PDF) (Spring 2017 ed.). Center for Energy Studies. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 14, 2018 . Retrieved April 13, 2018 – via Economics & Policy Research Group.

, p. 1 (" Unless stated otherwise, Gulf Coast hereafter specifically refers to the states of Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida").

^ "Gulf Coast Wetlands Rapidly Declining • The National Wildlife Federation Blog" .

The National Wildlife Federation Blog . January 8, 2014 . Retrieved March 4, 2021 .

^ See "Projected change in U.S. hurricane risk based on Risk Analysis Framework for Tropical Cyclones (RAFT)." Fig. 1 op cit ^ Balaguru, Karthik; Xu, Wenwei; Chang, Chuan-Chieh; Leung, L. Ruby; Judi, David R.; Hagos, Samson M.; Wehner, Michael F.; Kossin, James P.; Ting, Mingfang (2023).

"Increased U.S. Coastal hurricane risk under climate change" .

Science Advances .

9 (14).

Bibcode : 2023SciA....9F.259B .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adf0259 .

PMC 10081849 .

PMID 37027466 .

^ a b c B. Powell, Tori (February 19, 2022).

"Sea levels along U.S. coastlines to rise more than a foot by 2050, study projects" .

CBS News . Retrieved August 30, 2023 .

^ "Predicting Impacts of Sea Level Rise in the Northern Gulf of Mexico" .

coastalscience.noaa.gov . Retrieved August 30, 2023 .

^ Jacobo, Julia (February 22, 2021).

"Climate change, rising sea levels to increase cost of flood damage by $34 billion in coming decades: Report" .

ABC News . Retrieved August 30, 2023 .

^ Rosenberg, Matt (June 14, 2003).

"Busiest Ports in the World" . Archived from the original on February 23, 2007 . Retrieved October 15, 2006 .

^ Rosenberg, Matt (June 14, 2003).

"Waterborne Commerce Statistics: Tonnage for Selected U.S. Ports in 2004" . Archived from the original on November 17, 2006 . Retrieved October 15, 2006 .

^ Sarah S. Brophy; Elizabeth Wylie (2013).

The Green Museum: A Primer on Environmental Practice . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 7.

ISBN 9780759123229 .

^ Nash, Gary B.

Red, White and Black: The Peoples of Early North America Los Angeles 2015 p. 6 ^ "The 1900 Storm" . Archived from the original on July 11, 2006 . Retrieved July 11, 2006 .

^ "Galveston, Texas History" . Galveston.com . Retrieved October 15, 2007 .

^ "Evacuation and Devastation in Southern Texas" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved March 28, 2014 .

^ "Flooding in Miss. and FL" .

USA Today . September 11, 2008 . Retrieved March 28, 2014 .

^ "Ike missing" .

www.cnn.com . Retrieved January 14, 2020 .

^ Robbie Berg (January 23, 2009).

"Hurricane Ike Tropical Cyclone Report" (PDF) . NHC. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 12, 2014 . Retrieved September 12, 2009 .

^ Ike Evacuation and Rescue Operation Archived 2013-12-02 at the Wayback Machine ^ Heinz • •, Frank (January 24, 2025).

" 'Efforts already underway' to implement renaming of Denali, Gulf of Mexico" .

NBC 5 Dallas-Fort Worth . Retrieved January 25, 2025 .

^ "Geographic Names Information System--Feature ID 558730 "Gulf of America" " .

nationalmap.gov . Retrieved February 10, 2025 .

^ "25-01 AIS Charting Notice" (PDF) .

faa.gov . February 10, 2025. Archived from the original on February 10, 2025 . Retrieved February 10, 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Drescher, Christopher F., Stefan E. Schulenberg, and C. Veronica Smith. "The Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and the Mississippi Gulf Coast: Mental health in the context of a technological disaster." American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 84.2 (2014): 142.

Smith, F. Todd Louisiana and the Gulf South Frontier, 1500–1821 (Louisiana State University Press; 2014) 304 pages Williamson, James M., and John L. Pender. "Economic Stimulus and the Tax Code The Impact of the Gulf Opportunity Zone." Public Finance Review (2014): 1091142114557724.

External links [ edit ] "Map of the Gulf Coast from Florida to Mexico" from 1639 via the World Digital Library v t e Regions of the United States Administrative Units U.S. state District of Columbia Territory Insular area Minor Outlying Island Tribal domestic dependent nations Maritime territory Time zones Chamorro Samoa Hawaii–Aleutian Alaska Pacific Mountain Central Eastern Atlantic Census West Pacific Mountain Midwest E N Central W N Central Northeast New England Middle Atlantic South S Atlantic E S Central W S Central Courts of appeals 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th Physical Physiographic Pacific Mountain Intermontane Plateaus Rocky Mountains Laurentian Upland Interior Plains Interior Highlands Appalachian Highlands Atlantic Plain Tidewater Coastal Arctic West Great Lakes Gulf East Historical Acquisitions Thirteen Colonies Northwest Territory Southwest Territory Louisiana Purchase Gadsden Purchase Treaty of 1818 Adams–Onís Treaty Texas annexation Oregon Treaty Mexican Cession Alaska Purchase Newlands Resolution Acquisition of Puerto Rico and Guam Cession of Tutuila Cession of Manu'a Annexation of the Indian Territory Treaty of the Danish West Indies Acquisition of the Northern Mariana Islands Civil War Union Border states Confederacy Old South Dixie Slave states and free states Divided Atlantic Northeast The Californias Columbia District Oregon Country Pacific Northwest Prairie Pothole Samoan Islands Sonoran Desert Virgin Islands Other Appalachia Central Eastern Four Corners Great Plains High Plains Intermountain International border states Mariana Islands Northern Northwestern Cascadia Red states and blue states Southeastern Southern Deep Mid New Solid Upland Southwestern Upper Midwest Western List Category Commons v t e State of Alabama Montgomery (capital) Topics Index Aviation Climate Delegations Geography Geology Government governors History National Register of Historic Places Mass media newspapers radio TV People Sports Symbols Transportation Society Abortion Crime Culture Demographics African Americans Economy Education Elections Gun laws Homelessness LGBT rights Politics Regions North Alabama Central Alabama South Alabama Birmingham District Black Belt Canebrake Cumberland Plateau Eastern Shore Gulf Coastal Plain Piedmont Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians Tennessee Valley Wiregrass Flora and fauna Amphibians Gardens Mammals Reptiles Trees Largest cities Huntsville Birmingham Montgomery Mobile Tuscaloosa Hoover Auburn Dothan Decatur Madison Metros Birmingham–Hoover Huntsville Mobile Montgomery Tuscaloosa Daphne–Fairhope–Foley Decatur Auburn–Opelika Dothan Florence–Muscle Shoals Anniston–Oxford–Jacksonville Gadsden Counties Autauga Baldwin Barbour Bibb Blount Bullock Butler Calhoun Chambers Cherokee Chilton Choctaw Clarke Clay Cleburne Coffee Colbert Conecuh Coosa Covington Crenshaw Cullman Dale Dallas DeKalb Elmore Escambia Etowah Fayette Franklin Geneva Greene Hale Henry Houston Jackson Jefferson Lamar Lauderdale Lawrence Lee Limestone Lowndes Macon Madison Marengo Marion Marshall Mobile Monroe Montgomery Morgan Perry Pickens Pike Randolph Russell St. Clair Shelby Sumter Talladega Tallapoosa Tuscaloosa Walker Washington Wilcox Winston Alabama portal v t e State of Florida Tallahassee (capital) History Timeline Indigenous peoples of Florida Spanish Florida missions British Rule East Florida West Florida Florida Territory Seminole Wars Slavery Plantations of Leon County Mosquito County Armed Occupation Act Civil War Great Migration Fishing ranchos Florida East Coast Railway Draining and development of the Everglades Florida land boom of the 1920s Kennedy Space Center Disney World Geography Beaches Bays Caves Counties Everglades Keys Lakes Lake Okeechobee Metro areas Municipalities Regions Rivers Sinkholes Springs State forests State parks Straits Swamps Major hurricanes Florida Keys (1919) Tampa Bay (1921) Miami (1926) Okeechobee (1928) Florida Keys (1929) Treasure Coast (1933) Labor Day (1935) Dry Tortugas (1944) Homestead (1945) Fort Lauderdale (1947) South Florida (1948) 1949 Florida hurricane Easy (1950) King (1950) Donna (1960) Betsy (1965) Eloise (1975) Elena (1985) Andrew (1992) Opal (1995) Charley (2004) Frances (2004) Ivan (2004) Jeanne (2004) Dennis (2005) Wilma (2005) Matthew (2016) Irma (2017) Michael (2018) Dorian (2019) Ian (2022) Idalia (2023) Helene (2024) Milton (2024) Society African-American Brazilian-American culture Miami Orlando Crime Cuban-American culture Miami Tampa Culture Demographics Economy Agriculture Tourism Education Florida cracker Floridians Government Haitian-American culture Delray Beach Miami Homelessness Human trafficking Indigenous peoples Everglades LGBT rights Politics Ballot measures Congressional delegations Congressional districts Puerto Rican culture Orlando Kissimmee Politics Sports Seminole Black Seminoles Sports Culture Casinos Film Florida Man Florida Heritage Trails Floridiana Cuisine of Florida Literature Miami accent Music Mass media newspapers radio TV Symbols flag motto seal Visit Florida Environment Environmental issues Fauna Flora Florida Reef Geology Climate climate change Other Cuba–United States relations Index Tourist attractions Transportation Florida portal v t e State of Louisiana Baton Rouge (capital) Topics Index Fauna History Music Louisianians Constitution Governors Hurricanes Legislature Supreme Court Congressional districts Symbols Tourist attractions Society Abortion Climate change Culture Crime Demographics Economy Education Gun laws Homelessness LGBT rights Mass media Newspapers Radio TV Politics Regions Acadiana Ark-La-Tex Central Louisiana Florida Parishes Greater New Orleans Northwest Louisiana North Louisiana Southwest Louisiana Cities Alexandria Baton Rouge Bossier City Hammond Houma Kenner Lafayette Lake Charles Monroe Natchitoches New Iberia New Orleans Opelousas Ponchatoula Ruston Shreveport Slidell Sulphur CDPs Chalmette Harvey LaPlace Marrero Metairie Moss Bluff Terrytown Metros Alexandria Baton Rouge Hammond Houma – Bayou Cane – Thibodaux Lafayette Lake Charles Monroe New Orleans Shreveport – Bossier City Parishes Acadia Allen Ascension Assumption Avoyelles Beauregard Bienville Bossier Caddo Calcasieu Caldwell Cameron Catahoula Claiborne Concordia DeSoto East Baton Rouge East Carroll East Feliciana Evangeline Franklin Grant Iberia Iberville Jackson Jefferson Jefferson Davis Lafayette Lafourche LaSalle Lincoln Livingston Madison Morehouse Natchitoches Orleans Ouachita Plaquemines Pointe Coupee Rapides Red River Richland Sabine St. Bernard St. Charles St. Helena St. James St. John the Baptist St. Landry St. Martin St. Mary St. Tammany Tangipahoa Tensas Terrebonne Union Vermilion Vernon Washington Webster West Baton Rouge West Carroll West Feliciana Winn Louisiana portal v t e State of Mississippi Jackson (capital) Topics Index Climate Climate change Geography Government Delegations Governors Lieutenant governors Legislature History Law Constitution Music State landmarks State parks Symbols Tourist attractions Society Abortion Crime Culture Demographics Economy Education Homelessness Gun laws Mass media Newspapers Radio TV LGBT rights Mississippians Politics Regions The Delta Golden Triangle Gulf Coast Mississippi Plain Natchez District North Mississippi Pine Belt Tennessee Valley Metros Gulfport-Biloxi Hattiesburg Jackson Memphis (TN) Pascagoula Larger cities Gulfport Jackson Southaven Biloxi Hattiesburg Meridian Olive Branch Tupelo Smaller cities Bay St. Louis Brandon Brookhaven Canton Clarksdale Cleveland Clinton Columbus Corinth Gautier Greenville Greenwood Grenada Horn Lake Indianola Itta Bena Iuka Laurel Long Beach Louisville Madison Magee McComb Mendenhall Moss Point Natchez Ocean Springs Oxford Pascagoula Pass Christian Pearl Picayune Ridgeland Starkville Tunica Vicksburg Waveland West Hattiesburg (Oak Grove) West Point Yazoo City Counties Adams Alcorn Amite Attala Benton Bolivar Calhoun Carroll Chickasaw Choctaw Claiborne Clarke Clay Coahoma Copiah Covington DeSoto Forrest Franklin George Greene Grenada Hancock Harrison Hinds Holmes Humphreys Issaquena Itawamba Jackson Jasper Jefferson Jefferson Davis Jones Kemper Lafayette Lamar Lauderdale Lawrence Leake Lee Leflore Lincoln Lowndes Madison Marion Marshall Monroe Montgomery Neshoba Newton Noxubee Oktibbeha Panola Pearl River Perry Pike Pontotoc Prentiss Quitman Rankin Scott Sharkey Simpson Smith Stone Sunflower Tallahatchie Tate Tippah Tishomingo Tunica Union Walthall Warren Washington Wayne Webster Wilkinson Winston Yalobusha Yazoo Mississippi portal v t e State of Texas Austin (capital) Topics Outline Architecture Climate ( Climate change ) Cuisine Dialects Geography Government Healthcare History Languages Law Literature Mass media Newspapers Radio TV National Historic Landmarks National Register of Historic Places Sites Recorded Texas Historic Landmarks Sports Symbols Texans Time Tourist attractions Transportation Society Abortion Culture Crime Demographics Economy Education Gambling Gun laws Homelessness LGBT rights Politics Regions Ark‑La‑Tex Big Bend Boca Chica Blackland Prairies Brazos Valley Central Texas Coastal Bend Concho Valley Cross Timbers East Texas Edwards Plateau Golden Triangle Hill Country Llano Estacado Northeast Texas North Texas Osage Plains Panhandle Permian Basin Piney Woods Rio Grande Valley Southeast Texas South Plains South Texas Texoma Trans-Pecos West Texas Metropolitan areas Abilene Amarillo Austin – Round Rock ( Greater Austin ) Beaumont – Port Arthur Brownsville – Harlingen College Station – Bryan Corpus Christi Dallas – Fort Worth – Arlington ( DFW ) El Paso Houston – The Woodlands – Sugar Land ( Greater Houston ) Killeen – Temple Laredo Longview / Kilgore Lubbock McAllen – Edinburg – Mission Midland Odessa San Angelo San Antonio – New Braunfels Sherman – Denison Texarkana Tyler Victoria Waco Wagner Creek Wichita Falls Counties See: List of counties in Texas Texas portal Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_Coast_of_the_United_States&oldid=1302449915 " Categories : Gulf Coast of the United States Coasts of the United States Coasts of the Atlantic Ocean Landforms of the Gulf of Mexico Landforms of Florida Landforms of Louisiana Landforms of Mississippi Landforms of Texas Megapolitan areas of the United States Southeastern United States Southern United States Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use American English from November 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Pages using infobox settlement with no coordinates This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 13:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gulf Coast of the United States 19 languages Add topic

