Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of fungi 2 Symbiotic life forms of which fungi are a part 3 Study of fungi 4 History of fungi 5 Fungi-related publications 6 Persons influential in fungi 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of fungi Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of and topical guide to fungi The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to fungi and mycology : Fungi – "Fungi" is plural for "fungus". A fungus is any member of the group of eukaryotic organisms that includes unicellular microorganisms such as yeasts and molds , as well as multicellular fungi that produce familiar fruiting forms known as mushrooms . Biologists classify these organisms as a kingdom , Fungi , the second highest taxonomic rank of living organism beneath the Eukaryota domain; other kingdoms include plants, animals, protists, and bacteria. One difference that places fungi in a different kingdom is that their cell walls contain chitin , unlike the cell walls of plants, bacteria and some protists. Similar to animals, fungi are heterotrophs , that is, they acquire their food by absorbing dissolved molecules, typically by secreting digestive enzymes into their environment. Growth is their means of mobility, except for spores (a few of which are flagellated ), which may travel through air or water. Fungi function as the principal decomposers in ecological systems .

Types of fungi [ edit ] By form Molds Aspergillus ( list ) Fusarium ( list ) Mushrooms Agaricus ( list ) Amanita ( list ) Armillaria ( list ) Boletus ( list ) Coprinellus ( list ) Coprinopsis ( list ) Cortinarius ( list ) Entoloma ( list ) Gymnopilus ( list ) Gymnopus ( list ) Hebeloma ( list ) Hygrocybe ( list ) Hygrophorus ( list ) Inocybe ( list ) Lactarius ( list ) Lactifluus ( list ) Lepiota ( list ) Leucoagaricus ( list ) Leccinum ( list ) Marasmius ( list ) Pleurotus ( list ) Yeasts Other Cyathus ( list ) By activity Carnivorous fungi Pathogenic fungi Poisonous fungi Poisonous mushrooms List of poisonous mushrooms List of deadly mushrooms By aspect Bioluminescent fungi Deadly fungi By use Medicinal fungi Edible fungi Edible molds Penicillium camemberti – used in the production of Brie cheese and Camembert cheese Penicillium glaucum – used in making Gorgonzola cheese Penicillium roqueforti – used in making Roquefort cheese , Danish Blue cheese , and also recently Gorgonzola Edible mushrooms Symbiotic life forms of which fungi are a part [ edit ] Further information: Outline of lichens Lichen – composite organism that arises from algae or cyanobacteria living among filaments of multiple fungi [ 1 ] in a symbiotic relationship .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Lichens are classified by the fungal component. Lichen species are given the same scientific name (binomial name) as the fungus species in the lichen. Lichens are being integrated into the classification schemes for fungi.

Caloplaca ( list ) Cladonia ( list ) Lecanora ( list ) Study of fungi [ edit ] Mycology Branches of mycology Lichenology ( outline ) Mycotoxicology History of fungi [ edit ] History of mycology Fungi-related publications [ edit ] Books about fungi Mycology journals Fungal Biology Fungal Genetics and Biology Medical Mycology Mycologia Mycological Progress Mycoscience Mycoses Mycotaxon Sydowia Persons influential in fungi [ edit ] List of mycologists See also [ edit ] Fungi portal Outline of biology Outline of lichens References [ edit ] ^ Spribille, Toby; Tuovinen, Veera; Resl, Philipp; Vanderpool, Dan; Wolinski, Heimo; Aime, M. Catherine; Schneider, Kevin; Stabentheiner, Edith; Toome-Heller, Merje (2016-07-21).

"Basidiomycete yeasts in the cortex of ascomycete macrolichens" .

Science .

353 (6298): 488– 492.

Bibcode : 2016Sci...353..488S .

doi : 10.1126/science.aaf8287 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMC 5793994 .

PMID 27445309 .

^ "What is a lichen?, Australian National Botanical Garden" . Retrieved 10 October 2014 .

^ Introduction to Lichens – An Alliance between Kingdoms .  University of California Museum of Paleontology.

External links [ edit ] Fungi at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Tree of Life web project: Fungi Mushroom Observer ( mushroomobserver.org ), a collaborative fungus recording and identification project v t e Microbiology : Fungus Outline of fungi · Outline of lichens Branch Ethnomycology Lichenology Marine fungi Medicinal fungi Mycology Mycosis Mycotoxicology Structure Reproduction/ spore teleomorph/sexual : Zygospore Ascospore / Ascus Basidiospore / Basidium / Teliospore anamorph/asexual : Sporangium Conidium Chlamydospore Oidium Pycniospore Other Hypha Haustorium Mycelium Cell wall Sporocarp Growth patterns Dimorphic fungi Mold Yeast Mushroom List Glossary of mycology List of fungal orders List of mycologists List of mycology journals Category Commons WikiProject v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_fungi&oldid=1284147454 " Categories : Outlines of biology Outlines Fungi Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 21:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of fungi Add languages Add topic

