Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Francesco Mario Pagano 17 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano עברית Latina مصرى Napulitano Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Svenska Yorùbá Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian jurist (1748–1799) Francesco Mario Pagano Francesco Mario Pagano Born ( 1748-12-08 ) 8 December 1748 Brienza , Province of Potenza , Kingdom of Naples Died 29 October 1799 (1799-10-29) (aged 50) Naples , Kingdom of Naples Other names Mario Pagano Alma mater University of Naples Federico II Occupations Jurist Author Years active 1768–1799 Notable work Saggi politici (1783–85) Progetto di Costituzione della Repubblica napoletana Sul processo criminale Esame politico dell'intera legislazione romana Discorso sull’origine e natura della poesia Gerbino Agamennone Corradino Gli esuli tebani Prometeo Teodosio Emilia Francesco Mario Pagano (8 December 1748 – 29 October 1799) was an Italian jurist , author , thinker , and the founder of the Neapolitan school of law.

[ 1 ] He is regarded as one of the most influential Enlightenment thinkers.

[ 2 ] A moderate reformist, he is seen as a forerunner of the Italian unification .

[ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] He was born in Brienza in the southern Province of Potenza .  He studied at the University of Naples Federico II under Antonio Genovesi .  At the age of twenty, he became special lecturer in moral philosophy there, at the same time practising law. He was friend of Gaetano Filangieri , entering the masonry with him, and was elected venerable master of the Neapolitan lodge "La philantropia". Pagano was one of the men who powerfully helped Italy in her social and scientific advancement and in the 1790s he had striven more than any other intellectual to give a political form to the 18th century reform tradition in southern Italy.

[ 4 ] In 1794 he defended Vincenzo Galiani , Vincenzo Vitaliani and Emanuele De Deo – three alleged conspirators against Ferdinand IV ; after they were sentenced to death, Pagano was deprived of his professorship, arrested, imprisoned and expelled from the kingdom.

[ 5 ] After fleeing Naples in 1796, he returned in 1799 and drafted the constitution of the short-lived Neapolitan Republic . The document bore similarities to the French Constitution of 1793 but presented original traits such as the institution of the "body of ephors", an authority who would have overseen the maintenance of the law. It is considered the precursor of the modern constitutional court .

[ 6 ] After the fall of the republic, Pagano was arrested and imprisoned in the Castel Nuovo . He was executed by hanging at the "Piazza del Mercato" in Naples, along with other revolutionaries: Domenico Cirillo , Giorgio Pigliacelli and Ignazio Ciaia .

Works [ edit ] Pagano's Saggi politici (1783–85) provided a philosophical history of the Kingdom of Naples , arguing against torture and capital punishment and advocating more benign penal codes.

Considerazioni sul processo criminale (Considerations on the criminal trial, 1787), gave him international popularity and was much praised by Le Moniteur Universel , the main newspaper of revolutionary France .

[ 7 ] Pagano's other juridical or philosophical works included: Progetto di Costituzione della Repubblica napoletana Sul processo criminale Esame politico dell'intera legislazione romana Discorso sull’origine e natura della poesia He also translated works from Greek and Latin , and wrote six tragedies ( Gerbino, Agamennone, Corradino, Gli esuli tebani, Prometeo, and Teodosio ) and one comedy ( Emilia ).

Notes [ edit ] ^ The Cambridge History of Eighteenth-Century Political Thought , ed. Goldie & Wokler, 2006, p. 765 ^ Fulvio Tessitore, Comprensione storica e cultura , Guida, 1979, p. 27 ^ Roland Sarti, Italy: A Reference Guide from the Renaissance to the Present , Infobase Publishing, 2009, p. 457 ^ Girolamo Imbruglia, Naples in the Eighteenth Century , Cambridge University Press, 2007, p. 168 ^ Francesco Mario Pagano (1748-1799) Archived 25 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Maria Rosa Di Simone, Istituzioni e fonti normative in Italia dall'Antico Regime al fascismo , p. 111, Giappichelli, Torino, 2007.

^ Biancamaria Fontana, The Invention of the Modern Republic , Cambridge University Press, 2007, p. 140 References [ edit ] Nico Perrone .

La Loggia della Philantropia. Un religioso danese a Napoli prima della rivoluzione .

Palermo : Sellerio publ., 2006.

ISBN 88-389-2141-5 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Mario Pagano ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Francesco Mario Pagano at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Francesco Mario Pagano at Wikiquote Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Greece Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francesco_Mario_Pagano&oldid=1236703878 " Categories : 1748 births 1799 deaths Italian jurists 18th-century Italian historians Italian republicans Italian Freemasons People from Brienza Enlightenment philosophers Philosophers of law 18th-century executions 18th-century Neapolitan people 18th-century Italian jurists 18th-century Italian philosophers People of the Parthenopean Republic Scholars from the Kingdom of Naples Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles with hCards Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 26 July 2024, at 04:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Francesco Mario Pagano 17 languages Add topic

