Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Description 3 Use 4 Porous or perforated soaker hoses 5 Expandable hoses 6 Standards and connectors 7 Quick connectors 8 Health risks from aerosols 9 Gallery 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Garden hose 8 languages العربية Català Eesti Français Italiano Nederlands Norsk bokmål West-Vlams Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flexible tube used to convey water The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A coiled garden hose A garden hose , hosepipe , or simply hose is a flexible tube used to convey water . There are a number of common attachments available for the end of the hose, such as sprayers and sprinklers (which are used to concentrate water at one point or to spread it over a large area). Hoses are usually attached to a hose spigot or tap .

Terminology [ edit ] A garden hose in a cartoon from 1916 The alternative term "hosepipe" is a chiefly British, South African, and southern US usage; "hose" or "garden hose" is the predominant term in other English-speaking areas. The term " hose " is also used for other types of flexible, water-carrying tubes such as fire hose used by fire departments .

Description [ edit ] Garden hoses are typically made of extruded synthetic rubber or soft plastic , often reinforced with an internal web of fibers .  As a result of these materials, garden hoses are flexible and their smooth exterior facilitates pulling them past trees, posts and other obstacles. Garden hoses are also generally tough enough to survive occasional scraping on rocks and being stepped on, without damage or leaking.

Each male end of a typical garden hose can mate with the female connector on another, which allows multiple garden hoses to be linked end-to-end to increase their overall length.  Small rubber or plastic washers (often confusingly called "hose washers") are used in female ends to prevent leakage, because the threads are not tapered and are not used to create a seal.

Most garden hoses are not rated for use with hot water; even leaving certain hoses in the sun while pressurized can cause them to burst.

Hoses used to carry potable water are typically made of NSF International -listed polymers tested and shown not to leach harmful materials into the drinking water, such as the plasticizers ( phthalates ) used in polyvinyl chloride (PVC, or vinyl) hoses.

Use [ edit ] Sprayer pistol uses a quick-connect fitting, visible just beyond the sprayer grip As implied by the name, garden hoses are commonly used to transport water for gardening, lawn care, and other landscaping purposes.  They are also used for outdoor cleaning of items such as vehicles, equipment, building exteriors, and animals. NSF-approved hoses may be used for connecting drinkable water to recreational vehicles and trailers.

Whenever a flexible hose is connected to a drinkable water supply, the spigot or tap should be fitted with an approved backflow prevention device , to prevent contaminated water from being siphoned back, in the event of a pressure drop. Many water suppliers require this, and plumbing code may legally require permanently installed backflow preventers.

Porous or perforated soaker hoses [ edit ] Special hoses designed to leak throughout their length are sometimes used to gently distribute water on a lawn or garden. These hoses have either many small holes drilled or punched in them, or are made of a porous material, such as sintered rubber particles.  These "soaker hoses" [ 1 ] are a simple, low-cost, substitute for a drip irrigation system.

Expandable hoses [ edit ] These differ from traditional hoses in that the inner membrane expands when filled with water, much like a balloon.  An outer cover protects the delicate expandable membrane from punctures.  Such hoses "grow" when pressurized, and shrink back down when the pressure is released, allowing for easier storage.

Standards and connectors [ edit ] Brass hose spigot with threads for garden hose (GHT) visible on the right Garden hoses connect using a male/female thread connection. The technical term for this arrangement is a "hose union ".

Spigots or sillcocks have male hose connectors only, and the mating end of a hose has a captive nut which fits the threads there.

The thread standard for garden hose connectors in the United States, its territories, and Canada is known colloquially as "garden hose thread" (GHT), but its official designation is NH ("National Hose"): 3 ⁄ 4 -11.5NH designates full form threads as produced by cutting  material such as the brass spigot outlet or hose male or female end fitting found on more expensive hoses.

3 ⁄ 4 -11.5NHR designates thin-walled couplers produced by rolling thin material, usually brass, typically found on less expensive hoses.

3 ⁄ 4 -14NPSH designates female hose ends that mate a hose to a tapered pipe thread without a spigot.

The US standard was defined by NFPA 1963, "Standard for Fire Hose Connections", [ 2 ] then later by ANSI-ASME B1.20.7, [ 3 ] which specifies 1 + 1 ⁄ 16 inches (27 mm) diameter straight (non-tapered) thread with a pitch of 11.5 threads per inch (TPI). The female thread is abbreviated FHT (for "female hose thread"), and the male part is abbreviated MHT (for "male hose thread"). This fitting is used with 1 ⁄ 2 -inch, 5 ⁄ 8 -inch, and 3 ⁄ 4 -inch hoses.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In other countries, a British Standard Pipe (BSP) thread is used, which is 3 ⁄ 4 inch (19 mm) and 14 TPI (male part outside diameter is 26.441 mm or 1.04 in). The GHT and BSP standards are not compatible, and attempting to connect a GHT hose to a BSP fitting, or vice versa, will damage the threads.

The connector threads are not tapered, and do not seal against leaks. Instead, a pliable rubber or plastic gasket (often ambiguously called a "garden hose washer") seals the connection against leakage. A variant of this gasket also incorporates a fine-meshed metal or plastic screen to filter out small particles of dirt that may be present in the flowing stream of water.  The purpose of this filter is to intercept debris which could otherwise clog the small openings used to disperse a spray of water from various garden sprayers and sprinklers.

Adaptors made of metal or plastic are available to interconnect GHT, BSP, NPT , hose barb , and quick-connect fittings.

Quick connectors [ edit ] In the 1980s, the use of quick-connector systems became increasingly popular. These are fittings that attach to the hose and or screw into common hose connectors and equipment, allowing hoses and accessories to be easily connected together using a snap-fit type system. The first plastic connector was invented in the UK by Hozelock in 1959, [ 6 ] and the style has now become a de facto standard throughout Europe and the wider world, compatible with and imitated by many other manufacturers. A differently designed hermaphroditic quick-connect hose fitting made by GEKA has the advantage of interconnecting without distinction between "male" and "female" connectors, Some connectors also incorporate an "autostop" feature. This is an internal valve which is shut off by water pressure, and it is opened only by connecting a fitting or appliance; thus, disconnecting a hose fitted with this adaptor will automatically stop the flow of water. This eases connecting and changing appliances without the need to shut off the water first.

Health risks from aerosols [ edit ] In 2014, it was reported that use of common garden hoses in combination with spray nozzles may generate aerosols containing droplets smaller than 10 μm, which can be inhaled by nearby people. Water stagnating in a hose between uses, especially when warmed by the sun, can host the growth and interaction of Legionella and free-living amoebae (FLA) as biofilms on the inner surface of the hose. Clinical cases of Legionnaires' disease or Pontiac fever have been found to be associated with inhalation of garden hose aerosols containing Legionella bacteria.  The report provided measured microbial densities resulting from controlled hose conditions in order to quantify the human health risks. The densities of Legionella spp.

identified in two types of hoses were found to be similar to those reported during legionellosis outbreaks from other causes. It was proposed that the risk could be mitigated by draining hoses after use.

[ 7 ] Gallery [ edit ] Garden hose in use (Germany) Closeup of a garden hose shows the crisscrossed fiber reinforcements Gardena quick-connect hose fittings Hose cart and some quick-connect fittings This greenhouse is equipped with a hose suspended on pulleys .

Special expandable hose can be stretched to reach farther.

Hose guides can be used to make it easier to drag garden hoses around corners See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Garden hoses .

Drip irrigation Fire hose Hose coupling Outdoor water-use restriction , or "hosepipe ban" References [ edit ] ^ Dave's Garden.

Definition of soaker hose.

Archived 2021-05-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ "NH=National Hose" .

Ring & Plug Thread Gauges . Retrieved 26 August 2017 .

^ ASME B1.20.7-1991.

"Hose Coupling Screw Threads (Inch)" . Retrieved 26 August 2017 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) [ permanent dead link ] ^ Bill Lauer (1 January 2004).

AWWA Water Operator Field Guide . American Water Works Association. pp. 209–.

ISBN 978-1-58321-315-5 .

^ Rolf Ekenes (19 January 2010).

Southern Marine Engineering Desk Reference . Xlibris Corporation. pp. 134–.

ISBN 978-1-4691-1637-2 .

^ "About Us | Our History, Values and Innovations Hozelock Ltd" . 10 March 2019.

^ Thomas, Jacqueline M.; Thomas, Torsten; Stuetz, Richard M.; Ashbolt, Nicholas J. (2014). "Your Garden Hose: A Potential Health Risk Due to Legionella spp. Growth Facilitated by Free-Living Amoebae".

Environmental Science & Technology .

48 (17): 10456– 10464.

Bibcode : 2014EnST...4810456T .

doi : 10.1021/es502652n .

ISSN 0013-936X .

PMID 25075763 .

External links [ edit ] v t e Garden tools Hand tools Averruncator Axe Billhook Broadfork Daisy grubber Dibber Garden fork Grafter Grass shears Grass Stitcher Hoe Homi Hori hori Kirpi Loppers Machete Mattock Pickaxe Pitchfork Polesaw Post hole digger Potting bench Pruning shears or secateurs Rake Riddle Scythe Shovel Sickle Spade Loy Trowel Watering can Weeder Wheelbarrow Wood auger Manual or powered Cultivator Dethatcher Earth auger Edger Hedge trimmer Lawn aerator Lawn mower Lawn sweeper Plough Power tools Brushcutter Chainsaw Garden hose Irrigation sprinkler Leaf blower String trimmer Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking v t e Plumbing Fundamental concepts Air gap (plumbing) Backflow Compatibility (chemical) Corrosion Drain (plumbing) Drinking water Fuel gas Friction loss Grade (slope) Greywater Heat trap Hydrostatic loop Leak Neutral axis Onsite sewage facility Pressure Sanitary sewer Sewer gas Sewage Sewerage Siphon Storm sewer Stormwater Surface tension Tap water Thermal expansion Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Trap (plumbing) Venturi effect Wastewater Water hammer Water supply network Water table Well Technology Brazing British Standard Pipe (BSP) Cast iron pipe Chemical drain cleaners Compression fitting Copper tubing Crimp (joining) Drain-waste-vent system Ductile iron pipe Flare fitting Garden Hose Thread (GHT) Gasket Hydronics Leak detection National pipe thread (NPT) Nominal Pipe Size (NPS) O-ring Oakum Pipe (fluid conveyance) Pipe dope Pipe support Plastic pipework Push-to-pull compression fittings Putty Sealant Sewage pumping Soldering Solvent welding Swaging Thread seal tape Threaded pipe Tube bending Water heat recycling Components Atmospheric vacuum breaker Automatic bleeding valve Automatic faucet Backflow prevention device Ball valve Bleed screw Booster pump Butterfly valve Check valve Chemigation valve Chopper pump Circulator pump Cistern Closet flange Concentric reducer Condensate pump Coupling (piping) Diaphragm valve Dielectric union Double check valve Eccentric reducer Expansion tank Faucet aerator Float switch Float valve Floor drain Flow limiter Flushing trough Flushometer Gate valve Globe valve Grease trap Grinder pump Hose coupling Manifold Needle valve Nipple (plumbing) Pinch valve Piping and plumbing fitting Plug (sanitation) Pressure regulator Pressure vacuum breaker Pressure-balanced valve Pump Radiator (heating) Reduced pressure zone device Reducer Relief valve Riser clamp Rooftop water tower Safety valve sewage pumping Street elbow Submersible pump Tap (valve) Thermostatic mixing valve Trench drain Vacuum breaker Vacuum ejector Valve Water tank Zone valve Plumbing fixtures Accessible bathtub Bathtub Bidet Dehumidifier Dishwasher Drinking fountain Electric water boiler Evaporative cooler Flush toilet Garbage disposal unit Hot water storage tank Humidifier Icemaker Instant hot water dispenser Laundry tub Shower water recycling shower Sink Storage water heater Sump pump Tankless water heating Urinal Washing machine Washlet Water dispenser Water filter Water heating Water softening Specialized tools Basin wrench Blowtorch Borescope Core drill Drain cleaner Driving cap Flare-nut wrench Pipecutter Pipe wrench Plumber's snake Plumber wrench Plunger Strap wrench Tap and die Measurement and control Control valve Flow sensor Pressure sensor Water detector Water metering Professions, trades, and services Hydronic balancing Hydrostatic testing Leak detection Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Pipe marking Pipefitter Pipelayer Plumber Industry organizations and standards International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) NSF International Plumbing & Drainage Institute (PDI) Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) World Plumbing Council (WPC) Health and safety Plumbing code Scalding Waterborne disease See also Fire sprinkler system Piping Template:HVAC Template:Public health Template:Sewerage Template:Human waste elimination Template:Wastewater Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Garden_hose&oldid=1303132835 " Categories : Gardening tools Hoses Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from June 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 07:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Garden hose 8 languages Add topic

