Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Examples 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Site-specific art 22 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Latina 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artwork created for a certain place Dan Flavin , Site-specific installation, 1996, Menil Collection , Houston TX, USA Site-specific art is artwork created to exist in a certain place. Typically, the artist takes the location into account while planning and creating the artwork. Site-specific art is produced both by commercial artists, and independently, and can include some instances of work such as sculpture , stencil graffiti , rock balancing , and other art forms. Installations can be in urban areas, remote natural settings, or underwater.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] History [ edit ] Robert Irwin, Scrim Veil Black Rectangle Natural Light , Whitney Museum 2013 The term "site-specific art" was promoted and refined by Californian artist Robert Irwin [ 7 ] [ 8 ] but it was actually first used in the mid-1970s by young sculptors, such as Patricia Johanson , Dennis Oppenheim , and Athena Tacha , who had started executing public commissions for large urban sites.

[ 9 ] For Two Jumps for Dead Dog Creek (1970), Oppenheim attempted a series of standing jumps at a selected site in Idaho, where "the width of the creek became a specific goal to which I geared a bodily activity," with his two successful jumps being "dictated by a land form." [ 10 ] Site specific environmental art was first described as a movement by architectural critic Catherine Howett and art critic Lucy Lippard .

[ 11 ] Emerging out of minimalism , [ 12 ] site-specific art opposed the Modernist program of subtracting from the artwork all cues that interfere with the fact that it is "art", [ 13 ] Modernist art objects were transportable,  nomadic, could only exist in the museum space and were the objects of the market and commodification. Since 1960 the artists were trying to find a way out of this situation, and thus drew attention to the site and the context around this site. The work of art was created in the site and could only exist and in such circumstances - it can not be moved or changed. The notion of "site" precisely references the current location, which comprises a unique combination of physical elements: depth, length, weight, height, shape, walls, temperature.

[ 14 ] Works of art began to emerge from the walls of the museum and galleries ( Daniel Buren , Within and Beyond the Frame, John Weber Gallery, New York, 1973), were created specifically for the museum and galleries ( Michael Asher , untitled installation at Claire Copley Gallery, Los Angeles, 1974, Hans Haacke , Condensation Cube, 1963–65, Mierle Laderman Ukeles , Hartford Wash: Washing Tracks, Maintenance Outside, Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford, 1973), thus criticizing the museum as an institution that sets the rules for artists and viewers.

[ 15 ] Jean-Max Albert , created Sculptures Bachelard in Parc de la Villette related to the site, or Carlotta’s Smile , a trellis construction related to Ar. Co,’s architecture Lisbon , and to a choreography in collaboration with Michala Marcus and Carlos Zingaro , 1979.

[ 16 ] When the public debate over Tilted Arc (1981) resulted in its removal in 1989, its author Richard Serra reacted with what can be considered a definition of site-specific art: "To move the work is to destroy the work." [ 17 ] Examples [ edit ] Outdoor site-specific artworks often include landscaping combined with permanently sited sculptural elements; it is sometimes linked with environmental art . Outdoor site-specific artworks can also include dance performances created especially for the site. More broadly, the term is sometimes used for any work that is more or less permanently attached to a particular location. In this sense, a building with interesting architecture could also be considered a piece of site-specific art.

The Neon Parallax: luminous artworks specifically designed for the public space In Geneva, Switzerland, the Contemporary Art Funds are looking for original ways to integrate art into architecture and the public space since 1980.

[ 18 ] The Neon Parallax project, initiated in 2004, is conceived specifically for the Plaine de Plainpalais, a public square of 95'000 square meters, in the heart of the city. The concept consists of commissioning luminous artistic works for the rooftops of the buildings bordering the plaza, in the same way, advertisements are installed on the city's glamorous lakefront. The 14 artists invited had to respect the same legal sizes of luminous advertisements in Geneva. The project thus creates a parallax both between locations, and messages, but also by the way one interprets neon signs in the public realm.

[ 19 ] Site-specific performance art, site-specific visual art and interventions are commissioned for the annual Infecting the City Festival in Cape Town , South Africa. The site-specific nature of the work allows artists to interrogate the contemporary and historic reality of the Central Business District and create work that allows the city's users to engage and interact with public spaces in new and memorable ways.

[ 20 ] Gallery [ edit ] Robert Smithson , Spiral Jetty from atop Rozel Point, 2005.

Side effect X , Eberhard Bosslet ; Tias, Lanzarote, 2008.

A rock balance , England, 2013.

The Globe , Knockan Crag National Nature Reserve , Scotland, 2007.

Olafur Eliasson 's Waterfalls under the Brooklyn Bridge , 2008.

See also [ edit ] Ecological art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Independent public art Land art Land Arts of the American West Rock balancing Street Installations Public art References [ edit ] ^ TACO, L. A. (2013-11-13).

"Interview with Rafael Schacter, Author of the Amazing New Book: The World Atlas of Street Art and Graffiti" .

L.A. TACO . Retrieved 2022-07-22 .

^ Brooks, Raillan (2013-12-06).

"Aerosol Art" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2022-07-22 .

^ "Silence / Shapes – Filippo Minelli Studio" . Retrieved 2022-07-22 .

^ Rafael Schacter, author of " The World Atlas of Street Art and Graffiti ", September, 2013; ISBN 9780300199420 .

^ "Rafael Schacter and His "World Atlas of Street Art and Graffiti" " . Retrieved 2022-07-22 .

^ Gravity Glue 2015 , retrieved 2022-07-22 ^ Butterfield, Jan (1993).

The art of light + space . New York: Abbeville.

ISBN 1558592725 .

^ Hankins, Evelyn (2016).

Robert Irwin: All the Rules Will Change . Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden.

ISBN 978-3791355146 .

^ Chowdhry, Pritika (2021-11-06).

"Site-Specific Art" .

Pritika Chowdhry Art . Retrieved 2021-11-06 .

^ Kaye, Nick (2000). "Embodying Site: Dennis Oppenheim and Vito Acconci".

Site-Specific Art: Performance, Place and Documentation . New York: Routledge. pp.

154 .

ISBN 0-203-13829-5 .

^ Chowdhry, Pritika (2021-11-06).

"Site-Specific Art" .

Pritika Chowdhry Art . Retrieved 2021-11-06 .

^ Kwon, Miwon (2002).

One Place After Another: Site-Specific Art and Locational Identity . Cambridge (Massachusetts), London: MIT. p. 3.

ISBN 0-203-13829-5 .

^ Kaye (citing O'Docherty's Inside the White Cube , 1986), p. 27 ^ Kwon, p.3 ^ Kwon, p. 13 ^ "Abecedário — AR.CO — Centro de Arte e Comunicação Visual" .

www.arcoabecedario.pt . Retrieved 2018-10-26 .

^ Kaye, p. 2 ^ "Missions | Fonds d'art contemporain | Ville de Genève : Sites des institutions" .

institutions.ville-geneve.ch (in French) . Retrieved 2018-01-05 .

^ "NEON PARALLAX - Département de la culture et du sport - Ville de Genève" .

www.ville-ge.ch . Retrieved 2022-07-22 .

^ "Infecting The City - Africa Centre" .

Africa Centre . 2014-03-28 . Retrieved 2018-01-05 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Site-specific art at Wikimedia Commons v t e Visual arts and the art world Artwork Appropriation Collage Conceptual art Cultural artifact Drawing Fine art Fine-art photograph Found object Installation art Kinetic art Mixed media bricolage Mural fresco graffiti New media art history digital virtual Painting Performance art Plastic arts Portrait Printmaking Public art street art Sculpture carving relief statue tallest Site-specific art Social sculpture Soft sculpture Stained glass Artwork title Roles Artist Collector Conservator-restorer paintings frescos Critic Curator Dealer Model Patron Visual arts education Europe Places and events Art auction Art colony Art commune Art exhibition alternative exhibition space Art gallery Contemporary art gallery Art museum Single-artist museum Art school Europe Arts centre Arts festival Artist collective Artist cooperative Artist-in-residence program Artist-run initiative Artist-run space Biennale Commission Sculpture garden Sculpture trail Virtual museum History of art Timeline of art Art history (academic study) Art manifesto Art movements Criticism feminist History of painting outline Periods in Western art history Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America Related Art market The arts Catalogue raisonné Classificatory disputes Museum collection management deaccessioning Conservation-restoration paintings Cultural policy Depiction Destination painting Eclecticism in art Economics of art art finance art valuation Elements of art Forgery Index of painting-related articles Outline of the visual arts painting sculpture Provenance Sociology of art Style Unfinished work Lists Art magazines Art media Art techniques Art movements Art museums largest most visited sculpture parks single artist Art reference books Colossal sculptures in situ Contemporary artists Contemporary art galleries Modern artists National galleries Painters by name by nationality Photographers Sculptors female Stolen paintings Most expensive paintings , sculptures , works by living artists Painting portal Visual arts portal Arts portal v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees v t e Visual arts Architecture Art Body art Ceramics Comics Computer art Craft pallet crafts Decorative arts Design Drawing Digital art Filmmaking Light art Painting Photography Printmaking Public art Rock art Sculpture Site-specific art Street art List of artistic media Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Site-specific_art&oldid=1252149193 " Categories : Site-specific art Visual arts genres Artistic techniques Installation art Contemporary art Sculpture Land art Landscape design history Landscape architecture Postmodern art Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 October 2024, at 01:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Site-specific art 22 languages Add topic

