Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 19th century 1.1.1 Founding of the International Union of American Republics 1.2 20th century 1.2.1 Creation of the OAS 1.3 21st century 1.4 Milestones 2 Goals and purpose 3 Organizational structure Toggle Organizational structure subsection 3.1 General Assembly 3.2 Specialized agencies 3.3 Official languages 3.4 Funding and accountability 3.4.1 OAS Office of the Inspector General audits 3.4.2 Financial audits 4 Membership and adhesions Toggle Membership and adhesions subsection 4.1 Canada and the OAS 4.2 Sanctions against the Dominican Republic during Trujillo regime 4.3 Permanent observers 5 Suspensions, withdrawals and termination Toggle Suspensions, withdrawals and termination subsection 5.1 Cuba 5.2 Suspension of Honduras (2009–2011) 5.3 Nicaragua 5.4 Venezuela 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Organization of American States 83 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaelg Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°53′34″N 77°02′25″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8929138°N 77.0403734°W ﻿ / 38.8929138; -77.0403734 ﻿ ( OAS headquarters, Washington, D.C.

) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International organization of states in the Americas Organization of American States Spanish Organización de los Estados Americanos French Organisation des États américains Portuguese Organização dos Estados Americanos Flag Emblem Motto: "Democracy for peace, security and development" The OAS as of 2022 Member states Former member states Disputed member states Headquarters 17th Street and Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, D.C., U.S.

38°53′34″N 77°02′25″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8929138°N 77.0403734°W ﻿ / 38.8929138; -77.0403734 ﻿ ( OAS headquarters, Washington, D.C.

) Official languages English French Portuguese Spanish Member states 33 states Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Suriname Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Venezuela (Disputed) [ Note 1 ] Leaders • Secretary General Albert Ramdin • Assistant Secretary General Nestor Mendez Establishment • Charter 30 April 1948 Area • Total 40,275,678 km 2 (15,550,526 sq mi) Population • 2023 [ 1 ] estimate 1,028,404,247 Time zone UTC −10 to +0 Website oas.org A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational organizations in the Americas v t e The Organization of American States ( OAS or OEA ; Spanish : Organización de los Estados Americanos ; Portuguese : Organização dos Estados Americanos ; French : Organisation des États américains ) is an international organization founded on 30 April 1948 to promote cooperation among its member states within the Americas .

Headquartered in Washington, D.C., United States, the OAS is a "multilateral regional body focused on human rights, electoral oversight, social and economic development, and security in the Western Hemisphere", according to the Council on Foreign Relations .

[ 2 ] As of November 2023, 32 states in the Americas are OAS members.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Albert Ramdin of Suriname was inaugurated as OAS secretary general in May 2025, replacing Luis Almagro of Uruguay.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] History [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 19th century [ edit ] The International Union of American Republics' logo in 1909 [ 7 ] The Pan American Union Building in 1910, shortly after its construction in Washington, D. C.

The notion of an international union in the American continent was first put forward during the liberation of America by José de San Martín and Simón Bolívar [ 8 ] who, at the 1826 Congress of Panama , still being part of Colombia , proposed creating a league of American republics, with a common military, a mutual defense pact, and a supranational parliamentary assembly. The meeting was attended by representatives of Gran Colombia , comprising the present-day countries of Colombia , Ecuador , Panama , and Venezuela , Argentina , Peru , Bolivia , the United Provinces of Central America , and Mexico but the grandly titled "Treaty of Union, League, and Perpetual Confederation" was ultimately ratified only by Gran Colombia. Bolívar's dream soon floundered with civil war in Gran Colombia, the disintegration of Central America, and the emergence of national rather than New World outlooks in the newly independent American republics. Bolívar's dream of inter-American unity was meant to unify Hispanic American nations against external powers.

Founding of the International Union of American Republics [ edit ] The pursuit of regional solidarity and cooperation again came to the forefront in 1889–1890, at the First International Conference of American States . Gathered together in Washington, D.C., 18 nations resolved to found the International Union of American Republics, served by a permanent secretariat called the Commercial Bureau of the American Republics (renamed the International Commercial Bureau at the Second International Conference in 1901–1902). These two bodies, in existence as of 14 April 1890, represent the point of inception to which the OAS and its General Secretariat trace their origins.

20th century [ edit ] Pan American Union headquarters building in Washington, D.C. in 1943 At the fourth International Conference of American States ( Buenos Aires , 1910), the name of the organization was changed to the Union of American Republics and the Bureau became the Pan American Union. The Pan American Union Building was constructed in 1910, on Constitution Avenue , Northwest, Washington, D.C.

In the mid-1930s, U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt organized an inter-American conference in Buenos Aires. One of the items at the conference was a " League of Nations of the Americas", an idea proposed by Colombia, Guatemala, and the Dominican Republic.

[ 9 ] At the subsequent Inter-American Conference for the Maintenance of Peace, 21 nations pledged to remain neutral in the event of a conflict between any two members.

[ 10 ] The experience of World War II convinced hemispheric governments that unilateral action could not ensure the territorial integrity of the American nations in the event of external aggression. To meet the challenges of global conflict in the postwar world and to contain conflicts within the hemisphere, they adopted a system of collective security , the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Treaty) signed in 1947 in Rio de Janeiro .

Creation of the OAS [ edit ] The ninth International Conference of American States was held in Bogotá between March and May 1948 and led by United States Secretary of State George Marshall , a meeting which led to a pledge by members to fight communism in the western hemisphere .

[ 11 ] This was the event that saw the birth of the OAS as it stands today, with the signature by 21 American countries of the Charter of the Organization of American States on 30 April 1948 (in effect since December 1951). The meeting also adopted the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man , the world's first general human rights instrument.

The transition from the Pan American Union to OAS would have been smooth if it had not been for the assassination of Colombian leader Jorge Eliécer Gaitán . The Director General of the Pan American Union, Alberto Lleras Camargo , became the Organization's first Secretary General .

21st century [ edit ] The OAS emblem with its official name in English The OAS conducted an audit of the 2019 Bolivian general election , which opposition supporters argued was fraudulent. The OAS report contended that the results were marred by "clear manipulation" and significant irregularities leading to the 2019 Bolivian political crisis . Bolivian president Evo Morales resigned soon after, having lost the confidence of the country's military in what he described as a coup.

[ 12 ] Some media outlets debated whether it should be referred to as a coup.

[ 13 ] On 21 December, the Technical Mission of Electoral Experts sent by the European Union published a 67-page report which made similar observations and conclusions to that of the OAS. They noted that "there were minutes with an unusually high number of null votes, blank votes and a hundred percent participation of voters in a series of polling stations" and highlighted the general failure of the TSE to declare these irregularities.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Studies commissioned by the American left-leaning [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] think tank CEPR argued that the OAS report's statistical analysis was inaccurate and unreliable.

[ 19 ] The author of the OAS's vote return analysis stated that the CEPR's explanation of the results was implausible.

[ 20 ] The organization has been criticized by Mexico [ 21 ] and the CEPR [ 22 ] [ better source needed ] for their perception of interference into the internal affairs of Bolivia.

[ 23 ] The OAS observed the subsequent 2020 Bolivian general election stating there was no evidence of fraud.

[ 24 ] The New York Times concluded that there was some fraud, but that it was unclear how much or if it was sufficient to change the result of the election, and suggested the initial analysis by the OAS was flawed.

[ 25 ] In November 2021, OAS condemned the outcome of the Nicaraguan general election .

[ 26 ] In April 2022, Nicaragua reported the completion of its withdrawal process from the OAS initiated in November 2021. The OAS stated that, due to the terms of treaty, the withdrawal would not take effect until 2023.

[ 27 ] The move was completed on 19 November that year.

[ 28 ] Milestones [ edit ] Significant milestones in the history of the OAS since the signing of the Charter have included the following: 1959: Inter-American Commission on Human Rights created.

1959: Inter-American Development Bank created.

1960: First application of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance against the regime of Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic 1961: Charter of Punta del Este signed, launching the Alliance for Progress .

1962: OAS suspends Cuba .

1969: American Convention on Human Rights signed (in force since 1978).

1970: OAS General Assembly established as the Organization's supreme decision-making body.

1979: Inter-American Court of Human Rights created.

1991: Adoption of Resolution 1080, which requires the Secretary General to convene the Permanent Council within ten days of a coup d'état in any member country.

1994: First Summit of the Americas ( Miami ), which resolved to establish a Free Trade Area of the Americas by 2005.

2001: Inter-American Democratic Charter adopted.

2009: OAS revokes 1962 suspension of Cuba .

2009: OAS suspends Honduras due to the coup which ousted president Manuel Zelaya .

2011: OAS lifts the suspension of Honduras with the return of Manuel Zelaya from exile.

2017: Venezuela announces it would begin the process to leave the OAS, accusing the organization of interference in Venezuela's political crisis .

2019: During the Venezuelan presidential crisis , the President of the National Assembly Juan Guaidó , recognized by the National Assembly as the acting president, expressed his desire for Venezuela to remain a member of the OAS.

[ 29 ] the OAS voted to recognize Gustavo Tarre Briceño as Venezuela's delegate in April, the National Assembly's representative to the OAS.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] 2020: OAS concluded that the 2019 Bolivian general election was fraudulent.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] 2021: Nicaragua submitted a formal request to leave the OAS, following condemnation from the OAS General Assembly of Foreign Ministers of the outcome of the 2021 election .

[ 36 ] 2023: Nicaragua completed its withdrawal from the OAS.

[ 37 ] Goals and purpose [ edit ] In the words of Article 1 of the Charter, the goal of the member nations in creating the OAS was "to achieve an order of peace and justice, to promote their solidarity, to strengthen their collaboration, and to defend their sovereignty, their territorial integrity, and their independence." Article 2 then defines eight essential purposes: To strengthen the peace and security of the continent.

To promote and consolidate representative democracy , with due respect for the principle of non-intervention .

To prevent possible causes of difficulties and to ensure the pacific settlement of disputes that may arise among the member states.

To provide for common action on the part of those states in the event of aggression.

To seek the solution of political, judicial, and economic problems that may arise among them.

To promote, by cooperative action, their economic, social, and cultural development .

To eradicate extreme poverty , which constitutes an obstacle to the full democratic development of the peoples of the hemisphere.

To achieve an effective limitation of conventional weapons that will make it possible to devote the largest amount of resources to the economic and social development of the member states.

Over the course of the 1990s, with the end of the Cold War , the return to democracy in Latin America, and the thrust toward globalization , the OAS made major efforts to reinvent itself to fit the new context. Its stated priorities now include the following: Strengthening democracy: Between 1962 and 2002, the Organization sent multinational observation missions to oversee free and fair elections in the member states on more than 100 occasions. The OAS also works to strengthen national and local government and electoral agencies, to promote democratic practices and values, and to help countries detect and defuse official corruption.

Working for peace: Special OAS missions have supported peace processes in Nicaragua , Suriname , Haiti , and Guatemala . The Organization has played a leading part in the removal of landmines deployed in member states and it has led negotiations to resolve the continents' remaining border disputes ( Guatemala / Belize ; Peru / Ecuador ). Work is also underway on the construction of a common inter-American counter-terrorism front.

Defending human rights : The agencies of the inter-American human rights system provide a venue for the denunciation and resolution of human rights violations in individual cases. They also monitor and report on the general human rights situation in the member states.

Fostering free trade: The OAS is one of the three agencies currently engaged in drafting a treaty aiming to establish an inter-continental free trade area from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego .

Fighting the drugs trade: The Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission was established in 1986 to coordinate efforts and cross-border cooperation in this area.

Promoting sustainable development : The goal of the OAS's Inter-American Council for Integral Development is to promote economic development and combating poverty. OAS technical cooperation programs address such areas as river basin management, the conservation of biodiversity, preservation of cultural diversity, planning for global climate change, sustainable tourism , and natural disaster mitigation.

Organizational structure [ edit ] U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo speaks at the OAS Permanent Council in January 2019 The Organization of American States is composed of a General Secretariat, the Permanent Council , the Inter-American Council for Integral Development, and a number of committees.

The General Secretariat of the Organization of American States consists of six secretariats .

Secretariat for Political Affairs Executive Secretariat for Integral Development Secretariat for Multidimensional Security Secretariat for Administration and Finance Secretariat for Legal Affairs Secretariat for External Relations The various committees of the Organization of American States include: The Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs The Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Affairs The Committee on Hemispheric Security The Committee on Inter-American Summits Management and Civil Society Participation in OAS Activities The various commissions of the Organization of American States include: Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM) Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (CIDH) Inter-American Telecommunication Commission (CITEL) General Assembly [ edit ] Main article: General Assembly of the Organization of American States A session of the OAS's 35th General Assembly in Fort Lauderdale, Florida , in June 2005 The General Assembly is the supreme decision-making body of OAS. It convenes once every year in a regular session. In special circumstances, and with the approval of two-thirds of the member states, the Permanent Council can convene special sessions.

The Organization's member states take turns hosting the General Assembly on a rotating basis. The states are represented at its sessions by their chosen delegates: generally, their ministers of foreign affairs, or their appointed deputies. Each state has one vote, and most matters are settled by a majority vote, except for those for which the Charter or the General Assembly's own rules of procedure specifically require a two-thirds majority.

The General Assembly's powers include setting the OAS's general course and policies by means of resolutions and declarations; approving its budget and determining the contributions payable by the member states; approving the reports and previous year's actions of the OAS's specialized agencies; and electing members to serve on those agencies.

Specialized agencies [ edit ] The OAS has five specialized agencies: [ 38 ] Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) Inter-American Children's Institute [ es ] (IIN) Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM) Pan-American Institute of Geography and History (PAIGH) Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture [ es ] (IICA) Official languages [ edit ] Statue of Isabella I of Castile , the Catholic Queen in front of the seat of the OAS headquarters in Washington, D.C.

The Organization's official languages are Spanish , Portuguese , French , and English . The Charter, the basic instrument governing OAS, makes no reference to the use of official languages. These references are to be found in the Rules of Procedure governing the various OAS bodies. Article 51 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly, [ 39 ] the supreme body of the OAS, which meets once a year, states that English, French, Portuguese, and Spanish are the four official languages. Article 28 stipulates that a Style Committee shall be set up with representatives of the four official languages to review the General Assembly resolutions and declarations. Article 53 states that proposals shall be presented in the four official languages. The Rules of Procedure and Statutes of other bodies, such as the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CIDI), the Permanent Executive Committee of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CEPCIDI), the Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM), the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD), the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) and the Inter-American Juridical Committee (CJI), technical bodies of the OAS, also mention the four official languages in which their meetings are to be conducted. Policy is therefore dictated through these instruments that require use of the four official languages at meetings.

[ 40 ] Although a number of other languages have official status in one or more member states of OAS ( Dutch in Suriname; Haitian Creole alongside French in Haiti; Quechua and Aymara in Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia; Guaraní in Paraguay), they are not official languages of the Organization.

Funding and accountability [ edit ] The OAS has two funds, one for the General Secretariat, and one for specific programs and initiatives. The General Assembly asks for contributions from each member country based on its capacity to pay. In 2018 the General Secretariat's budget was $85 million of which the US contributed $50 million. In 2017 the US contributed $17 million to the fund for specific programs which was almost a third of the total contributions for that year.

[ 41 ] OAS Office of the Inspector General audits [ edit ] The OAS Office of the Inspector General (OIG) conducts forensic internal performance audits , to assess the General Secretariat in achieving the objectives recommended in administration and operations of the OAS and its safeguarding of resources used to undertake programs across Latin America and the Caribbean. The OIG's internal audit reports [ 42 ] are presented to the OAS Audit Committee, and the Secretary General as well as member states of the OAS upon request. The OIG maintains whistleblower provisions to report irregular activity to the OIG for review.

[ 43 ] Financial audits [ edit ] Under General Assembly Resolution 123, adopted on April 14, 1973 Financial audits of the accounts of the OAS are published annually.

[ 44 ] The annual reports are presented to the General Secretariat by The Audit Committee (formerly The OAS Board of External Auditors.) The Committee members are composed of three members elected by the OAS's General Assembly.

Membership and adhesions [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see Member states of the Organization of American States .

Upon its foundation in 1948, the OAS had 21 members, most of them in Latin America: Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba [ Note 2 ] Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras [ Note 3 ] Mexico Nicaragua [ Note 4 ] Panama Paraguay Peru United States Uruguay Venezuela [ Note 1 ] The later expansion of the OAS included Canada and the newly independent nations of the Caribbean. Members with later admission dates (sorted chronologically): Barbados (member since 1967) Trinidad and Tobago (1967) Jamaica (1969) Grenada (1975) Suriname (1977) Dominica (1979) Saint Lucia (1979) Antigua and Barbuda (1981) Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (1981) Bahamas (1982) Saint Kitts and Nevis (1984) Canada (1990) Belize (1991) Guyana (1991) Canada and the OAS [ edit ] Although admission into OAS's predecessor, the Pan American Union, was initially restricted to republics, several overtures were still made for Canada to join the organization in 1928, 1933, 1936, and 1938. During the 1936 Pan American Union Conference, the organization extended its membership from only "American republics" to "American states" to accommodate Canada's admission as a constitutional monarchy.

[ 47 ] However, U.S. opposition to Canadian membership prevented their admittance, with the U.S. fearing the admittance of Canada to the OAS would bring with it British influence that could impede its freedom of action within the organization. The U.S. reversed its position on Canadian membership in 1947.

[ 48 ] However, by that time, Canadian foreign policy had adopted an Atlanticist position with a European focus; [ 49 ] resulting in the Canadian government seeing little value in pursuing OAS membership.

[ 48 ] From the 1960s to the 1980s, the Canadian government expressed some interest in joining the OAS, having successfully applied for permanent observer status in 1972 to evaluate potential membership.

[ 50 ] In the 1980s, the Canadian government incrementally increased its participation in OAS activities.

[ 51 ] Canada signed the Charter of the Organization of American States in 1989. Canada's membership in the OAS was formalized when the decision was ratified in 1990.

[ 52 ] Sanctions against the Dominican Republic during Trujillo regime [ edit ] See also: Assassination attempt of Rómulo Betancourt This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) During the 6th Conference of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of American States (OAS) in Costa Rica , from 16 to 20 August 1960, a conviction against the State of the Dominican Republic was agreed to unanimously. The penalty was motivated because the foreign ministers checked the veracity of the claim that the Rafael Trujillo regime had sponsored an attack against Rómulo Betancourt , at that time the constitutional president of Venezuela. The meeting was attended by foreign ministers from 21 American nations, including Cuba , which at that time had not yet been expelled from the inter-American system.

All countries, including the United States and Haiti , broke off diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic. Additionally an economic blockade that affected the exports of sugar was applied, which at that time was the pillar of the Dominican economy.

It was the first application of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance , which had been adopted at the OAS on 29 July 1960.

Permanent observers [ edit ] As of 31 January 2014, there are 69 permanent observer countries including the four countries with territory or territories in the Americas—Denmark, France, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom; as well as the European Union and India.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] In March 2022, the OAS voted to suspend Russia as a permanent observer due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine .

[ 56 ] Suspensions, withdrawals and termination [ edit ] Cuba [ edit ] Further information: Cuba–OAS relations The current government of Cuba was excluded from participation in the Organization under a decision adopted by the Eighth Meeting of Consultation in Punta del Este , Uruguay , on 31 January 1962. The vote was passed by 14 in favor, with one against (Cuba) and six abstentions (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, and Mexico). The operative part of the resolution reads as follows: That adherence by any member of the Organization of American States to Marxism-Leninism is incompatible with the inter-American system and the alignment of such a government with the communist bloc breaks the unity and solidarity of the continents.

That the present Government of Cuba, which has officially identified itself as a Marxist-Leninist government, was incompatible with the principles and objectives of the inter-American system.

That this incompatibility excluded the present Government of Cuba from participation in the inter-American system.

[ 57 ] This meant that the Cuban nation was still technically a member state, but that the current government was denied the right of representation and attendance at meetings and of participation in activities. The OAS's position was that although Cuba's participation was suspended, its obligations under the Charter, the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man , etc. still hold: for instance, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights continues to publish reports on Cuba's human rights situation and to hear individual cases involving Cuban nationals. However, this stance was occasionally questioned by other individual member states.

The resolution to exclude Cuba was controversial when it was adopted, and the reintegration of Cuba into the Inter-American system has remained a frequent source of contention among the countries of the hemisphere ever since.

[ 58 ] Cuba's position was stated in an official note sent to the Organization "merely as a courtesy" by Minister of Foreign Affairs Raúl Roa on 4 November 1964: "Cuba was arbitrarily excluded ... The Organization of American States has no juridical, factual, or moral jurisdiction, nor competence, over a state which it has illegally deprived of its rights." [ 59 ] The reincorporation of Cuba as an active member regularly arose as a topic within the inter-American system –  for instance, it was intimated by the outgoing ambassador of Mexico in 1998 [ 60 ] – but most observers did not see it as a serious possibility while the present government remained in power. Since 1960, the Cuban administration had repeatedly characterized the OAS as the "Ministry of Colonies" of the United States of America.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Fidel Castro and his brother Raúl attacked the OAS as a "Yankee bordello" and "instrument of imperialist domination" and vowed that Cuba would never join, although OAS rescinded the nation's expulsion in 2009 and invited it to apply for readmission.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez promised to veto any final declaration of the 2009 Summit of the Americas due to Cuba's exclusion.

[ 65 ] On 17 April 2009, after a "trading of warm words" between the administrations of U.S. President Barack Obama and Cuban leader Raúl Castro , OAS Secretary General José Miguel Insulza said he would ask the 2009 General Assembly to annul the 1962 resolution excluding Cuba.

[ 66 ] On 3 June 2009, foreign ministers assembled in San Pedro Sula , Honduras , for the OAS's 39th General Assembly , passed a vote to lift Cuba's suspension from the OAS. The United States had been pressuring the OAS for weeks to condition Cuba's readmission to the group on democratic principles and commitment to human rights. Ecuador's Foreign Minister Fander Falconí said there will be no such conditions. "This is a new proposal, it has no conditions—of any kind", Falconí said. "That suspension was made in the Cold War , in the language of the Cold War. What we have done here is fix a historic error." [ 67 ] The suspension was lifted at the end of the General Assembly, but, to be readmitted to the Organization, Cuba will need to comply with all the treaties signed by the Member States, including the Inter-American Democratic Charter of 2001.

[ 68 ] A statement issued by the Cuban government on 8 June 2009 stated that while Cuba welcomed the Assembly's gesture, in light of the Organization's historical record "Cuba will not return to the OAS." [ 69 ] Suspension of Honduras (2009–2011) [ edit ] The OAS's Extraordinary Assembly voted to suspend Honduras on 5 July 2009, during the 2009 Honduran constitutional crisis .

Following the expulsion of its President Manuel Zelaya , Honduras' membership of the Organization was suspended unanimously at midnight on 5 July 2009.

[ 70 ] The de facto government had already announced it was leaving the OAS hours earlier; this was not, however, taken into account by the OAS, which did not recognize that government as legitimate.

[ 71 ] An extraordinary meeting had been conducted by the OAS in Washington, D.C., with Zelaya in attendance.

[ 70 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] The suspension of Honduras was approved unanimously with 33 votes (Honduras did not vote).

[ 70 ] [ 73 ] This was the first suspension carried out by the OAS since that of Cuba in 1962.

[ 70 ] [ 73 ] After Zelaya's return to Honduras in 2011, the country was re-admitted to the Organization on 1 June 2011 with 32 votes in favor and 1 (Ecuador) against. Venezuela expressed some reservations.

[ 74 ] Nicaragua [ edit ] On 7 November 2021, Nicaragua held a general election which saw President Daniel Ortega re-elected to a fourth term in office.

[ 75 ] In a vote by the OAS Permanent Council, 25 member states voted in favour of a resolution condemning the election. Seven countries, including Mexico, Honduras and Bolivia, abstained. The motion stated that the election was "not free, fair or transparent and lack[s] democratic legitimacy" and also instructed the Permanent Council to undertake an assessment of the situation and "take appropriate action".

[ 76 ] In response to this statement, Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Denis Moncada [ es ] announced on 19 November that Nicaragua would leave the OAS.

[ 46 ] Moncada called the bloc "an instrument of interference and intervention" and accused it of "facilitating the hegemony of the United States with its interventionism over the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean." [ 77 ] [ 78 ] According to Article 143 of the OAS Charter, the process to withdraw from the organization takes two years after its announcement.

[ 79 ] In April 2022, Nicaragua announced that it had completed its withdrawal from the OAS. It said the OAS offices in Managua had been closed.  The OAS stated that, due to the terms of treaty, the withdrawal would not take effect until 2023.

[ 80 ] Nicaragua eventually completed its withdrawal from the OAS on 19 November that year.

[ 81 ] Venezuela [ edit ] On 28 April 2017, Venezuela notified the OAS of its denunciation of the Charter of the OAS, which as per Article 143 would lead to the withdrawal of Venezuela from the OAS effective two years from the date of notification.

[ 29 ] During this period, the country did not plan on participating in the OAS.

[ 82 ] During the 2019 Venezuelan presidential crisis , the President of the National Assembly of Venezuela Juan Guaidó , who was recognized by the National Assembly as the acting president, [ 83 ] sent a letter to the OAS Secretary General annulling the previous denunciation of the OAS Charter, [ citation needed ] and expressing his desire for Venezuela to remain a member of the OAS.

[ 29 ] The National Assembly designated a special envoy as representative to the OAS, lawyer Gustavo Tarre Briceño , who the OAS voted to recognize as Venezuela's delegate in April.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] In October 2022, a bloc of leftist OAS member states led a motion to remove Tarre's representation in the organization. Out of 35 members, 19 nations voted in favor of the motion and 4 against. The motion fell short of the 24 votes required for a two-thirds majority.

[ 84 ] See also [ edit ] African Union Community of Latin American and Caribbean States European Union Flag of the Organization of American States Organization of Ibero-American States Regional integration Rio Group Rio Pact Statues of the Liberators Union of South American Nations Notes [ edit ] ^ a b On 28 April 2017, Venezuela notified the OAS of its denunciation of the Charter of the OAS, which as per Article 143 would lead to the withdraw of Venezuela from the OAS effective two years from the date of notification.

[ 29 ] During the 2019 Venezuelan presidential crisis , the President of the National Assembly of Venezuela Juan Guaidó , who was recognized by the National Assembly as the acting president, sent a letter to the OAS Secretary General annulling the previous denunciation of the OAS Charter, and expressing his desire for Venezuela to remain a member of the OAS.

[ 29 ] The National Assembly designated a special envoy as representative to the OAS, who the OAS voted to recognize as Venezuela's delegate in April.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] ^ Suspended from 1962 to 2009, however the Cuban government has stated it does not intend to resume participation in the organization. See Cuba–OAS relations .

^ Suspended between 2009–2011.

[ 45 ] See Suspension of Honduras below.

^ On 19 November 2021, Nicaragua announced its intention to withdraw from the OAS. Per the terms of the charter, the process became effective two years following notification, on 19 November 2023.

[ 46 ] See Status of Nicaragua below.

References [ edit ] ^ The Organization of American States ^ "The Organization of American States" .

Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 17 June 2023 .

^ OAS (1 August 2009).

"OAS – Organization of American States: Democracy for peace, security, and development" .

www.oas.org . Retrieved 17 June 2023 .

^ "The Organization of American States" . Council on Foreign Relations.

^ Kuipers, Ank (10 March 2025).

"Suriname's Albert Ramdin elected OAS's first Caribbean secretary general" . Reuters . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ "Former Suriname Minister Albert Ramdin sworn in as OAS Secretary General" .

Caribbean National Weekly . 3 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 .

^ catalog, International bureau of the American republics, Washington, D. C. [from old; Book, Start this, Cacao , retrieved 13 October 2021 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Panama: A Country Study" . Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress. 1987.

^ "League of Nations in Americas urged by 3 Latin states" , The New York Times . 13 April 1936. p. 1.

^ "Americas adopt neutrality pact" , The New York Times . 20 December 1936.

^ "Organization of American States" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 4 September 2019 .

^ Faiola, Anthony; Krygier, Rachelle.

"Bolivia's Morales resigns amid scathing election report, rising protests" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 18 March 2021 .

^ "AP Explains: Did a coup force Bolivia's Evo Morales out?" .

Associated Press . 11 November 2019 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

Whether the events Sunday in Bolivia constitute a coup d'état is now the subject of debate in and outside the nation. ... Bolivia's "coup" is largely a question of semantics ^ "Unión Europea Misiónde Expertos Electorales Bolivia 2019 Informe Final" (PDF) (in Spanish). European Union in Bolivia. Archived from the original on 6 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ "Informe de la UE detectó "numerosos errores" en elecciones de Bolivia" .

www.voanoticias.com (in Spanish). Voice of America Spanish. 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ Rosenberg, Tina (4 November 2007).

"The Perils Of Petrocracy" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 5 October 2014 .

… Mark Weisbrot, co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, a left-wing Washington policy group.

^ Sussman, Anna Louie (7 September 2015).

"Are Women the New Face of Organized Labor?" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 20 September 2015 .

^ Fox, Maggie (24 July 2013).

"Obamacare won't slash workers' hours, report finds" . NBC News . Retrieved 31 October 2014 .

^ Johnston, Jake (21 October 2020).

"Data from Bolivia's Election Add More Evidence That OAS Fabricated Last Year's Fraud Claims" .

Center for Economic and Policy Research .

Archived from the original on 25 October 2023.

^ Nooruddin, Irfan (10 March 2020).

"Analysis | Yes, Bolivia's 2019 election was problematic. Here's why" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 18 March 2021 .

^ Garcia, David Alire (17 March 2021). Esposito, Anthony (ed.).

"Mexico to OAS: Stop interfering in Bolivia's internal affairs" . Thomson Reuters. Associated Press . Retrieved 14 February 2022 .

^ Williams, Jack R.; Curiel, John.

"Analysis of the 2019 Bolivia Election" (PDF) .

Center for Economic and Policy Research (CEPR) . Retrieved 14 February 2022 .

^ Hetland, Gabriel (7 March 2020).

"Opinion: The OAS helped undermine, not restore, democracy in Bolivia" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 14 February 2022 .

^ Tancara Castillo, Cándido (23 October 2020).

"ONU, OEA y Uniore descartan fraude en elecciones generales" .

Pagina Siete (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 8 June 2021 .

^ Kurmanaev, Anatoly (7 June 2020).

"A Bitter Election. Accusations of Fraud. And Now Second Thoughts" .

The New York Times .

^ "OAS members condemn Nicaragua elections, urge action" . Reuters. 13 November 2021.

^ "Nicaragua announces withdrawal from Organization of American States despite bloc's objections" .

france24.com . 25 April 2022.

^ "The history behind Nicaragua's exit from the OAS" . La Prensa Latina. 18 November 2023. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 .

^ a b c d e "CHARTER OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (A-41)" . Organization of American States . Retrieved 29 April 2019 .

^ a b c "Resolution on the Situation in Venezuela" . Organization of American States. 9 April 2019 . Retrieved 29 April 2019 .

^ a b c "OAS recognises Guaido's envoy until new Venezuela elections held" .

Al Jazeera . 9 April 2019 . Retrieved 27 April 2019 .

^ a b "Tarre Briceño, primera designación gubernamental de la AN" .

Efecto Cocuyo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 January 2019 . Retrieved 23 January 2019 .

^ Kurmanaev, Anatoly (7 June 2020).

"A Bitter Election. Accusations of Fraud. And Now Second Thoughts" .

The New York Times .

^ Greenwald, Glenn (8 June 2020).

"The New York Times Admits Key Falsehoods That Drove Last Year's Coup in Bolivia: Falsehoods Peddled by the U.S., Its Media, and the Times" .

The Intercept .

^ Resnick, David (5 September 2020).

"The OAS Accusation of Electoral Fraud Against Evo Morales is Bullshit — And Now We Have the Data to Prove It" .

Jacobin .

^ "Nicaragua decides to leave OAS" . DW. 19 November 2021.

^ "A partir de este domingo Nicaragua está oficialmente fuera de la OEA" (in Spanish). La Prensa. 19 November 2023.

^ "OAS :: Our Structure : Specialized Organizations" .

OAS – Organization of American States . 29 January 1996 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

^ General Assembly of the OAS, Amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly , 5 June 2000 ^ Marguerite Groves (Coordinator, Division of Language Services, OAS), Information on the use of language at the OAS: multilingualism Archived 3 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Inter-American Languages Management Seminar , Conseil supérieur de la langue française ( Quebec ), Quebec City , 20 to 22 August  2002 ^ "The Organization of American States" .

Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 12 November 2019 .

^ Annual Internal audits ^ OIG's whistleblower hotline ^ Annual External Audits ^ "OAS readmits Honduras to its ranks" . CNN. 1 June 2011 . Retrieved 1 November 2012 .

^ a b "Nicaragua says it will leave Organization of American States" . Associated Press News. 19 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .

^ Pharand 1986 , p. 432.

^ a b Pharand 1986 , p. 433.

^ Pharand 1986 , p. 454.

^ Pharand 1986 , p. 436.

^ McKenna, Peter (1995).

Canada and the OAS: From Dilettante to Full Partner . McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 144.

ISBN 0886292581 .

^ OAS (August 2009).

"Charter of the Organization of American States (a-41): Signatories and Ratifications" .

OAS . Retrieved 2 June 2022 .

^ "OAS – Organization of American States: Democracy for peace, security, and development" .

www.oas.org . 1 August 2009.

^ SER :: DIA :: Permanent Observers . OAS. Retrieved on 12 July 2013.

^ "Montenegro Gains Observer Status to Organisation of American States" . 4 February 2014. Archived from the original on 24 February 2014 . Retrieved 4 February 2014 .

^ " "Pregúntense a quién hubiera apoyado Simón Bolívar", dijo Zelenski en un emotivo discurso ante la OEA" . 6 October 2022.

^ "Six Report on the Situation of Political Prisoners in Cuba" .

Inter-American Commission on Human Rights . Organization of American States. 14 December 1979.

^ This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain : "Organization of American States: Background and Issues for Congress" (PDF) .

^ "The Situation of Human Rights in Cuba: Seventh Report" .

Inter-American Commission on Human Rights . Organization of American States. 4 October 1983.

^ "Mexico Calls for Cuba's Reinstatement into the OAS" (Press release). Organization of American States. 4 February 1998.

Organization of American States.

^ "The Testing of the OAS" .

Time . 22 August 1960. Archived from the original on 24 June 2009 . Retrieved 24 November 2008 .

^ Solis, Marta (26 April 1972).

"Castro admits problems in education" .

Siempre . Latin American Network Information Center, University of Texas at Austin. pp.

40– 41.

^ Lino Gutierrez (9 June 2009).

"Why Cuba won't join the OAS" .

Foreign Policy .

^ "Cuba will never rejoin 'imperialist' OAS, says Castro" . Deutsche Welle. 5 June 2016.

^ "Chavez threatens veto over Cuba" .

BBC News Online . 17 April 2009 . Retrieved 17 April 2009 .

^ "U.S., Cuba trade warm words ahead of summit" .

NBC News . 17 April 2009 . Retrieved 17 April 2009 .

^ "OAS votes to lift suspension of Cuba" .

The Miami Herald . 3 June 2009 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Proceedings Volume 1" . Retrieved 28 December 2019 .

^ "Declaration of the Revolutionary Government" .

Granma . 8 June 2009. Archived from the original on 19 February 2012 . Retrieved 15 June 2009 .

^ a b c d "Americas group suspends Honduras" . BBC. 5 July 2009 . Retrieved 5 July 2009 .

^ "Honduras leaders pull out of OAS" .

RTÉ . 4 July 2009 . Retrieved 5 July 2009 .

^ "OAS expels Honduras' membership over coup" .

China Daily . 5 July 2009 . Retrieved 5 July 2009 .

^ a b c Hipwell, Deirdre (5 July 2009).

"Organisation of American States suspends Honduras over coup" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 29 May 2010 . Retrieved 5 July 2009 .

^ Press Releases :: E-698/11 . OAS. Retrieved on 12 July 2013.

^ "Biden calls Nicaragua's election a 'pantomime' that's 'neither free nor fair' " .

France 24 . 8 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .

^ "OAS members condemn Nicaragua elections, urge action" . Reuters. 13 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .

^ "Nicaragua decides to leave OAS after election criticism" .

Deutsche Welle . 19 November 2021 . Retrieved 21 November 2021 .

^ Kawsachun News [@KawsachunNews] (19 November 2021).

"Nicaragua's condemns the OAS as "an instrument of interference and intervention" adding that "it has as its mission to facilitate the hegemony of the United States with its interventionism against the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean." " ( Tweet ) . Retrieved 20 November 2021 – via Twitter .

^ Maldonado, Carlos Salinas (19 November 2021).

"Ortega anuncia la salida de la OEA tras el rechazo a las elecciones de Nicaragua" .

El País (in Spanish) . Retrieved 21 November 2021 .

^ "Nicaragua withdraws from regional bloc OAS after election row" .

MSN . 25 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ "Accountability for Daniel Ortega and Rosario Murillo Following OAS Departure" . U.S. Department of State. 19 November 2023.

^ "Venezuela says it will quit Organization of American States" .

Washington Post . Retrieved 27 April 2017 .

^ "La OEA aprobó la resolución que declara ilegítimo al nuevo gobierno de Nicolás Maduro" .

infobae (in European Spanish). 10 January 2019 . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ Aquino, Marco; Rochabrun, Marcelo (7 October 2022).

"Latin America's left raises pressure on Venezuela's Guaido at OAS summit" . Reuters . Retrieved 7 October 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Pharand, Donat (1986).

"Canada and the OAS: the Vacant Chair Revisited" .

Revue générale de droit .

17 (3): 429– 454.

doi : 10.7202/1059251ar .

ISSN 0035-3086 .

S2CID 191749791 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Organization of American States .

Official website The Organization of American States in Haiti: Election Monitoring or Political Intervention?

, from the Center for Economic and Policy Research , October 2011.

v t e Organization of American States (OAS) Members Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Suriname Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Venezuela Organization General Assembly Secretariat for Political Affairs Secretariat for Integral Development Secretariat for Multidimensional Security Inter-American Commission of Women Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Inter-American Telecommunication Commission Inter-American Court of Human Rights Pan American Union Building Politics Charter Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man American Convention on Human Rights Pan-American Conference Summit of the Americas v t e Pan-Americanism History Spanish American wars of independence Decolonization of the Americas Latin American integration North American integration Patria Grande Simón Bolívar José de San Martín Lucas Alamán Inter-American Commission of Women United States involvement in regime change in Latin America Organizations Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization (ACTO) Andean Community (CAN) Association of Caribbean States (ACS) Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA) Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Central American Integration System (SICA) Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) Contadora group Contadora support group Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America (PROSUR) Latin American Economic System (SELA) Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) Lima Group (LG) Mercosur Organization of American States (OAS) Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI) Pacific Alliance Petrocaribe Rio Group Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, CEPAL) United States Pirate Party (USPP) Projects Andean passport CARICOM passport CARICOM Single Market and Economy CARIPASS Central America-4 Border Control Agreement Central America-4 passport Eastern Caribbean Currency Union Initiative for the Integration of the Regional Infrastructure of South America (IIRSA) Interoceanic Highway SUCRE Institutions Andean Parliament Bank of the South Caribbean Court of Justice Caribbean Development Bank Central American Parliament Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean (CAF) Inter-American Development Bank Latin American Parliament Mercosur Parliament South American Parliament Free trade areas Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA) CARIFORUM Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) Economic Partnership Agreements Free Trade Area of the Americas G3 Free Trade Agreement United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA) Events Pan American Games Pan-American Congress v t e Regional organizations Bodies African Union Alliance of Sahel States Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization Arab League Arctic Council Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Asia Cooperation Dialogue Asia Council Asia-Europe Foundation Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Assembly of European Regions Association of Caribbean States AUKUS Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples' Trade Treaty Benelux British–Irish Council Bucharest Nine Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Central American Integration System Central European Free Trade Agreement Central European Initiative Collective Security Treaty Organization Commonwealth of Independent States Commonwealth of Nations Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations Community of Democratic Choice Community of Latin American and Caribbean States Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership Conference of European Regions with Legislative Power Council of the Baltic Sea States Council of Europe Craiova Group East African Community Eastern Partnership Economic Community of West African States Economic Cooperation Organization Eurasian Economic Union European Political Community European Union Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development Gulf Cooperation Council Indian Ocean Rim Association International Conference on the Great Lakes Region Liptako–Gourma Authority Latin American Economic System Latin American Integration Association Latin American Parliament Lublin Triangle Melanesian Spearhead Group Mercosur New Hanseatic League Nordic-Baltic Eight Nordic Council North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Open Balkan Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Organization of American States Organization of Ibero-American States Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Pacific Alliance Pacific Islands Forum Paneuropean Union Polynesian Leaders Group Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Regional Cooperation Council Shanghai Cooperation Organisation South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone South-East European Cooperation Process Southern African Development Community TAKM Three Seas Initiative Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat Organization of Turkic States Union of South American Nations Visegrád Group West African Economic and Monetary Union West Nordic Council Western Balkans Quad Topics Regional integration Regional organizations by population Regionalism (international relations) v t e Power in international relations Types Climate Economic Energy Food Hard Maritime National Politics Realpolitik Sharp Smart Soft Status Small Middle Regional Emerging Great ( Least Great ) Super ( Potential ) Geopolitics African American ( Pax ) Asian Chinese Indian Pacific History List of ancient great powers List of medieval great powers List of modern great powers International relations (1814–1919) Theory American decline Balance of power European Deterrence theory Hegemonic stability theory Internationalism Multilateralism Philosophy of power Polarity Power projection Power transition theory Second Superpower Sphere of influence Superpower collapse Superpower disengagement Studies Composite Index of National Capability Comprehensive National Power Organizations and groups by region Africa African Union Union for the Mediterranean Africa–Asia Arab League Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC) Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) Americas Association of Caribbean States (ACS) Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Central American Integration System (SICA) Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) Mercosur North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Organization of American States (OAS) Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) Asia Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA) Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat (TCS) Europe Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Council of Europe (CoE) European Political Community (EPC) European Union (EU) Nordic Council Visegrád Group (V4) Eurasia Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU) Organization of Turkic States North America–Europe Arctic Council North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Africa–Asia–Europe Union for the Mediterranean Africa–South America South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone Oceania–Pacific Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Australia–New Zealand–United States Security Treaty (ANZUS) Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG) Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) Polynesian Leaders Group (PLG) Non–regional Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS) Commonwealth of Nations Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries E9 G4 G7 G8 G8+5 G20 G24 G77 India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA) Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF) Uniting for Consensus (UfC) Global United Nations (UN) Links to related articles v t e International organizations with Denmark as member Geographical and geopolitical Arctic Council European Union (EU) EEA Schengen Council of Europe (CE) International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Nordic Council Organization of American States (OAS) Historical and cultural International Olympic Committee (IOC) International Organization for Migration (IOM) International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Economic and social development African Development Bank (AfDB) Asian Development Bank (AsDB) Bank for International Settlements (BIS) European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement (ICRM) International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRCS) International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Paris Club World Customs Organization (WCO) World Trade Organization (WTO) Security Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) International Criminal Court (ICCt) Interpol North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) Western European Union (WEU) Zangger Committee (ZC) Technology and research Australia Group European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) European Investment Bank (EIB) European Space Agency (ESA) International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) International Energy Agency (IEA) Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) United Nations (UN) Branches MONUSCO UNCTAD UNHCR UNMEE UNMIL UNMOGIP UNOMIG UNTSO Specialized agencies FAO ICAO IFAD ILO IMF IMO ITU UNESCO UNIDO UPU WHO WIPO WMO World Bank Group IBRD IDA IFC MIGA Italics indicates observer status v t e International organizations with the Kingdom of Norway as a member Geographical and geopolitical Arctic Council European Free Trade Association EEA Schengen Council of Europe (CE) International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Nordic Council Organization of American States (OAS) Historical and cultural International Olympic Committee (IOC) International Organization for Migration (IOM) International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Economic and social development African Development Bank (AfDB) Asian Development Bank (ADB) Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement (ICRM) International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRCS) International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Paris Club World Customs Organization (WCO) World Trade Organization (WTO) Security Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) International Criminal Court (ICCt) Interpol North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) Zangger Committee (ZC) Technology and research Australia Group European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) European Space Agency (ESA) International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) International Energy Agency (IEA) International Mobile Satellite Organization (IMSO) International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (ITSO) Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) United Nations (UN) Branches UNCTAD UNHCR UNTSO Specialized agencies FAO ICAO IFAD ILO IMF IMO ITU MINUSMA UNESCO UNIDO UPU UNITAR UNMISS UNRWA UNWTO WHO WIPO WMO World Bank Group IBRD IDA IFC MIGA Italics indicates observer status v t e United States membership in international organizations AfDB ANZUS APEC ARF AsDB ASEAN (dialogue partner) Australia Group BIS CE (observer) CERN (observer) CP EAPC EBRD FAO G5 G7 G8 G10 IADB IAEA IBRD ICAO ICC ICCt (signatory) ICFTU ICRM IDA IEA IFAD IFC IFRCS IHO ILO IMF IMO Interpol IOC IOM ISO ITU MIGA MINUSTAH NAM (guest) NATO NEA NSG OAS OECD OPCW OSCE Paris Club PCA United Nations United Nations Security Council (permanent member) UNCTAD UNESCO UNHCR UNITAR UNMEE UNMIK UNMIL UNMOVIC UNOMIG UNRWA UNTSO UPU WCL WCO WHO WIPO WMO World Trade Organization ZC Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Portugal 2 Norway Greece Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Portals : North America Central America Mesoamerica Caribbean South America Latin America Politics NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fgq8k
Cached time: 20250818001331
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.574 seconds
Real time usage: 1.872 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9938/1000000
Revision size: 64134/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 424664/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 66353/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 356720/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.970/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22917615/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1590.114      1 -total
 34.06%  541.553      2 Template:Reflist
 21.76%  346.086      1 Template:Infobox_Geopolitical_organization
 15.88%  252.469     36 Template:Cite_web
 10.65%  169.408     29 Template:Cite_news
  7.12%  113.251      1 Template:Name_in_various_languages
  6.06%   96.343      1 Template:Supranational_American_Bodies
  5.03%   79.910     11 Template:Navbox
  4.54%   72.185      5 Template:Sfn
  4.32%   68.653      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22788:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818001331 and revision id 1306484210. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Organization_of_American_States&oldid=1306484210 " Categories : Organization of American States Intergovernmental organizations International diplomatic organizations International organizations based in the Americas International political organizations Organizations established in 1948 1948 establishments in the United States Organizations based in Washington, D.C.

Anti-communist organizations United Nations General Assembly observers United States–Caribbean relations United States–Central American relations United States–North American relations United States–South American relations Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links Source attribution All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2010 CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2023 Use Oxford spelling from August 2025 Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Coordinates not on Wikidata Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Articles needing additional references from April 2018 All articles needing additional references All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from February 2022 Articles needing additional references from November 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 00:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Organization of American States 83 languages Add topic

