Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Growth forms Toggle Growth forms subsection 1.1 Twining vines 2 Horticultural climbing plants 3 Scientific description 4 Example vine taxa 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Vine 63 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu Беларуская Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dagbanli Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Lietuvių Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Oromoo ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Runa Simi Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Plant with a growth habit of trailing or scandent stems or runners This article is about climbing plants in general. For the short-form video service, see Vine (service) . For grapevines, see Vitis . For other uses, see Vine (disambiguation) .

Momordica charantia (bitter melon), a climbing plant A tendril A vine is any plant with a growth habit of trailing or scandent (that is, climbing) stems, lianas, or runners. The word vine can also refer to such stems or runners themselves, for instance, when used in wicker work.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In parts of the world, including the British Isles, the term "vine" usually applies exclusively to grapevines, [ 3 ] while the term "climber" is used for all climbing plants.

[ 4 ] Growth forms [ edit ] Convolvulus vine twining around a steel fixed ladder Boston ivy covering a chimney Certain plants always grow as vines, while a few grow as vines only part of the time. For instance, poison ivy and bittersweet can grow as low shrubs when support is not available, but will become vines when support is available.

[ 5 ] A vine displays a growth form based on very long stems. This has two purposes. A vine may use rock exposures, other plants, or other supports for growth rather than investing energy in a lot of supportive tissue, enabling the plant to reach sunlight with a minimum investment of energy. This has been a highly successful growth form for plants such as kudzu and Japanese honeysuckle , both of which are invasive exotics in parts of North America. There are some tropical vines that develop skototropism, and grow away from the light, a type of negative phototropism . Growth away from light allows the vine to reach a tree trunk, which it can then climb to brighter regions.

[ 6 ] The vine growth form may also enable plants to colonize large areas quickly, even without climbing high. This is the case with periwinkle and ground ivy . It is also an adaptation to life in areas where small patches of fertile soil are adjacent to exposed areas with more sunlight but little or no soil. A vine can root in the soil but have most of its leaves in the brighter, exposed area, getting the best of both environments.

[ citation needed ] The evolution of a climbing habit has been implicated as a key innovation associated with the evolutionary success and diversification of a number of taxonomic groups of plants.

[ 7 ] It has evolved independently in several plant families, using many different climbing methods, [ 8 ] such as: twining the stem around a support (e.g., morning glories, Ipomoea species) by way of adventitious, clinging roots (e.g., ivy, Hedera species) with twining petioles (e.g., Clematis species) using tendrils , which can be specialized shoots ( Vitaceae ), leaves ( Bignoniaceae ), or even inflorescences ( Passiflora ) using tendrils which also produce adhesive pads at the end that attach themselves quite strongly to the support ( Parthenocissus ) using thorns (e.g. climbing rose) or other hooked structures, such as hooked branches (e.g.

Artabotrys hexapetalus ) The climbing fetterbush ( Pieris phillyreifolia ) is a woody shrub-vine which climbs without clinging roots, tendrils, or thorns. It directs its stem into a crevice in the bark of fibrous barked trees (such as bald cypress ) where the stem adopts a flattened profile and grows up the tree underneath the host tree's outer bark. The fetterbush then sends out branches that emerge near the top of the tree.

[ 9 ] Most vines are flowering plants. These may be divided into woody vines or lianas , such as akebia wisteria , kiwifruit , and common ivy , and herbaceous (nonwoody) vines, such as morning glory .

[ citation needed ] One odd group of vining plants is the fern genus Lygodium , called climbing ferns .

[ 10 ] The stem does not climb, but rather the fronds (leaves) do. The fronds unroll from the tip, and theoretically never stop growing; they can form thickets as they unroll over other plants, rockfaces, and fences.

[ citation needed ] L : A left-handed bine grows in an anticlockwise direction (viewed from the point of view of the plant: S-twist ).

R : A right-handed bine grows in a clockwise direction. ( Z-twist ) [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Twining vines [ edit ] Twining vine / bine ( Fockea edulis ) Tendril-supported vine ( Brunnichia ovata ) A twining vine, also known as a bine , climbs by its shoots growing in a helix , in contrast to vines that climb using tendrils or suckers. Many bines have rough stems or downward-pointing bristles to aid their grip.

Hops (used in flavoring beer) are a commercially important example of a bine.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Compare woodbines .

The direction of rotation of the shoot tip during climbing is autonomous and does not (as sometimes imagined) derive from the shoot's following the sun around the sky – the direction of twist does not therefore depend upon which side of the equator the plant is growing on. This is shown by the fact that some bines always twine clockwise, including runner bean ( Phaseolus coccineus ) and bindweed ( Convolvulus species), while others twine anticlockwise, including black bryony ( Dioscorea communis ) and climbing honeysuckles ( Lonicera species). The contrasting rotations of bindweed and honeysuckle was the theme of the satirical song "Misalliance", written and sung by Michael Flanders and Donald Swann (but the lyrics confuse the direction of twining, describing honeysuckle as right-handed and bindweed as left-handed).

[ 15 ] Horticultural climbing plants [ edit ] The term "vine" also applies to Cucurbitaceae like cucumbers where botanists refer to creeping vines; in commercial agriculture the natural tendency of coiling tendrils to attach themselves to pre-existing structures or espaliers is optimized by the installation of trellis netting.

[ citation needed ] Gardeners can use the tendency of climbing plants to grow quickly. If a plant display is wanted quickly, a climber can achieve this. Climbers can be trained over walls, pergolas, fences, etc. Climbers can be grown over other plants to provide additional attraction. Artificial support can also be provided. Some climbers climb by themselves; others need work, such as tying them in and training them.

[ citation needed ] Scientific description [ edit ] This section needs attention from an expert in plants . The specific problem is: It is the work of a student editor, it needs verification, and may be overly technical for this article.

WikiProject Plants may be able to help recruit an expert.

( May 2018 ) Vines widely differ in size, form and evolutionary origin. Darwin classified climbing groups based on their climbing method. He classified five classes of vines – twining plants, leaf climbers, tendril bearers, root climbers and hook climbers.

[ citation needed ] Vines are remarkable in that they have multiple evolutionary origins. They usually reside in tropical locations and have the unique ability to climb. Vines are able to grow in both deep shade and full sun due to their uniquely wide range of phenotypic plasticity . This climbing action prevents shading by neighbors and allows the vine to grow out of reach of herbivores.

[ 16 ] The environment where a vine can grow successfully is determined by the climbing mechanism of a vine and how far it can spread across supports. There are many theories supporting the idea that photosynthetic responses are closely related to climbing mechanisms.

A large Apios vine on the street in Sochi , Russia Temperate twining vines, which twist tightly around supports, are typically poorly adapted for climbing beneath closed canopies due to their smaller support diameter and shade intolerance. In contrast, tendril vines usually grow on the forest floor and onto trees until they reach the surface of the canopy, suggesting that they have greater physiological plasticity.

[ 17 ] It has also been suggested that twining vines' revolving growth is mediated by changes in turgor pressure mediated by volume changes in the epidermal cells of the bending zone.

[ 18 ] Climbing vines can take on many unique characteristics in response to changes in their environments. Climbing vines can induce chemical defenses and modify their biomass allocation in response to herbivores. In particular, the twisting vine Convolvulus arvensis increases its twining in response to herbivore-associated leaf damage, which may lead to reduced future herbivory.

[ 19 ] Additionally, the tendrils of perennial vine Cayratia japonica are more likely to coil around nearby plants of another species than nearby plants of the same species in natural and experimental settings. This ability, which has only been previously documented in roots, demonstrates the vine's ability to distinguish whether another plant is of the same species as itself or a different one.

In tendrilled vines, the tendrils are highly sensitive to touch and the coiling action is mediated by the hormones octadecanoids, jasmonates and indole-3-acetic acid . The touch stimulus and hormones may interact via volatile compounds or internal oscillation patterns.

[ 20 ] Research has found the presence of ion translocating ATPases in the Bryonia dioica species of plants, which has implications for a possible ion mediation tendril curling mechanism. In response to a touch stimulus, vanadate -sensitive K + , Mg 2+ ATPase and Ca 2+ -translocating ATPases rapidly increase their activity. This increases transmembrane ion fluxes that appear to be involved in the early stages of tendril coiling.

[ 21 ] Example vine taxa [ edit ] Canary creeper trailing on a trellis.

Ficus pumila ' s vigorous wall growth Spring growth of Virginia creeper Scrambling habit of climbing groundsel .

Confederate jasmine with flowers Bower vine 's showy flowers Mandevilla trailing on trellis Oceanblue morning glory German ivy creeping on ground Actinidia , a genus in the Actinidiaceae family that includes edible fruiting vines, Actinidia chinensis var.

deliciosa ( kiwifruit vine), and A. arguta (hardy kiwifruit or kiwiberry vine), and cultivated ornamental vines A.kolomikta , and A. polygama (silver vine) Adlumia fungosa , the Allegheny vine Akebia , a genus of about 5 vines in the Lardizabalaceae family, including Akebia quinata , and A. trioliata (chocolate vines) [ 22 ] Allamanda , a genus in the Apocynaceae family including the cultivated ornamental vines Allamanda cathartica ( common or golden trumpet vine) and A. blanchetii [ 23 ] Ampelocissus , a large genus in the Vitaceae family native to tropical and subtropical regions worldwide [ 24 ] Ampelopsis , a genus of vines in the Vitaceae family native to Asia and North America known as porcelain berry or pepper vines, including the cultivated ornamental vines Ampelopsis glandulosa [ 25 ] Anredera cordifolia , Madeira-vine Antigonon , the coral vine Antigonon leptopus , the Confederate vine Aptenia cordifolia , the heart-leaved aptenia Araujia sericifera , moth vine Asparagus asparagoides , bridal creeper, bridal-veil creeper Banisteriopsis caapi , ayahuasca, also known as caapi, yage, and soul vine Berchemia scandens , the rattan vine Bignonia , the cross vine Bougainvillea , a genus of thorny ornamental vines, bushes, and trees Callerya megasperma , native wisteria Calamus , rattan Calystegia sepium , hedge bindweed Campsis , the trumpet vine Campsis grandiflora , the Chinese trumpet vine Cardiospermum halicacabum , the balloon vine Celastrus , the staff vine Ceropegia woodii , string of hearts Clematis vitalba , traveller's joy Clerodendrum thomsoniae , bleeding-heart vine Clitoria ternatea , butterfly pea Ceropegia linearis , the rosary vine or sweetheart vine Cissus antarctica , the kangaroo vine Cissus hypoglauca , the water vine Citrullus lanatus var.

lanatus , the watermelon Cobaea scandens , cup-and-saucer vine, cathedral bells, Mexican ivy Cochliasanthus , known as corkscrew vine, snail vine, snail creeper Cucumis sativus , the cucumber Cyphostemma juttae , known as wild grape Delairea odorata , German ivy Desmoncus , jacitara Dolichandra unguis-cati , cat's claw creeper, funnel creeper, or cat's claw trumpet Epipremnum aureum , known as golden pothos and devil's ivy Fallopia baldschuanica , the Russian vine Ficus pumila , known as the climbing fig Hardenbergia violacea , lilac vine Hedera helix , known as common ivy, English ivy, European ivy, or ivy Hibbertia scandens , climbing guinea flower, golden guinea vine, gold guinea plant Hoya , a genus of about 300 species of climbing or creeping plants Humulus lupulus , common hop Hydrangea petiolaris , climbing hydrangea Ipomoea , a genus of over 600 mostly climbing species and largest genus in the Convolvulaceae family.

Ipomoea batatas (sweet potato) is widely cultivated for its edible, starchy roots. The sap of I. alba (moon vine) sap was used for vulcanization of the latex of Castilla elastica (Panama rubber tree). Many species are cultivated as ornamentals vines including I. cairica (coast morning glory), I. indica (blue morning glory), I. purpurea (purple morning glory), I. lobata (fire vine, Spanish flag vine), and I. tricolor Jasminum polyanthum , pink jasmine Kadsura japonica , kadsura vine Kennedia coccinea , the common coral vine Kennedia nigricans ' , black coral pea Lagenaria siceraria , known as the bottle gourd, calabash, opo squash, or long melon Lathyrus odoratus , the sweet pea Lonicera japonica , known as Suikazura or Japanese honeysuckle Luffa , a genus of tropical and subtropical vines classified in the cucumber family, Cucurbitaceae Lygodium , a genus of about 40 species of ferns, known as climbing ferns Mandevilla , rocktrumpet, Brazilian jasmine Momordica charantia , the bitter gourd Mikania scandens , the hemp vine Muehlenbeckia adpressa , the macquarie vine Nepenthes , a genus of carnivorous plants known as tropical pitcher plants or monkey cups Pandorea jasminoides , bower vine Pandorea pandorana , the wonga wonga vine Parthenocissus is a genus of deciduous vines in the Vitaceae family, native to Asia and North America.

[ 26 ] Several species are cultivated as ornamental vines, including P. henryana , (Chinese Virginia-creeper), P. quinquefolia ( Virginia creeper), and P. tricuspidata (Boston ivy, Japanese ivy) Passiflora is a large genus of about 550 species in the Passifloraceae , with the vast majority being tendril-bearing vines.

[ 27 ] Some species are cultivated for their edible fruit ( passion fruit ) with Passiflora edulis (maracujá) the most important species commercially, but other edible species include P. ligularis and P. quadrangularis (granadilla), P. tripartita and P. tarminiana . Many species and hybrids are also grown as ornamentals for their flowers.

Periploca graeca , the silk vine Philodendron hederaceum , heartleaf philodendron Piper betle . betel vine Podranea ricasoliana , the pink trumpet vine Pueraria lobata , the kudzu vine Pyrostegia venusta , flamevine or orange trumpet vine Pseudogynoxys chenopodioides , Mexican flamevine Rosa banksiae , Lady Banks' rose Rosa filipes , climbing rose Schizophragma , hydrangea vine Scindapsus pictus , the silver vine Sechium edule , known as chayote, christophene, or several other names Senecio angulatus , known as Cape ivy Solandra , a genus of flowering plants in the nightshade family Solanum laxum , the potato vine Stephania japonica , snake vine Stephanotis floribunda , known as Madagascar jasmine Strongylodon macrobotrys , the jade vine Syngonium , the goosefoot vine Syngonium podophyllum , the arrowhead vine Thunbergia alata , black-eyed Susan Thunbergia grandiflora , known as the Bengal clock vine or blue trumpet vine Thunbergia erecta , the bush clock vine Toxicodendron radicans , known as poison ivy Trachelospermum asiaticum , Asiatic jasmine Trachelospermum jasminoides , Confederate jasmine, star jasmine Vitis , any of about sixty species of grape Wisteria , a genus of flowering plants in the pea family Xerosicyos , silver dollar vine See also [ edit ] Vine (disambiguation) Liana , any of various long-stemmed, woody vines Nutation (botany) , bending and growth patterns of plants, which dictate the growth of vines.

On the Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants , by Charles Darwin Vine training systems References [ edit ] ^ Brown, Lesley (1993).

The New shorter Oxford English dictionary on historical principles . Oxford [Eng.]: Clarendon.

ISBN 0-19-861271-0 .

^ Jackson; Benjamin; Daydon (1928).

A Glossary of Botanic Terms with their Derivation and Accent , 4th ed. London: Gerald Duckworth & Co.

^ Francis E. Putz (1991).

The Biology of Vines . Cambridge University Press. pp. xiii.

ISBN 978-0-521-39250-1 .

Using 'vines' to denote all climbing plants may initially confuse some readers from lands where, with due respect for wine, 'the vine' is used solely in reference to grapes.

^ Shorter Oxford English dictionary, 6th ed . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 2007. p. 3804.

ISBN 978-0199206872 .

^ "Creepers" . mannuthynursery. Archived from the original on 16 September 2019 . Retrieved 17 July 2013 .

^ Glimn-Lacy, Janice; Kaufman, Peter B. (2006).

Botany Illustrated . Springer.

doi : 10.1007/0-387-28875-9 .

ISBN 978-0-387-28870-3 .

^ Gianoli, Ernesto (2004).

"Evolution of a climbing habit promotes diversification in flowering plants" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

271 (1552): 2011– 2015.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2004.2827 .

JSTOR 4142967 .

PMC 1691831 .

PMID 15451690 .

^ Putz, Francis E.

"Vine Ecology" . Retrieved 1 March 2012 .

^ Weakley, Alan (2010).

Flora of the Southern and Mid-Atlantic States (PDF) . p. 661. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2018 . Retrieved 25 January 2011 .

^ "Japanese climbing fern" . Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants. Archived from the original on 16 June 2024 . Retrieved 6 March 2023 .

^ Haldeman, Jan.

"As the vine twines" .

Native and Naturalized Plants of the Carolinas and Georgia . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ Weakley, Alan S. (May 2015).

Flora of the Southern and Mid-Atlantic States . UNC Herbarium, North Carolina Botanical Garden, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ bine at Merriam-Webster ^ Cone Heads at Willamette Week ^ Misalliance ^ Gianoli, Ernesto; Molina-Montenegro, Marco A. (2005).

"Leaf Damage Induces Twining in a Climbing Plant" .

The New Phytologist .

167 (2): 385– 90.

Bibcode : 2005NewPh.167..385G .

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2005.01484.x .

JSTOR 3694507 .

PMID 15998392 .

^ Carter, Gregory A.; Teramura, Alan H. (1988). "Vine Photosynthesis and Relationships to Climbing Mechanisms in a Forest Understory".

American Journal of Botany .

75 (7): 1101.

doi : 10.2307/2443769 .

JSTOR 2443769 .

^ Millet, B.; Melin, D.; Badot, P.-M. (1988). "Circumnutation in Phaseolus vulgaris. I. Growth, osmotic potential and cell ultrastructure in the free moving part of the shoot".

Physiologia Plantarum .

72 (1): 133– 138.

Bibcode : 1988PPlan..72..133M .

doi : 10.1111/j.1399-3054.1988.tb06634.x .

^ Molina-Montenegro, Marco A.; Gianoli, Ernesto; Becerra, José (2007). "Interactive Effects of Leaf Damage, Light Intensity and Support Availability on Chemical Defenses and Morphology of a Twining Vine".

Journal of Chemical Ecology .

33 (1): 95– 103.

Bibcode : 2007JCEco..33...95G .

doi : 10.1007/s10886-006-9215-8 .

PMID 17111219 .

S2CID 27419071 .

^ Fukano, Yuya; Yamawo, Akira (26 August 2015).

"Self-discrimination in the tendrils of the vine is mediated by physiological connection" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

282 (1814): 20151379.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2015.1379 .

PMC 4571702 .

PMID 26311669 .

^ Liß, H.; Weiler, E. W. (July 1994). "Ion-translocating ATPases in tendrils of Bryonia dioica Jacq".

Planta .

194 (2): 169– 180.

doi : 10.1007/BF00196385 .

JSTOR 23383001 .

S2CID 25162242 .

^ "Akebia Decne. | Plants of the World Online | Kew Science" .

Plants of the World Online . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ "Allamanda L. | Plants of the World Online | Kew Science" .

Plants of the World Online . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ "Ampelocissus Planch. | Plants of the World Online | Kew Science" .

Plants of the World Online . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ "Ampelopsis Michx. | Plants of the World Online | Kew Science" .

Plants of the World Online . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ "Parthenocissus Planch. | Plants of the World Online | Kew Science" .

Plants of the World Online . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ "Passiflora L. | Plants of the World Online | Kew Science" .

Plants of the World Online . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Look up vine in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Vines at Wikimedia Commons Media related to Climbing plants at Wikimedia Commons Beach, Chandler B., ed. (1914).

"Twiner" .

The New Student's Reference Work . Chicago: F. E. Compton and Co.

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vine&oldid=1306038154 " Categories : Plant morphology Vines Plants by habit Plant life-forms Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles needing expert attention from May 2018 All articles needing expert attention Plants articles needing expert attention Inconsistent wikidata for Commons category Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vine 63 languages Add topic

