Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Antiquity 2.2 Roman and Byzantine periods 2.3 Ottoman period 3 Archaeology 4 Population movement 5 Politics Toggle Politics subsection 5.1 Social unrest in 1970s-1980s 5.2 Current 6 Geography and climate 7 Composition 8 Economy 9 Places of interest 10 Notable natives 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Fatsa 36 languages العربية تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Cebuano Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gagauz گیلکی Հայերեն ქართული Kiswahili Кырык мары Magyar مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Română Русский Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°01′50″N 37°30′0″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.03056°N 37.50000°E ﻿ / 41.03056; 37.50000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia District and municipality in Ordu, Turkey Fatsa District and municipality Map showing Fatsa District in Ordu Province Fatsa Location in Turkey Coordinates: 41°01′50″N 37°30′0″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.03056°N 37.50000°E ﻿ / 41.03056; 37.50000 Country Turkey Province Ordu Government • Mayor İbrahim Etem Kibar ( AKP ) Area 363 km 2 (140 sq mi) Elevation 10 m (30 ft) Population (2022) [ 1 ] 126,775 • Density 350/km 2 (900/sq mi) Time zone UTC+3 ( TRT ) Postal code 52400 Area code 0452 Climate Cfa Website www .fatsa .bel .tr Fatsa is a municipality and district of Ordu Province , Turkey .

[ 2 ] Its area is 363 km 2 , [ 3 ] and its population is 126,775 (2022).

[ 1 ] It lies on the Black Sea coast.

Name [ edit ] The oldest recorded name of the town is Polemonion ( Ancient Greek : Πολεμώνιον , Latinized as Polemonium), after Polemon I of Pontus . A derivative of Polemonion, i.e. Bolaman, is the modern name of the river passing through Fatsa (the river is the ancient Sidenus ).

[ 4 ] The present name, Fatsa, has been influenced by modern Greek Φάτσα or Φάτσα Πόντου (φἀτσα is derived from Italian faccia ), which translates as "face or housefront on the sea", but has in fact mutated from Fanizan, the name of the daughter of King Pharnaces II of Pontus , through Fanise, Phadisana ( Greek : Φαδισανή ), [ 5 ] Phadsane [ 6 ] Phatisanê [ 7 ] Vadisani ( Greek : Βαδισανή ), Phabda, [ 8 ] Pytane, Facha, Fatsah [ 7 ] [ 9 ] into today's Fatsa. Apart from Polemonion, another Greek name of the town was Side.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] Antiquity [ edit ] The Diocese of Pontus and its provinces in c. 400 AD.

Fatsa, the late Ottoman era.

The history of Fatsa goes back to antiquity, when the coast was settled by Cimmerians , and Pontic Greeks in the centuries BC. The ruins on Mount Çıngırt (the ancient rock tombs and vaults) are from this period.

Roman and Byzantine periods [ edit ] Fatsa was first mentioned, in the era of the Kingdom of Pontus , as Polemonium , after King Polemon I , the Roman client king appointed by Mark Antony . Under Nero , the kingdom became a Roman province in AD 62. In about 295, Diocletian (r. 284–305) divided the province into three smaller provinces, one of which was Pontus Polemoniacus , called after Polemonium, which was its administrative capital.

As the Roman Empire developed into the Byzantine Empire , the city lost some of its regional importance.

Neocaesarea became the capital of the province, and the Diocese of Polemonion was a suffragan of the metropolitan see of Neocaesarea .

[ 11 ] Due to partition of the Byzantine Empire as a result of the Fourth Crusade , Fatsa became a part of the Empire of Trebizond in 1204.

In the 13th and 14th centuries Genoese traders established trading posts on the Black Sea coast.

[ 12 ] Fatsa became one of the most important of these ports. There is a stone warehouse on the shore built in this period.

Ottoman period [ edit ] Following the conquest of the Empire of Trebizond by the Ottomans in 1461, Fatsa become a part of Rûm Eyalet and later a part of Trebizond Eyalet of the Ottoman Empire and remained within the Sanjak of Janik until the collapse of the Empire in 1921. Fatsa
became a district of Ordu Province, following the formation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923.

Archaeology [ edit ] In 2020, archaeologist discovered ruins of a church at the bottom of the lake Gaga.

[ 13 ] Discovered in 2021, the ruins of a monastery dedicated to Saints Constantine and Helena and dating back to the 5th or 6th century were excavated in the following years.

[ 14 ] Population movement [ edit ] Ali Pasha of Çürüksu (front row, middle) and Ottoman Georgians during the Russo-Turkish War (1877–78) . At the end of the war, the re-settlement of Ottoman Georgians in Fatsa was supervised by Ali Pasha.

[ 15 ] Literary Publications, Testimonials and Narratives in Pieria , which includes chronicles of Fatsa's Pontic Greeks on their exodus from Fatsa to Katerini in 1923.

[ 16 ] Following the Turkish conquest of Anatolia by the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum and later by the Ottomans, Muslim settlers arrived at Fatsa in the middle of the 14th Century.

[ 17 ] The early Muslim Turkish settlers included Turkomens , whose descendants make up the majority of Fatsa's current Alevi Muslim community.

[ 18 ] In 1999, a religious worship complex that serves to both Alevis and Sunni Muslims was opened in Fatsa, which was unprecedented in Turkey.

[ 19 ] In the second half of the 19th century, Fatsa's Sunni population increased significantly, as some of Chveneburi (Sunni Muslim Georgians ) from Batumi and Kobuleti (Turkish: Çürüksu ), who fought in the Ottoman army against the Russian forces in Russo-Turkish War (1877–78) under Ali Pasha of Çürüksu [ 15 ] and some of the Abazins and Circassians , [ 20 ] who were forced to leave their ancestral land in North Caucasus after the end of the Caucasian War in 1864, were settled in Fatsa and in the surrounding villages. The Circassian immigrants had an immediate impact on the local economy by introducing silk production to the area.  In 1868, 3 million piastres worth of silk was sold in Fatsa.

[ 20 ] During the Byzantine period, as early as the 9th century, an Orthodox diocese was located in Fatsa ( Diocese of Polemonion ).

[ 11 ] Fatsa's Christian population during the Ottoman era was made up by Pontic Greeks and Armenians , [ 21 ] who thrived as craftsmen and bureaucrats. According to the last Ottoman census carried out in 1914, the Christians made up 12% of Fatsa's total population of 40,339.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, Fatsa's Christian population diminished. The last Pontic Greek community left Fatsa in 1923 as a part of the Population exchange between Greece and Turkey , when 770 Muslim families from Thessaloniki , Greece were settled in Fatsa and the indigenous Pontic Greek population of Fatsa were settled in Katerini and in the village of Trilofos Himachal , both in the Pieria region of Greece . Two members of Fatsa's Pontic Greek community, after the population exchange in 1923, became politicians in Greece; Alexander Deligiannidis , born in Fatsa in 1914 served in the Greek Parliament as a member of National Radical Union Party (1956 - 1964) and Takis Terzopoulos , born in Fatsa in 1920 served as the mayor of Katerini (1964 - 1967).

The book titled Literary Publications, Testimonials and Narratives in Pieria (1918 - 2010) (Greek: Λογοτεχνικές εκδόσεις, μαρτυρίες και αφηγήσεις στην Πιερία )  includes chronicles of some of Fatsa's Pontic Greeks on their exodus from Fatsa to Katerini, including an anecdotal account by Chalkidis Ef. Theophilus (Greek: Χαλκίδης Ευθ. Θεόφιλος)  (b. Fatsa in 1900 - d. Katerini 1985).

[ 16 ] In 1919, in Fatsa, there were 8 churches ( Greek Orthodox , Greek Evangelical and Armenian Apostolic ) served by 9 priests.

[ 24 ] After the departure of the last Christian community in 1923, the churches were closed and later demolished.

[ 17 ] The last remaining church in Fatsa was in town's Kurtuluş District and was demolished in the late 1980s.

Politics [ edit ] Social unrest in 1970s-1980s [ edit ] During the social unrest in Turkey in the 1970s, a major international incident in the area was the kidnapping of three NATO engineers (two British , one Canadian ) from the Ünye radar station in 1972 by the members of People's Liberation Army of Turkey , [ 25 ] which had a support base in Fatsa.

In 1976, Nazmiye Komitoğlu was elected as the mayor of Fatsa, who was the first female mayor elected in the Black Sea region of Turkey. Following her death in office, [ 26 ] Fikri Sönmez , a local Chveneburi , [ 18 ] was elected as the mayor on 14 October 1979.

[ 27 ] Sönmez and his Marxist–Leninist organisation Devrimci Yol , which was made up by local committees under the slogan "The red sun will rise in Fatsa",  controlled the municipality until 11 July 1980.

[ 28 ] After his election as the mayor, Sönmez divided Fatsa into eleven regions and created people's committees, which had power to recall government authorities.

[ 26 ] Sönmez was blamed creating a new state inside the Turkish Republic by the prime minister of Turkey at the time, Süleyman Demirel .

[ 29 ] Fatsa in this period underwent a revolution, where the mayor and his supporters proclaimed an independent Soviet republic.

[ 30 ] This era ended when, upon the initiative of the Nationalist Movement Party supporting the provincial governor, the Turkish military conducted an operation called Operation Target (Turkish: Nokta Operasyonu ) against the town.

[ 31 ] On 8 July 1980, the Turkish Army surrounded Fatsa. On 9 July the General Staff of Turkish Armed Forces , General Kenan Evren arrived at Fatsa. On 11 July 1980, the army moved into the town, and Mayor Sönmez and 300 others were arrested by the army.

[ 18 ] OperationTarget is believed to be the rehearsal for the 1980 Turkish coup d'état led by Gen. Kenan Evren.

[ 32 ] Throughout this turbulent period, Fatsa lost a significant number of its people as they migrated away to jobs in Turkey's larger cities or abroad. Immigrants from Fatsa constitute the largest proportion of the Turkish community in Japan .

[ 33 ] Current [ edit ] The current mayor of Fatsa is İbrahim Etem Kibar from the conservative AK Party .

[ 34 ] Geography and climate [ edit ] Fatsa is one of world's leading hazelnut cultivation regions.

Fatsa is located on a strip of coastline between the Black Sea and the Janik Mountains (Turkish: Canik ) and watered by the rivers of Elekçi , Bolaman , Yapraklı and Belice . Fatsa has a humid subtropical climate ( Köppen : Cfa ); warm and humid in summer, cool and damp in winter, with occasional - but sometimes heavy - snowfalls.

Composition [ edit ] There are 89 neighbourhoods in Fatsa District: [ 35 ] Ahmetler Arpalık Aşağıardıç Aşağıtepe Aşağıyavaş Aslancami Ayazlı Bacanak Bağlarca Bahçeler Başköy Beyceli Bolaman Bozdağı Bucaklı Buhari Bülbülköy Büyükkoç Çömlekli Çöteli Demirci Dereyurt Dolunay Duayeri Düğünlük Dumlupınar Eskiordu Evkaf Fatih Geyikçeli Gölköy Güvercinlik Hacıköy Hamlık Hatipli Hıdırbeyli Hoylu Ilıca İnönü İslamdağ Kabakdağı Kaleönü Karataş Kargucak Karşıyaka Kavraz Kayaca Kayaköy Akçakese Kılavuzömer Kılıçlı Konakbaşı Kösebucağı Küçükkoç Kulakköy Küpdüşen Kurtuluş Mehmetakif Meşebükü Mustafa Kemalpaşa Oluklu Örencik Palazlı Kömürlük Sakarya Salihli Saraytepe Sazcılar Sefaköy Şerefiye Sudere Tahtabaş Taşlıca Tayalı Tepecik Uzundere Yalıköy Yapraklı Yassıbahçe Yassıtaş Yavaş Yenidoğan Yenikent Yenipazar Yeniyurt Yeşilköy Yeşiltepe Yukarıardıç Yukarıbahçeler Yukarıtepe Yusuflu Economy [ edit ] The local economy depends on agriculture and fishing. In the early 20th century, the town thrived as a port and trading post, as there was no coastal road to in the region. There are fishing fleets harboured at the port in Fatsa and in the small districts of Yalıköy and Bolaman ( Polemonium ) and in the hamlet of Belice, which forms a natural harbour. The Black Sea Coastal Highway runs through Fatsa bringing passing trade.

Before the 20th century, maize and rice were the main grains grown in the hinterland. From the 1920s onwards, the coastal swamps were dried up by irrigation works, rice growing ceased and the town grew. During this time, hazelnuts were introduced to the area. About 80% of arable land is planted with hazelnuts . The higher mountain areas of the district are covered in forest.

Places of interest [ edit ] Lake Gaga, Fatsa.

The countryside and coast of Fatsa are lush in spring and summer time. A number of places in and around the town attract visitors, including; The Belice rock on sea The ruins of the Pontic Greek Göreği Monastery, 5 km west of Fatsa Mount Çıngırt ancient rock tombs and vaults Lake Gaga - 10 km south-east of Fatsa The ruins of Bolaman Castle and the Haznedaroğlu mansion Town's promenade The mineral water springs of Ilıca The annual Fatsa Çınar Festival was used to be held in July which included concerts, sports competitions, a beauty contest and various other activities. The last festival was held in 2008.

Notable natives [ edit ] Hekimoğlu İbrahim -  Folk hero and outlaw who was involved in the skirmishes between the local Chveneburi (Muslim Georgian )  and Turks in the early 20th century [ 36 ] (b. Fatsa ? - d. Fatsa 1918) Soytaroğlu İsmail - Folk hero and outlaw who was involved in the skirmishes between the local Chveneburi and Turks in the early 20th century (b.

Vona ? - d. Ordu 1923) [ 37 ] Alexander Deligiannidis ( Αλέξανδρος Δεληγιαννίδης ) (b. Fatsa 1914 - Thessaloniki , Greece 1969) - Ethnic Pontic Greek from Fatsa. Served in the Greek Parliament as a member of the National Radical Union Party .

Takis Terzopoulos ( Τάκης Τερζόπουλος ) (b. Fatsa 1920 - d.

Katerini , Greece 1989) - Ethnic Pontic Greek from Fatsa. Served as a mayor of Katerini in Greece.

Fikri Sönmez ("Fikri The Tailor") -   Revolutionary, mayor of Fatsa. Ethnic Chveneburi (b. Fatsa 1938 - d.

Amasya 1985) Ali Poyrazoğlu - Actor and director, who spent his childhood in Fatsa [ 38 ] (b. 1943, Istanbul - ) Dursun Ali Akınet - Folk poet, ethnic Chveneburi [ 39 ] (b. Fatsa 1945 - ) Kadir İnanır - Actor and director (b. Fatsa 1949 - ) Erdoğan Arıca - Football player and coach (b. Fatsa 1954 - d. Istanbul 2012) Mehmet Gümüş - Singer [ 40 ] (b. Fatsa ? -) Eyüp Fatsa - Politician, member of the Turkish Parliament [ 41 ] (b. Fatsa 1961 - ) Levent İnanır - Actor (b. Fatsa 1962 - ) [ 42 ] İlhan Saygılı - Diplomat, served as the Consul General of Turkey in Frankfurt , Germany until 2011.

[ 43 ] (b. Fatsa ? - ) Soner Arıca - Model and singer (b. Fatsa 1966 - ) Moody E. Prior - (1901-1996) - Ethnic Pontic Greek- Birth name Papadapolous- Northwestern University professor of the Humanities and English and an authority on Shakespeare - Dean of the Graduate School [ 44 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Address-based population registration system (ADNKS) results dated 31 December 2022, Favorite Reports" (XLS) .

TÜİK . Retrieved 19 September 2023 .

^ Büyükşehir İlçe Belediyesi Archived 2015-07-06 at the Wayback Machine , Turkey Civil Administration Departments Inventory. Retrieved 19 September 2023.

^ "İl ve İlçe Yüz ölçümleri" . General Directorate of Mapping . Retrieved 19 September 2023 .

^ Smith, William , ed. (1854–1857). "Sidenus".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography . London: John Murray.

^ Friedrich Heinrich Theodor Bischoff, Vergleichendes Wörterbuch der alten, mittleren und neuen Geographie, 1829 ^ Richard J. A. Talbert, Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World, ^ a b Louis Vivien de Saint-Martin , Description historique et géographique de l'Asie Mineure, comprenant les temps anciens, le moyen age et les temps modernes, avec un précis détaillé des voyages qui ont été faits dans la péninsule, depuis l'époque des croisades jusqu'aux temps les plus récents; précédé d'un tableau de l'hstoire géographique de l'Asie, depuis les plus anciens temps jusqu'à nos jours.

^ Anthony Bryer and David Winfield, The Byzantine Monuments and Topography of the Pontos (Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection, 1985: ISBN 0-88402-122-X ), p. 111.

^ "Atlas plate from maproom.org" .

^ Putzgers, F.W., Historischer Schul-Atlas, Bielefeld, 1929 ^ a b DIMITRI KOROBEINIKOV (2003): Orthodox Communities in Eastern Anatolia in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries.1 Part 1: The Two Patriarchates: Constantinople and Antioch, Al-Masaq: Islam and the Medieval Mediterranean, 15:2, 197-214 ^ Rakova Snezhana, "Genoese in the Black Sea", Encyclopaedia of the Hellenic World, Black Sea ^ Ruins of church discovered on bottom of lake ^ Mosaic unearthed in a byzantine monastery in Turkey ^ a b BERAT YILDIZ, EMIGRATIONS FROM THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE TO THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE: AN ANALYSIS IN THE LIGHT OF THE NEW ARCHIVAL MATERIALS, BILKENT UNIVERSITY ^ a b Αντώνης Κάλφας, Λογοτεχνικές εκδόσεις, μαρτυρίες και αφηγήσεις στην Πιερία (1918 - 2010), Πολιτιστικός Οργανισμός Δήμου Κατερίνης, 2011, ISBN 978-960-99702-0-4 ^ a b David Winfield et al., Some Byzantine Churches from the Pontus, Anatolian Studies, Vol. 12 (1962), pp. 131-161 ^ a b c Morgül Kerem, A History of Social Struggles in Fatsa 1960-1980, Boğaziçi University, 2007.

^ "T.C. Ordu Valiliği - Cami ve Cemevi, Fatsa'da Aynı Çatı Altında" . Archived from the original on 2013-06-20 . Retrieved 2013-06-18 .

^ a b Donald Presgrave Little et al., Islamic Studies Presented to Charles J. Adams, Brill Academic Pub; First Edition (April 1, 1991), ISBN 978-9004092211 ^ Léon Maccas, L’Hellenisme de L’Asie – Mineure, Paris, 1919, s: 83.

^ Meir Zamir (1981): Population statistics of the Ottoman empire in 1914 and 1919, Middle Eastern Studies, 17:1, 85-106 ^ Tableaux indiquant le nombre des divers elements de la population dans l'Empire Ottoman au 1 Mars 1330 (14 Mars 1914), Constantinople ^ Maccas, Léon, L'hellénisme de l'Asie-Mineure son histoire, sa puissance (1919) ^ San Mateo Times /Thursday, March 30, 1972 /Page-1 ^ a b ENGİN BOZKURT, THE CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT EXPERIENCES IN TURKEY: THE CASE OF HOZAT MUNICIPALITY, MIDDLE EAST TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY, 2011 ^ TÜRKMEN, HADE, RADICALISATION OF POLITICS AT THE LOCAL LEVEL: THE CASE OF FATSA DURING THE LATE 1970s, MIDDLE EAST TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY, 2006 ^ SÜMERCAN BOZKURT, THE RESISTANCE COMMITTEES: DEVRIMCI YOL AND THE QUESTION OF REVOLUTIONARY ORGANIZATION IN TURKEY IN THE LATE 1970s, MIDDLE EAST TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY, 2008 ^ "Fatsa nokta operasyonu" .

^ Zurcher, Erik.

Turkey: A Modern History . IB Tauris. p. 267.

Whole neighbour hoods, especially in the squatter towns, came under the control of one or  the other of the competing groups and were declared 'liberated areas'.  The most famous example was the small Black Sea town of Fatsa, where  a left-wing mayor and his supporters officially repudiated the authority  of the government and proclaimed an independent Soviet republic.  Eventually, this peculiar experiment was ended when the troops were  sent in.

^ "Milliyet - Ece Temelkuran - Teferruat!" (in Turkish) . Retrieved 12 November 2008 .

^ "Bir Yerel Yönetim Deneyi" by Pertev Aksakal (Simge Yayınevi) 1989 ^ "Fatsalı'nın ikinci vatanı Japonya" .

Sabah (in Turkish). 2005-10-01 . Retrieved 2009-02-24 .

^ "Başkan'ın Özgeçmişi" . Retrieved 9 October 2023 .

^ Mahalle Archived 2015-07-06 at the Wayback Machine , Turkey Civil Administration Departments Inventory. Retrieved 19 September 2023.

^ BOA DH. MTV 55/48.

^ "Ordu Kent Gazetesi - Sizi Gidi Sizi... 4 Nisan 1337 (1921)" .

^ "ALİ POYRAZOĞLU - Fatsalı Sanatçılar Yazar ve Şairler" . Archived from the original on 2013-06-26 . Retrieved 2013-06-16 .

^ "Gürcistan Dostluk Derneği" . Archived from the original on 2016-03-13.

^ "..::Mehmet Gümüş Resmi Web Sitesine Hoşgeldiniz::" . Archived from the original on 2013-06-27 . Retrieved 2013-06-16 .

^ "Türkiye Büyük Millet Meclisi 23. Dönem Milletvekili" . Archived from the original on 2007-10-27.

^ "Levent İnanır Kimdir? Biyografisi" .

^ "T.C. Frankfurt Başkonsolosu İlhan Saygılı'dan | AVRUPA TÜRKLERİ HABER PORTALI" . Archived from the original on 2016-03-04.

^ Northwestern University Archival and Manuscript Collections External links [ edit ] Media related to Fatsa at Wikimedia Commons District governor's official website (in Turkish) v t e Fatsa in Ordu Province of Turkey Districts Akkuş Altınordu Aybastı Çamaş Çatalpınar Çaybaşı Fatsa Gölköy Gülyalı Gürgentepe İkizce Kabadüz Kabataş Korgan Kumru Mesudiye Perşembe Ulubey Ünye Districts of Ordu List of provinces by region Istanbul Istanbul West Marmara Balıkesir Çanakkale Edirne Kırklareli Tekirdağ Aegean Afyonkarahisar Aydın Denizli İzmir Kütahya Manisa Muğla Uşak East Marmara Bilecik Bursa Düzce Eskişehir Kocaeli Sakarya Yalova West Anatolia Ankara Karaman Konya Mediterranean Adana Antalya Burdur Hatay Isparta Kahramanmaraş Mersin Osmaniye Central Anatolia Aksaray Kayseri Kırıkkale Kırşehir Nevşehir Niğde Sivas Yozgat West Black Sea Amasya Bartın Bolu Çankırı Çorum Karabük Kastamonu Samsun Sinop Tokat Zonguldak East Black Sea Artvin Giresun Gümüşhane Ordu Rize Trabzon Northeast Anatolia Ağrı Ardahan Bayburt Erzincan Erzurum Iğdır Kars Central East Anatolia Bingöl Bitlis Elazığ Hakkâri Malatya Muş Tunceli Van Southeast Anatolia Adıyaman Batman Diyarbakır Gaziantep Kilis Mardin Siirt Şanlıurfa Şırnak Metropolitan municipalities are bolded.

v t e Neighbourhoods of Fatsa District Ahmetler Arpalık Aşağıardıç Aşağıtepe Aşağıyavaş Aslancami Ayazlı Bacanak Bağlarca Bahçeler Başköy Beyceli Bolaman Bozdağı Bucaklı Buhari Bülbülköy Büyükkoç Çömlekli Çöteli Demirci Dereyurt Dolunay Duayeri Düğünlük Dumlupınar Eskiordu Evkaf Fatih Geyikçeli Gölköy Güvercinlik Hacıköy Hamlık Hatipli Hıdırbeyli Hoylu Ilıca İnönü İslamdağ Kabakdağı Kaleönü Karataş Kargucak Karşıyaka Kavraz Kayaca Kayaköy Akçakese Kılavuzömer Kılıçlı Konakbaşı Kösebucağı Küçükkoç Kulakköy Küpdüşen Kurtuluş Mehmetakif Meşebükü Mustafa Kemalpaşa Oluklu Örencik Palazlı Kömürlük Sakarya Salihli Saraytepe Sazcılar Sefaköy Şerefiye Sudere Tahtabaş Taşlıca Tayalı Tepecik Uzundere Yalıköy Yapraklı Yassıbahçe Yassıtaş Yavaş Yenidoğan Yenikent Yenipazar Yeniyurt Yeşilköy Yeşiltepe Yukarıardıç Yukarıbahçeler Yukarıtepe Yusuflu v t e Ancient settlements in Turkey Aegean Abbassus Abrostola Achaion Limen Acharaca Acmonia Acrassus Adramyttium Agatheira Aegae Airai Aizanoi Alabanda Alia Alinda Allianoi Almura Amnista Amorium Amos Amynanda Amyzon Anaua Anineta Annaea Antandrus Antioch on the Maeander Apamea in Phrygia Aphrodisias Apollonia in Mysia Apollonia Salbaces Apollonis Apollonos Hieron Appia Appolena Aragokome Araukome Arcadiopolis Arilla Aroma Aspaneus Astragon Astyra near Adramyttium Astyra near Pergamon Astyria Atarneus Atarneus sub Pitanem Attea Attuda Augustopolis Aulae Aurelia Neapolis Aureliopolis in Lydia Aurokra Bageis Bargasa Bargasa in northern Caria Bargylia Beudos Beycesultan Birgena Blaundus Bonitai Boukolion Boutheia Briula Bruzus Bybassus Cadi Callipolis Caloe Canae Carene Carmylessus Carura Caryanda Castabus Casystes Cedreae Celaenae Ceramus Chalcetor Choria Chrysaoris Chytrium Cidramus Cindye Cisthene Clannuda Claros Colophon Colossae Conium Coryphas Cybeleia Cyllandus Cyme Daldis Dareioukome Dideiphyta Didyma Digda Dioclea Dionysiopolis Dios Hieron in Ionia Dios Hieron in Lydia Dioskome Docimium Doroukome Eibeos Eiokome Elaea Eluza Embatum Emoddi Ephesus Erines Erythrae Erythras Etsyena Euaza Eukarpia Euhippe Eumeneia Euromus Euthenae Euxine Gambrium Gerga Gergitha Gerriadai Glauke Gryneium Halicarnassus Halisarna Harpasa Helos Heraclea at Latmus Heraclea in Aeolis Heraclea in Lydia Heraclea Salbace Hermocapelia Hierapolis Hieropolis Hierocaesarea Homadena Hydai Hydas Hydissus Hygassos Hyllarima Hypaepa Hypokremnos Hyrcanis Iasos Iaza Idyma Ioniapolis Ioudda Ipsus Isinda in Ionia Iskome Kadyie Kaira Kalabantia Kasara Kasossos Kaualena Kaunos Kaymakçı Tepe Kilaraza Kildara Klazomenai Kleimaka Kleros Politike Knidos Koddinou Petra Koraia Korakoe Koresa Kouara Kyllene Kymnissa Kys Labraunda Lagina Lalandos Lamyana Lankena Laodicea on the Lycus Larisa in Caria Larisa in Ionia Larisa in Lydia Larissa Phrikonis Larymna Lasnedda Latmus Lebedus Leimon Leucae Leucophrys Limantepe Lobolda Loryma Lunda Lydae Lyrna Lysimachia Madnasa Maeandropolis Magnesia ad Sipylum Magnesia on the Maeander Maiboza Maionia in Lydia Malene Marathesium Mastaura Meiros Meiros Megale Melampagos Meloukome Metropolis in Lydia Metropolis in southern Phrygia Miletus Mylasa Mobolla Mokolda Mossyna Mostene Motella Myloukome Myndus Myrina Myus Nais Nasos Naulochon Naulochus Naxia Neapolis Neonteichos Nisyra Notion Nymphaeum Nysa on the Maeander Odon Oenoanda Olaeis Olymos Oroanna Orthoisa Ortygia Otrus Palaemyndus Palaeopolis Panasion Panormus near Miletus Panormus near Halicarnassus Parsada Parthenium Passala Passanda Pedasa Peltae Pepuza Pergamon Perperene Philadelphia in Lydia Phocaea Phoenix in Caria Physcus Phyteia Pidasa Pinara Pisilis Pisye Pitane Pladasa Plarasa Polichna in Ionia Polichne in Ionia Polybotus Pordoselene Priene Prymnessus Pteleum Pydnae Pygela Pyrnus Pyrrha Saouenda Sardis Satala in Lydia Sebaste in Phrygia Sebastopolis in Caria Setae Side in Caria Sidussa Silandus Sillyos Sion Skolopoeis Smyrna Soa Spore Stadia Stectorium Stratonicea in Lydia Stratonicea in Caria Strobilos Syangela Symbra Synaus Syneta Synnada Syrna Tabae Tabala Tateikome Taza Teichiussa Telandrus Temenothyra Temnos Tempsis Tendeba Teos Termera Teuthrania Thasthara Theangela Thebe Hypoplakia Thebes Thera Thyaira Thyatira Thymbrara Thyssanus Tisna Tlos in Caria Tomara Traianopolis Trapezopolis Trarium Triopium Tripolis on the Meander Troketta Tyanollos Tymion Tymnos Ula Uranium Zemmeana Zingotos Kome Black Sea Abonoteichos Aegialus Aiginetes Alaca Höyük Amasia Amastris Ancon Anticinolis Argyria Armene Athenae Berissa Bonita Boon Cabira Cales Callistratia Carambis Carissa Carussa Cerasus Chadisia Cinolis Cizari Colonia in Armenia Colussa Comana in the Pontus Coralla Cordyle Cratia Crenides Cromen Cromna Cyptasia Cytorus Dia Diacopa Elaeus Endeira Erythini Euchaita Eusene Gadilon Garius Garzoubanthon Gaziura Gozalena Hadrianopolis in Paphlagonia Hattusa Heraclea Pontica Heracleium Hermonassa Hieron Oros Hüseyindede Tepe Hyssus Ibora Ischopolis Karza Kelesa Kimista Laodicea Pontica Libiopolis Lillium Metroon Mokata Naustathmus Nerik Nicopolis Ophis Oxinas Patara Pharnacia Phazemon Philocaleia Pida Pimolisa Polemonium Pompeiopolis Potami Prusias ad Hypium Pteria in Paphlagonia Salatiwara Samuha Sandaraca Sapinuwa Satala Saurania Sebastopolis in Pontus Stephane Syderos Themiscyra Thymena Timolaeum Tium Tripolis Virasia Yazılıkaya Zagorus Zaliche Zephyrium in Paphlagonia Ziporea Central Anatolia Abouadeineita Alişar Hüyük Amblada Anadynata Anastasiopolis Andabalis Anisa Anniaca Antoniopolis Anzoulada Aquae Saravenae Aralla Arasaxa Archalla Ardistama Ariaramneia Ariarathia Armaxa Artiknos Aspenzinsos Astra Atenia Balbissa Balgatia Barate Bathys Rhyax Binbirkilise Blucium Borissos Campae Camuliana Candara Carus Vicus Çatalhöyük Cimiata Ciscissus Cinna Claneus Comitanassus Congustus Corna Corniaspa Coropassus Cotenna Cybistra Cyzistra Dadastana Dasmenda Derbe Diocaesarea Doara Dometiopolis Dorylaeum Ecdaumava Ecobriga Ergobrotis Euaissa Eudocia (Cappadocia) Eudocia (Phrygia) Eulepa Faustinopolis Germa Gorbeus Gordium Hadrianopolis in Phrygia Heraclea Cybistra Herpha Hieropotamon Homana Hyde Ilistra Irenopolis Isauropolis Juliopolis Kaman-Kalehöyük Kanotala Karbala Keissia Kerkenes Kilistra Kindyria Kobara Kodylessos Korama Koron Kültepe (Kanesh) Lageina Lamatorma Laodicea Combusta Laroumada Lauzadus Limnae Lystra Malandasa Malus in Galatia Malus in Phrygia Meloë Metropolis in northern Phrygia Midaeium Mistea Mnizus Mokissos Mourisa Moutalaske Musbanda Myrika Nakoleia Nazianzus Nitazi Nora Nyssa Ochras Olosada Orcistus Papirion Parnassus Pedachtoë Pedaia Peium Perta Pessinus Pharax Phlara Pillitokome Pissia Pithoi Pontanena Posala Pteria Purushanda Pyrgoi Sadagolthina Salamboreia Salarama Sasima Savatra Sbida Sedasa Senzousa Sereana Sibora Sidamaria Skandos Soanda Soandos Sora Takourtha Tavium Thebasa Thouththourbia Tiberiopolis Trocmades Tyana Tynna Tyriaeum Vasada Verinopolis Zeita Zizima Eastern Anatolia Altıntepe Ani Arsamosata Cafer Höyük Camachus Citharizum Dadima Justinianopolis Melid Sugunia Theodosiopolis Tushpa Marmara Abarnis Abydos Achaiion Achilleion Ad Statuas Adrasteia Aegospotami Agora Aianteion in Thrace Aianteion in the Troad Ainos Alexandria Troas Alopeconnesus Ammoi Amycus Anaplous Apamea Myrlea Aphrodisias Apollonia on the Rhyndacus Aprus Apsoda Arbeila Argiza Argyria Argyronion Argyropolis Arisba Artace Artaiouteichos Artanes Assos Astacus Astyra in Troad Athyras Aureliane Aureliopolis Baradendromia Baris Basilica Therma Basilinopolis Bathonea Bathys Limen Beodizo Bergule Birytis Bisanthe Bitenas Bithynium Blachernae Bolos Boradion Brunca Burtudizon Bythias Byzantium Byzapena Caenophrurium Callum Calpe Canopus Cardia Cebrene Cenchreae Cenon Gallicanon Chalcaea Chalcedon Charax Charmidea Chelae on the Black Sea Chelae on the Asian coast of the Bosphorus Chelae on the European coast of the Bosphorus Choiragria Chryse Chrysopolis Cius Clitae Cobrys Cocylium Colla Colonae Cremaste Crenides Cressa Crithote Cypasis Cypsela Cyzicus Dadokome Dacibyza Damalis Daphne Mainomene Daphnus Dardanus Dascylium Dascylium in Bithynia Dekaton in Bithynia Dekaton in Thrace Delkos Delphin Deris Desa Didymateiche Diolkides Drabus Drizipara/Drusipara Eirakla Elaea in Bithynia Elaeus Elekosmioi Embolos Ergasteria Eribolum Gargara Gentinos Gergis Germa Germanicopolis Hadriani ad Olympum Hadriania Hadrianotherae Halone Hamaxitus Harpagion Hebdomon Helenopolis/Drepanum Heracleium Hermaion Hieria Hierion Iasonion Ide Ilieon Kome Kabia Kalamos Kalasyrta Kale Peuke Kalos Agros Kampos Kassa Katapaspanas Kepos Kizoura Koila Kolonai Kosilaos Koubaita Kyparodes Kypra Lamponeia Lampsacus Larisa in Troad Lasthenes Leptoia Liada Libum Libyssa Limnae in Bithynia Limnae in Thrace Linus Lupadium Lygos Lysimachia Madytus Mantineion Marpessos Miletopolis Mocasura Mochadion Modra Morzapena Mossynea Moukaporis Myrileion Narco Nassete Nausikleia Nausimachion Neandreia Neapolis on the Bosphorus Neapolis on the Thracian Chersonese Neonteichos Nerola Nicomedia Oka Ontoraita Ophryneion Orestias Orni Ostreodes Pactya Paeon Paesus Palodes Panion Pantichium Parabolos Parium Paulines Pegae in Mysia Pegae in Thrace Pege Pentephyle Percote Pericharaxis Perinthus Petrozetoi Pharmakia Phidalia Petra Phiela Philia Phosphorus Pionia Pitheci Portus Placia Ploketta Poemanenum Poleatikon Polychron Polymedium Potamoi Potamonion Praenetus Pratomysia Prepa Priapus Prindea Proconnesus Proochthoi Prusa Psarela Psyllium Pyrrhias Cyon Pytheion Rhebas Rhegion Rhesion Rhoiteion Rouphinianai Salmydessus Sangarus Scamandria Scamandrus Scepsis Scylace Scylla Selymbria Semystra Serrion Teichos Sestos Sigeion Sirkanos Smintheion Soka Strobilos Sykai Syllanta Tarpodizo Tarsus in Bithynia Tattaios Tenba Terbos Tesderamoska Tetrakomia Tipaso Tragasai Thynias Traron Tricomia in Bithynia Troy ( Hisarlik ) Tyrodiza Tzurulum Urisio Utsurgae Zeleia Mediterranean Acalissus Acarassus Adada Adrasus Aegae Agrae Alalakh Amelas Anabura in Pisidia Anazarbus Anchiale Andeda Andriaca Anemurium Ano Kotradis Antigonia Antioch on the Orontes Antioch of Pisidia Antiochia Lamotis Antioch on the Cragus Antioch on the Pyramis Antiphellus Aperlae Aphrodisias of Cilicia Apollonia in Lycia Arabissus Araxa Ariassus Arima Arnabanda Arneae Arsada Arsinoe Artanada Arycanda Aspendos Augai Augusta Aulae Aunesis Bab al-Hawa Border Crossing Balbura Baris Bindaios Bubon Cabassus Cadrema Cadyanda Callimache Calynda Carallia Carmylessus Casae Castabala Ceretapa Cestrus Charadrus Choma Cibyra Mikra Claudiopolis Colybrassus Comama Comana in Cappadocia Comba Conana Coracesium Corycium Antrum Corycus (Kızkalesi) Corydala Cremna Cretopolis Crya Cyaneae Cyrrhus Daedala Dalisandus in Isauria Dalisandus in Pamphylia Damasei Dias Diocaesarea Domuztepe Elaiussa Sebaste Elbessos Emirzeli Epiphania Erymna Etenna Eudocia (Lycia) Eudocias (Pamphylia) Flaviopolis Gagae Gözlükule Hacilar Hadrianopolis in Pisidia Halae Hamaxia Hierapolis Hippucome Holmi Hyia Idebessos Idyros Iotape Irenopolis Isaura Nea Isaura Palaea Isba Isinda in Lycia Isinda in Pisidia Issus Istlada Juliosebaste Kalanthia Kalelibelen Kandyba Kanytelis Karakabaklı Karatepe Karkabo Kastellon Kendema Keraia Kibyra Kiphisos Kirkota Kitanaura Kodroula Kolbasa Korasion Korma Kynosarion Laertes Lagbe Lamos Lebessus Legeita Limnae in Pamphylia Limnae in Pisidia Limyra Lissa Lycae Lyrbe Lysinia Magarsa Magastara Magydus Mallus Malus in Pisidia Mampsoukrenai Mamure Castle Manava Mandane Marciana Marmara (Mnara) Mastaura Meloë Melanippe Meriana Mezgitkale Moatra Mopsucrene Mopsuestia Morka Moron Hydor Moumoustra Mylae Mylios Myra Myriandus Nagidos Nauloi Neapolis in Pisidia Nephelis Nisa Octapolis Olba Olbasa Olbia Olympus Öküzlü Onobara Orokenda Otanada Ouerbe Padyandus Palaeopolis Panemotichus Panhormus Pargais Parlais Patara Pednelissus Perga Perminounda Phaselis Phellus Philadelphia in Cilicia Philaea Phoenicus Phoenix in Lycia Pisarissos Pisurgia Placoma Platanus Podalia Pogla Prostanna Pseudokorasion Ptolemais Rhodiapolis Rhoscopus Rhosus Rygmanoi Sabandus Sagalassos Sandalium Saraganda Sebeda Seleucia in Pamphylia Seleucia Pieria Seleucia Sidera Selge Selinus Seroiata Serraepolis Sia Sibidounda Sibyla Side Siderus Sidyma Sillyon Simena Sinda Siricae Soli Solyma Sozopolis Sura Syca Syedra Takina Tapureli Tardequeia Tarsus Teimiussa Tell Judaidah Tell Tayinat Telmessos Telmessos (Caria) Tenedos Termessos Tetrapyrgia in Cappadocia Tetrapyrgia in Pamphylia Titiopolis Tityassus Tlos Toriaeum Tragalassus Trebendae Trebenna Trysa Tyberissus Tyinda Tymandus Tynada Typallia Xanthos Yanıkhan Yumuktepe Zenopolis in Isauria Zenopolis in Lycia Zephyrium on the Calycadnus Southeastern Anatolia Amida Antioch in the Taurus Antioch in Mesopotamia (Constantia) Apamea on the Euphrates Carcathiocerta Carchemish Çayönü Dabanas Dara Doliche Edessa Göbekli Tepe Hallan Çemi Tepesi Harran Khashshum Kussara Matiate Nevalı Çori Nicopolis in Cilicia Nisibis Sakçagözü Sam'al Samosata Sareisa Seleucia at the Zeugma Sitai Sultantepe Tille Tushhan Urima Urshu Zeugma Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Other Kulturenvanteri monument Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fatsa&oldid=1303826859 " Categories : Fatsa District Populated places in Ordu Province Black Sea port cities and towns in Turkey Fishing communities in Turkey Populated coastal places in Turkey Districts of Ordu Province Metropolitan district municipalities in Turkey Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRG without Wikisource reference CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Turkish-language sources (tr) This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 08:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fatsa 36 languages Add topic

