Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Treatment of financial assets under IFRS 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Financial asset 21 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Lietuvių Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intangible asset that derives value because of a contractual claim Part of a series on Financial markets Public market Exchange · Securities Bond market Bond valuation Corporate bond Fixed income Government bond High-yield debt Municipal bond Securitization Stock market Common stock Growth stock Preferred stock Registered share Shareholder Stock Stockbroker Stock certificate Stock exchange Watered stock Other markets Derivatives ( Credit derivative Futures exchange Hybrid security ) Foreign exchange ( Currency Exchange rate ) Commodity ETF Money Mutual fund Option Real estate Reinsurance Structured product Swap (finance) Alternative investment Private equity Private credit Leveraged buyout Venture Growth Secondaries SPAC Carried Interest Leveraged finance Over-the-counter (off-exchange) Forwards Options Spot market Swaps Trading Participants Regulation Clearing Related areas Asset management Banks and banking Bulls and Bears Diversification ESG Climate finance Eco-investing Impact investing Sustainable finance Greenwashing Financial technology Investment management Market risk Market trend Speculative attack v t e A financial asset is a non-physical asset whose value is derived from a contractual claim, such as bank deposits , bonds , and participations in companies' share capital . Financial assets are usually more liquid than tangible assets , such as commodities or real estate.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The opposite of financial assets is non-financial assets , which include both tangible property (sometimes also called real assets ) such as land, real estate or commodities, and intangible assets such as intellectual property , including copyrights, patents, trademarks and data.

Types [ edit ] According to the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), a financial asset can be: Cash or cash equivalent, Equity instruments of another entity, Contractual right to receive cash or another financial asset from another entity or to exchange financial assets or financial liabilities with another entity under conditions that are potentially favorable to the entity, A contract that will or may be settled in the entity's own equity instruments and is either a non-derivative for which the entity is or may be obliged to receive a variable number of the entity's own equity instruments, or a derivative that will or may be settled other than by exchange of a fixed amount of cash or another financial asset for a fixed number of the entity's own equity instruments.

[ 4 ] Treatment of financial assets under IFRS [ edit ] Under IFRS, financial assets are classified into four broad categories which determine the way in which they are measured and reported: Financial assets "held for trading " — i.e., which were acquired or incurred principally for the purpose of selling, or are part of a portfolio with evidence of short-term profit-taking, or are derivatives — are measured at fair value through profit or loss .

Financial assets with fixed or with determinable payments and fixed maturity which the company has to be willing and able to hold till maturity are classified as "held-to-maturity" investments. Held-to-maturity investments are either measured at fair value through profit or loss by designation, or determined to be financial assets available for sale by designation.

Financial assets with fixed or determinable payments which are not listed in an active market are considered to be " loans and receivables ". Loans and receivables are also either measured at fair value through profit or loss by designation or determined to be financial assets available for sale by designation.

All other financial assets are categorized as financial assets " available for sale " and are measured at fair value through profit or loss by designation.

[ 5 ] For financial assets to be measured at fair value through profit or loss by designation , designation is only possible at the amount the asset was initially recognized at. Moreover, designation is not possible for equity instruments which are not traded in an active market and the fair value of which cannot be reliably determined. Further (alternative) requirements for designation are e.g. at least a clear diminution of a "mismatch" with other financial assets or liabilities, [ 6 ] an internal valuation and reporting and steering at fair value, [ 7 ] or a combined contract with an embedded derivative which is not immaterial and which may be separated.

[ 8 ] Regarding financial assets available for sale by designation , designation is only possible at the amount the asset was initially recognised at as well. However, there are no further restrictions or requirements.

See also [ edit ] Security (finance) Financial accounting Financial statements Intangible asset finance References [ edit ] ^ Chen, James (20 November 2003).

"Financial Asset" .

Investopedia .

Dotdash . Retrieved 2 December 2016 .

^ "What are Financial Assets?" .

The Balance .

Dotdash . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 December 2016 .

^ "Financial assets" .

The Free Dictionary . Retrieved 2 December 2016 .

^ International Accounting Standard (IAS) 32.11 ^ International Accounting Standard (IAS) 32.9 ^ International Accounting Standard (IAS) 32.9b i ^ International Accounting Standard (IAS) 32.9b ii ^ International Accounting Standard (IAS) 32.11a Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Financial_asset&oldid=1304812610 " Category : Asset Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 08:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Financial asset 21 languages Add topic

