Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Flora 2 Fauna 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Myanmar 3 languages فارسی မြန်မာဘာသာ Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Biodiversity of Myanmar ) Monkey on Mount Zwegabin The wildlife of Myanmar includes its flora and fauna and their natural habitats .

Flora [ edit ] See also: list of ecoregions in Myanmar Like all Southeastern Asian forests, the forests of Myanmar can be divided into two categories: monsoon forest and rainforest . Monsoon forest is dry at least three months a year, and is dominated by deciduous trees. Rainforest has a rainy season of at least nine months, and are dominated by broadleaf evergreen .

In the region north of the Tropic of Cancer , in the Himalayan region , subtropical broadleaf evergreen dominates to an elevation of 2000 m, and from 2000 m to 3000 m, semi-deciduous broadleaf dominates, and above 3000 m, evergreen conifers and subalpine forest are the primary fauna until the alpine scrubland .

The area from Yangon to Myitkyina is mostly monsoon forest, while peninsular Malaysia south of Mawlamyine is primarily rainforest, with some overlap between the two. Along the coasts of Rakhine State and Tanintharyi Division , tidal forests occur in estuaries , lagoons , tidal creeks , and low islands . These forests are host to the much-depleted Myanmar Coast mangroves habitat of mangrove and other trees that grow in mud and are resistant to sea water . Forests along the beaches consist of palm trees , hibiscus , casuarinas , and other trees resistant to storms.

Fauna [ edit ] Myanmar is home to nearly 300 known mammal species, 300 reptile species, and about 1000 bird species .

[ 1 ] There are also many non-marine molluscs in Myanmar .

See also [ edit ] Deforestation in Myanmar References [ edit ] ^ "MOFA: About Myanmar: Flora and Fauna and Myanmar" .

mofa.gov.mm . Myanmar - Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 24 April 2009 .

Sources [ edit ] "Myanmar Flora and Fauna" .

myanmars.net . Retrieved 24 April 2009 .

v t e Myanmar articles Myanmar is also known as Burma History Prehistory Waithali kingdom Pyu city-states Thaton kingdom Pagan kingdom Launggyet dynasty Myinsaing kingdom Pinya kingdom Sagaing kingdom Kingdom of Ava Prome kingdom Hanthawaddy kingdom Kingdom of Mrauk U Toungoo dynasty First Toungoo Empire Restored Hanthawaddy kingdom Konbaung dynasty Shan States Karenni States British rule Japanese occupation Union of Burma Socialist Republic 8888 Uprising State Peace and Development Council 2007 protests 2011–2015 political reforms 2021 coup Protests Civil war Geography Borders Cities Climate Deforestation Ecoregions Islands Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Wildlife Earthquakes Volcanoes Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Corruption Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Women's rights Conflict Law enforcement Military military rule commander-in-chief Parliament State Administration Council Political parties President list Prime Minister list Economy Agriculture Central bank Opium production Telecommunications Myanmar kyat (currency) Tourism Transportation Units of measurement Society Crime Demographics Education Environmental issues Ethnic groups Health Human trafficking Languages Religion Women Prostitution Sex trafficking Culture Art Anthem State Seal Capitals Calendar Zodiac Censorship Cinema Clothing Cuisine Dance Etymology Festivals Flag Folklore Literature Media Music National symbols Public holidays Sports Traditional Tattooing Twelve Auspicious Rites Weddings Category Commons Portal Outline of Myanmar v t e Wildlife of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_Myanmar&oldid=1242371393 " Categories : Wildlife by country Biota of Myanmar Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Use British English from November 2015 Use dmy dates from November 2015 This page was last edited on 26 August 2024, at 14:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Myanmar 3 languages Add topic

