Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose of study 2 Mineral resources 3 Ore 4 Coal and petroleum 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Economic geology 25 languages العربية Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Монгол 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science concerned with earth materials of economic value "Economic Geology" redirects here. For the journal, see Economic Geology (journal) .

An open pit uranium mine in Namibia Part of a series on Geology Index Outline Category Glossary History ( Timeline ) Key components Minerals Rock ( Igneous Sedimentary Metamorphic ) Sediment Plate tectonics Strata Weathering Erosion Geologic time scale Laws, principles, theories Stratigraphic principles Principle of original horizontality Law of superposition Principle of lateral continuity Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of inclusions and components Walther's law Topics Composition Geochemistry Mineralogy Sedimentology Petrology Structure of Earth Geophysics Landform structures Geomorphology Glaciology Structural Geology Volcanology Geologic history Geological history of Earth Research Branches of geology Geologist ( List) Methods Geological survey Applications Engineering Mining Forensics Military Planetary geology Lists of geological features of the Solar System Geology of solar terrestrial planets By planet and body Mercury Venus Moon Mars Vesta Ceres Io Titan Triton Pluto Charon Geology portal v t e Economic geology is concerned with earth materials that can be used for economic and industrial purposes. These materials include precious and base metals , nonmetallic minerals and construction-grade stone . Economic geology is a subdiscipline of the geosciences; according to Lindgren (1933) it is “the application of geology”. It may be called the scientific study of the Earth's sources of mineral raw materials and the practical application of the acquired knowledge.

[ 1 ] The study is primarily focused on metallic mineral deposits and mineral resources. The techniques employed by other Earth science disciplines (such as geochemistry , mineralogy , geophysics , petrology , paleontology and structural geology ) might all be used to understand, describe and exploit an ore deposit.

[ citation needed ] Economic geology is studied and practiced by geologists. Economic geology may be of interest to other professions such as engineers, environmental scientists and conservationists because of the far-reaching impact that extractive industries have on society, the economy and the environment.

Purpose of study [ edit ] The purpose of the study of economic geology is to gain understanding of the genesis and localization of ore deposits plus the minerals associated with ore deposits.

[ 2 ] Though metals, minerals and other geologic commodities are non-renewable in human time frames, the impression of a fixed or limited stock paradigm of scarcity has always led to human innovation resulting in a replacement commodity substituted for those commodities which become too expensive. Additionally the fixed stock of most mineral commodities is huge (e.g., copper within the Earth's crust given current rates of consumption would last for more than 100 million years.) [ 3 ] Nonetheless, economic geologists continue to successfully expand and define known mineral resources.

[ citation needed ] Mineral resources [ edit ] Main article: Mineral resource classification Mineral resources are concentrations of minerals significant for current and future societal needs. Ore is classified as mineralization economically and technically feasible for extraction. Not all mineralization meets these criteria for various reasons. The specific categories of mineralization in an economic sense are: Mineral occurrences or prospects of geological interest but not necessarily economic interest [ citation needed ] Mineral resources include those potentially economically and technically feasible and those that are not [ citation needed ] Ore reserves , which must be economically and technically feasible to extract [ citation needed ] Ore [ edit ] Citrobacter species can have concentrations of uranium in their bodies 300 times higher than in the surrounding environment.

Main article: Ore genesis Geologists are involved in the study of ore deposits, which includes the study of ore genesis and the processes within the Earth's crust that form and concentrate ore minerals into economically viable quantities.

[ citation needed ] Study of metallic ore deposits involves the use of structural geology , geochemistry , the study of metamorphism and its processes, as well as understanding metasomatism and other processes related to ore genesis.

[ citation needed ] Ore deposits are delineated by mineral exploration , which uses geochemical prospecting, drilling and resource estimation via geostatistics to quantify economic ore bodies. The ultimate aim of this process is mining .

[ citation needed ] Coal and petroleum [ edit ] Mud log in process, a common way to study the lithology when drilling oil wells.

See main articles Coal and Petroleum geology The study of sedimentology is of prime importance to the delineation of economic reserves of petroleum and coal energy resources.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Mineral economics Mineral resource classification Ore Ore genesis Coal Valuation (finance)  § Valuation of mining projects Geology portal References [ edit ] ^ Pohl W.L. (2020) Economic Geology, Principles and Practice: Metals, Minerals, Coal and Hydrocarbons – an Introduction to Formation and Sustainable Exploitation of Mineral Deposits. 2nd ed. 755 pp. 32 Colour Plates, 305 Figures, 32 Tables, 25 Boxes,  81 Equations. Schweizerbart Science Publishers, Stuttgart. www.schweizerbart.de/9783510654352 (Soft Cover) ^ J. M. Gilbert and C. F. Park, Jr., 2007, The Geology of Ore Deposits , 985 pages, Waveband Press, Long Grove, IL ^ J.E. Tilton, 2010, "Is Mineral Depletion a threat to sustainable mining?", Society of Economic Geologists Newsletter , No. 82 Lindgren, W., 1933. Mineral Deposits. 930 pp. McGraw-Hill, New York.

U.S. Geological Survey Circular 831, Principles of a Resource/Reserve Classification for Minerals (PDF format) Dill, H.G., 2010.

The “chessboard” classification scheme of mineral deposits: Mineralogy and geology from aluminum to zirconium.

Earth-Science Reviews Volume 100, pp. 1–420, 2010 v t e Ore minerals , mineral mixtures and ore deposits Ores Oxides Cassiterite ( tin ) Chromite ( chromium ) Coltan ( niobium and tantalum ) Columbite ( niobium ) Hematite ( iron ) Ilmenite ( titanium ) Magnetite ( iron ) Pyrolusite ( manganese ) Tantalite ( tantalum ) Uraninite ( uranium ) Sulfides Acanthite ( silver ) Argentite ( silver ) Bornite ( copper ) Chalcopyrite ( copper ) Chalcocite ( copper ) Cinnabar ( mercury ) Cobaltite ( cobalt ) Galena ( lead ) Molybdenite ( molybdenum ) Pyrite ( iron ) Pentlandite ( nickel ) Sphalerite ( zinc ) Carbonates Dolomite ( magnesium ) Magnesite ( magnesium ) Malachite ( copper ) Other Baryte ( barium ) Bauxite ( aluminium ) Beryl ( beryllium ) Sperrylite ( platinum ) Scheelite ( tungsten ) Wolframite ( tungsten ) Deposit types Banded iron formation Carbonate-hosted lead-zinc Heavy mineral sands Iron oxide copper gold (IOCG) Kambalda-type komatiitic nickel Lateritic nickel Magmatic nickel-copper-iron-PGE Porphyry copper Sedimentary exhalative (SedEx) Uranium Volcanogenic massive sulfide (VMS) Orogenic gold deposit Minerals portal v t e Geology Overviews Outline of geology Glossary of geology History of geology Index of geology articles History of geology Geochronology Geological history of Earth Timeline of geology Composition and structure Cosmochemistry Crystallography Geochemistry Mineralogy Petrology Sedimentology Historical geology Stratigraphy Paleontology Paleoclimatology Palaeogeography Dynamic Earth Structural geology Geodynamics Plate tectonics Geomorphology Volcanology Water Glaciology Hydrogeology Marine geology Geodesy Cartography Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity of Earth Planetary geodesy Remote sensing Geopositioning Geophysics Geomagnetism Geophysical survey Planetary geophysics Seismology Tectonophysics Applications Biogeology Economic geology Engineering geology Environmental geology Planetary geology Geobiology Geologic modelling Forensic geology Forensic geophysics Meteoritics Mining geology Mineral physics Occupations Geologist Petroleum geologist Volcanologist Geology portal Geology Geology Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Spain Latvia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economic_geology&oldid=1300948562 " Category : Economic geology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 08:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economic geology 25 languages Add topic

