Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Architecture 1.2 Landscape architecture 1.3 Urban planning and design 1.4 Establishment 1.5 Deans 2 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 2.1 Rankings 2.2 Executive Education 3 Student body 4 Research and publications Toggle Research and publications subsection 4.1 Design Research Labs 5 Campus Toggle Campus subsection 5.1 Gund Hall 5.2 Frances Loeb Library 5.3 Fabrication Lab 6 Notable alumni and faculty Toggle Notable alumni and faculty subsection 6.1 Alumni 6.2 Current faculty 6.3 Emeritus faculty 6.4 Former faculty 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Graduate School of Design 8 languages Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Polski ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′33″N 71°06′50″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3758°N 71.1139°W ﻿ / 42.3758; -71.1139 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Architecture school of Harvard University Harvard Graduate School of Design Coat of arms Type Private graduate school of design Established 1874 (first courses taught) 1936 (GSD established) Parent institution Harvard University Dean Sarah Whiting Academic staff 206 Students 878 362 (architecture) 161 (urban planning and design) 182 (landscape architecture) 173 (doctoral/design studies) Location Cambridge, Massachusetts , U.S.

42°22′33″N 71°06′50″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3758°N 71.1139°W ﻿ / 42.3758; -71.1139 Campus Urban Website gsd .harvard .edu The Harvard Graduate School of Design ( GSD ) is the graduate school of design at Harvard University , a private research university in Cambridge, Massachusetts . It offers master's and doctoral programs in architecture , landscape architecture , urban planning , urban design , real estate , [ 1 ] design engineering, and design studies.

The GSD has over 13,000 alumni and has graduated many famous architects , urban planners , and landscape architects . The school is considered a global academic leader in design fields.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The GSD has the world's oldest landscape architecture program (founded in 1893) and North America's oldest urban planning program (founded in 1900). Architecture was first taught at Harvard University in 1874.

[ 4 ] The Graduate School of Design was officially established in 1936, combining the three fields of landscape architecture, urban planning, and architecture under one graduate school.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Charles Eliot Norton brought the first architecture courses to Harvard University in 1874 Architecture [ edit ] Charles Eliot Norton brought the first architecture classes to Harvard University in 1874.

[ 6 ] Landscape architecture [ edit ] In 1893, the nation's first professional course in landscape architecture was offered at Harvard University. In 1900, the world's first landscape architecture program was established by Frederick Law Olmsted Jr.

and Arthur A. Shurcliff. The School of Landscape Architecture was established in 1913.

[ 7 ] Lester Collins who studied there, graduating in 1942, became professor after World War II, and soon Dean of the course.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Urban planning and design [ edit ] In 1900, the first urban planning courses were taught at Harvard University, and by 1909, urban planning courses taught by James Sturgis Pray were added to Harvard's design curriculum as part of the then School of Landscape Architecture. In 1923, a specialization in urban planning was established under the degree program of Master in Landscape Architecture. In 1929, North America's first urban planning degree (at the graduate level) was established at Harvard under short-term funding from the Rockefeller Foundation. The planning program migrated to the Graduate School of Design in 1936. Then in 1981, the then City and Regional Planning Program under John Kain ceased at the Graduate School of Design and was dispersed to the Kennedy School of Government and the Faculty of Arts and Sciences. In 1984, the Department of Urban Planning and Design was formed under Dean Gerald M. McCue with the inclusion of the Urban Design Program. Then in 1994, the Urban Planning program was officially returned to the Graduate School of Design under the aegis of Albert Carnesale , the Dean of the Kennedy School of Government, and Peter G. Rowe , the Dean of the Faculty of Design; with the first class entering in academic year 1994–1995. At the time, this program was envisioned as a physical planning program. In 2021, the Department of Urban Planning and Design assumed responsibility for a third graduate degree, the Master in Real Estate [ 10 ] (MRE).

Establishment [ edit ] The three major design professions (landscape architecture, urban planning, and architecture) were officially united in 1936 to form the Harvard Graduate School of Design. Joseph F. Hudnut (1886–1968) was an American architect scholar and professor who was the first dean. In 1937, Walter Gropius joined the GSD faculty as chair of the Department of Architecture and brought modern designers, including Marcel Breuer to help revamp the curriculum.

In 1960, Josep Lluís Sert established the nation's first Urban Design program. George Gund Hall, which is the present iconic home GSD, opened in 1972 and was designed by Australian architect and GSD graduate John Andrews. The school's now defunct Laboratory for Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis (LCGSA) led by the Department of Landscape Architecture is widely recognized as the research/development environment from which the now-commercialized technology of geographic information systems (GIS) emerged in the late 1960s and 1970s. More recent research initiatives include the Design Robotics Group, a unit that investigates new material systems and fabrication technologies in the context of architectural design and construction.

[ 11 ] [ 5 ] Deans [ edit ] Dean Tenure Career Joseph Hudnut 1936–1953 Architect Josep Lluís Sert 1953–1969 Architect and urban planner Maurice D. Kilbridge 1969–1980 Urban planner Gerald M. McCue 1980–1992 Architect Peter G. Rowe 1992–2004 Architect Alan A. Altshuler 2005–2008 Urban planner Mohsen Mostafavi 2008–2019 Architect Sarah M. Whiting 2019–present Architect Academics [ edit ] Gund Hall, designed by architect John Andrews in 1972, is the home of the Harvard Graduate School of Design The historic Robinson Hall in Harvard Yard was the home of the GSD until 1972, when the school moved to nearby Gund Hall.

The degrees granted in the masters programs include the Master in Landscape Architecture (MLA), Master of Architecture (MArch), Master of Architecture in Urban Design (MAUD), Master of Landscape Architecture in Urban Design (MLAUD), Master in Urban Planning (MUP), Master in Real Estate (MRE), Master in Design Engineering (MDE), Master in Design Studies (MDes). The school also offers the Doctor of Design (DDes) and jointly administers a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) degree in architecture, landscape architecture, and urban planning with the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences .

[ 12 ] Master in Landscape Architecture (MLA I) Master in Landscape Architecture (MLA I AP) Master in Landscape Architecture (MLA II) (Post-professional) Master of Landscape Architecture in Urban Design (MLAUD) (Post-professional) Master of Architecture (MArch I) Master of Architecture (MArch II) (Post-professional) Master of Architecture in Urban Design (MAUD) (Post-professional) Master in Urban Planning (MUP) Master in Real Estate (MRE) Master in Design Engineering [ 13 ] (MDE) Master in Design Studies (MDes) [ 14 ] Doctor of Design (DDes) Doctor of Philosophy in Architecture, Landscape Architecture, and Urban Planning (PhD) [ 15 ] Rankings [ edit ] As of 2016, the program's ten-year average ranking places it first, overall, on DesignIntelligence's ranking of programs accredited by the National Architectural Accrediting Board.

Executive Education [ edit ] Executive Education operates within GSD providing professional development classes.

[ 16 ] The Advanced Management Development Program in Real Estate (AMDP) is a year-long executive development course open to established real estate professionals. Upon graduating from AMDP, participants are full-fledged Harvard University Alumni. Throughout the year, Executive Education offers short duration programs in the fields of architecture, urban planning, design, and real estate to a diverse audience of learners.

[ 16 ] Student body [ edit ] As of 2012–2013, there were 878 students enrolled. 362 students or 42% were enrolled in architecture, 182 students or 21% in landscape architecture, 161 students or 18% in urban planning, and 173 students or 20% in doctoral or design studies programs. Approximately, 65% of students were Americans . The average student is 27 years old.

[ 17 ] GSD students are represented by the Harvard Graduate Council (HGC), a university-wide student government organization. There are also several dozen internal GSD student clubs.

[ 18 ] Research and publications [ edit ] In addition to its degree programs, the GSD administers the Loeb Fellowship, [ 19 ] and has hosted numerous research initiatives such as the Zofnass Program for Sustainable Infrastructure [ 20 ] and TUT-POL: Transforming Urban Transport - The Role of Political Leadership, [ 21 ] led by Diane E. Davis and Lily Song . The school publishes the bi-annual Harvard Design Magazine , Platform, and other design books and studio works. Since 1935, the institution has presented the Wheelwright Prize , an international architecture traveling fellowship.

[ 22 ] Design Research Labs [ edit ] The GSD Design Labs synthesize theoretical and applied knowledge through research with the intent to enable design to be an agent of change in society. There are seven current labs: Material Processes and Systems Group; Energy, Environments and Design; New Geographies Lab; Responsive Environments and Artifacts Lab; Social Agency Lab; Urban Theory Lab; Geometry Lab.

Campus [ edit ] The GSD campus is located northeast of Harvard Yard and across the street from Memorial Hall . Gund Hall is the main building of the GSD, and it houses most of the student space and faculty offices. Other nearby buildings include space for the school's Design Research Labs, faculty offices, the Loeb Fellowship program office, and research space for students, including those in the MDes and DDes programs.

Gund Hall [ edit ] Gund Hall's huge slanted glass roof provides light to the 5 staggered levels of studio space, known as the Trays [ 23 ] The Trays within Gund Hall.

Gund Hall is the main building, which has studio spaces and offices for approximately 800 students and more than 100 faculty and staff, lecture and seminar rooms, workshops and darkrooms, an audiovisual center, computer facilities, Chauhaus, the cafeteria, a project room, Piper Auditorium, and the Frances Loeb Library. The central studio space, also known as the Trays, extends through five levels under a stepped, clear-span roof. Gund Hall has a yard that comprises a basketball court and is often used for events, as an exhibition area for class projects, and as the setting for commencement ceremonies. The building was designed by architect John Andrews and supervised by structural engineer William LeMessurier both GSD alumni.

[ 24 ] Frances Loeb Library [ edit ] The Frances Loeb Library, is the main library of the Graduate School of Design. The library has a collection of over 300,000 books and journals. It also has a Materials and Visual Resources Department, and the Special Collections Department, which houses the GSD's rare books and manuscript collection.

Fabrication Lab [ edit ] The Fabrication Lab has both traditional tools and state-of-the-art technology available for model making and prototyping to faculty research and student course work. The Fabrication Lab has a full wood shop, metals shop, printing labs, 3D printing, CNC tools, robotic machines, laser cutter machines, etc.

[ 25 ] Notable alumni and faculty [ edit ] As of 2013, [update] the GSD had over 13,000 alumni in 96 countries. The GSD had 77 faculty members and 129 visiting faculty members. 45% of the faculty members were born outside of the United States.

[ 26 ] Frank Gehry studied urban planning at the GSD. Though he did not complete the program, he received an honorary doctorate from the school in 2000.

Philip Johnson , architecture alumnus José Rafael Moneo Vallés , architecture faculty Frederick Law Olmsted Jr.

, founder of the landscape architecture program Alumni [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Alan Wanzenberg , architect [ 27 ] Alejandro Zaera-Polo , architect Alexandra Lange , critic Andy Fillmore , urban designer and incumbent member of the Canadian parliament for Halifax Martin Bechthold , architect and architectural technologist Anita Berrizbeitia , landscape architect and former Chair of the Department of Landscape Architecture, Harvard University Bruno Zevi , architect, critic, and historian John Andrews , designer of the GSD's Gund Hall Charles Jencks , landscape architect and architectural theorist Christopher Alexander , architect, co-author of A Pattern Language Christopher Charles Benninger , architect Lesley Chang , architect Lester Collins (landscape architect) Shaun Donovan (born 1966), former US Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and Director of the Office of Management and Budget , running for Mayor of New York City Cornelia Oberlander , landscape architect Dan Kiley , modernist landscape architect Danny Forster , architect and television host Louis Edwin Fry Sr.

, architect and professor; former Chair of Howard University School of Architecture [ 28 ] David Gee Cheng , engineer and real estate developer, former Indonesian Deputy Minister for City Planning and Construction Edward Durell Stone , Modernist architect Edward Durell Stone Jr.

, landscape architect, founder of EDSA Edward Larrabee Barnes , prolific Modernist architect Eliot Noyes Elizabeth Whittaker , architect, founder of Merge Architects Farshid Moussavi Frank Gehry , Pritzker Prize Laureate , awarded honorary doctorate, studied urban planning Frida Escobedo , Architect Fumihiko Maki , Pritzker Prize Laureate Garrett Eckbo , modernist landscape architect George Ranalli Grace La , architect Grant Jones , landscape architect Harry Seidler Henry N. Cobb Hideo Sasaki , landscape architect, former department chair, founder of Sasaki Associates and Sasaki Walker Associates Hugh Stubbins , architect Ian McHarg , landscape architect and landscape planner, GIS development IM Pei , Pritzker Prize Laureate Jack Dangermond , landscape architecture, GIS development, co-founder of Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI) Jeanne Gang John Hejduk Joshua Prince-Ramus Julia Watson , landscape designer, author Julian Wood Glass Jr.

, businessman, philanthropist Julie Bargmann , landscape architect, inaugural winner of Cornelia Hahn Oberlander International Landscape Architecture Prize from The Cultural Landscape Foundation Ken Smith (architect) ，landscape architect, educator Kongjian Yu , landscape architect, educator, founder of Turenscape, Peking, winner of The Cultural Landscape Foundation Cornelia Hahn Oberlander International Landscape Architecture Prize Lawrence Halprin , landscape architect Mario Torroella , architect and artist, co-founder of HMFH Architects Meejin Yoon , architect and Dean of Cornell University College of Architecture, Art, & Planning Michael Graves Michael Maltzan , architect Michaele Pride-Wells , architect and educator [ 29 ] Michel Mossessian , architect, Design Principal and Founder of mossessian & partners Michele Michahelles , Paris-based architect, led restoration of Les Invalides Mikyoung Kim , landscape architect Mitchell Joachim Monica Ponce de Leon , dean and professor, Princeton University School of Architecture ; principal, MPdL Studio Nalina Moses , architect, author, designer Richard T. Murphy Jr.

Nader Tehrani (g. 1991) [ 30 ] – Dean, The Irwin S. Chanin School of Architecture of the Cooper Union, Founding Principal of NADAAA Paul Rudolph Peter Walker (landscape architect) Philip Johnson , Pritzker Prize Laureate Preston Scott Cohen , architect Robert F. Fox Jr.

Robert Geddes , architect and Dean of Princeton School of Architecture Roger Montgomery , first HUD Urban Designer, dean at U.C. Berkeley Shaun Donovan , former Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Shrinkhala Khatiwada , Miss Nepal 2018 Thomas Dolliver Church , Landscape Architect Thom Mayne , Pritzker Prize laureate William J. R. Curtis , architectural historian William LeMessurier , structural engineer founder of LeMessurier Consultants Xu Tiantian , architect, founder of DnA Design and Architecture Yoshio Taniguchi Ayla Karacebey Current faculty [ edit ] Notable faculty currently at the school include: Martin Bechthold , Anita Berrizbeitia , Eve Blau , Jennifer Bonner , Sean Canty , Preston Scott Cohen , Jeanne Gang , K. Michael Hays , Gary R. Hilderbrand , [ 31 ] Sharon Johnston , Hanif Kara , Rem Koolhaas , Grace La , Mark Lee , Rahul Mehrotra , Rafael Moneo , Toshiko Mori , Mohsen Mostafavi , Farshid Moussavi , Benjamin Pardo [ d ] , [ 32 ] Antoine Picon and Jorge Silvetti , Peter G. Rowe , John R. Stilgoe , Sarah M. Whiting , and Krzysztof Wodiczko .

Emeritus faculty [ edit ] Alan A. Altshuler Martha Schwartz Richard T.T. Forman Michael Van Valkenburgh , Former faculty [ edit ] Barbara Bestor [ 33 ] Tatiana Bilbao Lester Collins (landscape architect) Pierre de Meuron Bjarke Ingels , Visiting Professor [ 34 ] Christopher Tunnard , landscape architect Eduard Sekler George Hargreaves , landscape architect Jacques Herzog Gerhard Kallmann , Kallmann & McKinnell, designer of Boston City Hall Henry N. Cobb , Pei Cobb Freed & Partners, designer of John Hancock Tower in Boston Hugh Stubbins , architect, designer of Citigroup Center J. B. Jackson , vernacular American landscape writer Jaqueline Tyrwhitt , 1955–1969 Richard M. Sommer , 1998–2009 Jerzy Sołtan , 1959–1979 John Wilson (sculptor) Josep Lluis Sert , dean of the GSD from 1953 to 1969 and often credited with being instrumental in bringing modernist architecture to the United States Joshua Prince-Ramus , Visiting Professor Philippe Rahm , Visiting Professor Kenneth John Conant Marcel Breuer Martin Wagner , German architect and housing expert Michael McKinnell , Kallmann & McKinnell, designer of Boston City Hall Monica Ponce de Leon Moshe Safdie , designer of Habitat Peter Walker , landscape architect Rick Joy , Visiting Professor Serge Chermayeff , 1953–1962 [ 35 ] Sigfried Giedion , author of the highly influential history Space, Time and Architecture Theodora Kimball Hubbard , librarian, 1911–1924 Walter Gropius , 1937–1952; founder of Bauhaus Zaha Hadid , Pritzker Prize Laureate References [ edit ] ^ "About - REAL ESTATE and the BUILT ENVIRONMENT" .

REAL ESTATE and the BUILT ENVIRONMENT . Archived from the original on November 18, 2015 . Retrieved November 17, 2015 .

^ "The Best US Architecture Schools for 2014 are..." November 4, 2013.

^ "2013 United States Best Architecture Schools" . November 21, 2012.

^ "Harvard Graduate School of Design" .

www.gsd.harvard.edu .

^ a b "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 10, 2013 . Retrieved May 12, 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Harvard University, Graduate School of Design. The GSD History Collection, Administrative Affairs: An Inventory" . Retrieved November 22, 2017 .

^ Alofsin, Anthony (2002).

The Struggle for Modernism: Architecture, Landscape Architecture, and City Planning at Harvard .

^ "Landscape Architect Lester A. Collins Dies" .

Washington Post . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ "History of the Garden" .

Innisfree Garden . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ "Master in Real Estate" .

Harvard Graduate School of Design . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ [1] . gsd.harvard.edu. Retrieved on 2012-04-03.

^ "Doctoral Programs" .

Harvard Graduate School of Design . Harvard University . Retrieved October 23, 2013 .

^ "Harvard Master in Design Engineering" .

www.mde.harvard.edu . Retrieved March 5, 2020 .

^ "Harvard Graduate School of Design - Homepage" .

www.gsd.harvard.edu . Retrieved January 19, 2016 .

^ "Doctoral Programs" .

Harvard Graduate School of Design . Harvard University . Retrieved September 2, 2015 .

^ a b "Harvard Graduate School of Design Executive Education" . Retrieved May 29, 2020 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 20, 2013 . Retrieved May 12, 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Student Group Directory , Harvard Graduate School of Design, Retrieved 22 April 2018 ^ "The LOEB Fellowship" .

The LOEB Fellowship . Retrieved November 8, 2022 .

^ "Zofnass Programme for Sustainable Infrastructure" . Retrieved March 8, 2024 .

^ "Transforming Urban Transport - the Project" . Retrieved March 8, 2024 .

^ Dagenais, Travis (September 10, 2019).

"The Grand Tour: GSD's Wheelwright Prize reminds architects of the power of global research" .

Harvard Graduate School of Design . Retrieved June 23, 2024 .

^ Eleanor Gibson, Herzog & de Meuron to overhaul Harvard GSD's Gund Hall , Dezeen , July 26, 2018.

^ "Architectural Forum - December 1972" (PDF) . Retrieved July 14, 2019 .

^ "Harvard Graduate School of Design" .

www.gsd.harvard.edu .

^ "Endowment" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 4, 2017 . Retrieved November 22, 2017 .

^ Arango, Jorge S. (April 16, 2014).

"Alan Wanzenberg's Life in Design" .

1stDibs Introspective . Retrieved March 13, 2025 .

^ Wilson, Dreck Spurlock (March 2004). "Louis Edwin Fry Sr. (1903–2000)".

African American Architects: A Biographical Dictionary, 1865-1945 . Routledge. pp.

217– 221.

ISBN 978-1-135-95629-5 .

^ "Michaele Pride, Architect, and Educator" .

African American Registry (AAREG) .

^ "Harvard Graduate School of Design - Nader Tehrani" .

www.gsd.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 1, 2016 .

^ "Gary R. Hilderbrand" .

^ "Benjamin A. Pardo" .

^ Emily Young, Building a Name for Herself , The Los Angeles Times , March 14, 2002 ^ "Judges 2009 Bjarke Ingels" . World Architecture Festival. Archived from the original on February 26, 2012 . Retrieved October 20, 2009 .

^ Alan Powers , "Chermayeff, Serge", Grove Art Online External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Norway Sweden Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Graduate_School_of_Design&oldid=1305034686 " Categories : Harvard Graduate School of Design Harvard University schools 1936 establishments in Massachusetts Landscape architecture schools University subdivisions in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2020 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 17:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Graduate School of Design 8 languages Add topic

