Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Explanation of the problem 3 Examples 4 Approaches 5 Further reading 6 References Toggle the table of contents Many-body problem 10 languages العربية বাংলা Català Español فارسی Italiano 日本語 Português Српски / srpski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Many-body theory ) Problem in physics and quantum mechanics This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Many-body problem" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is about the many-body problem in quantum mechanics. For the n-body problem in classical mechanics, see n-body problem .

Part of a series of articles about Quantum mechanics i ℏ ℏ d d t | Ψ Ψ ⟩ ⟩ = H ^ ^ | Ψ Ψ ⟩ ⟩ {\displaystyle i\hbar {\frac {d}{dt}}|\Psi \rangle ={\hat {H}}|\Psi \rangle } Schrödinger equation Introduction Glossary History Background Classical mechanics Old quantum theory Bra–ket notation Hamiltonian Interference Fundamentals Complementarity Decoherence Entanglement Energy level Measurement Nonlocality Quantum number State Superposition Symmetry Tunnelling Uncertainty Wave function Collapse Experiments Bell's inequality CHSH inequality Davisson–Germer Double-slit Elitzur–Vaidman Franck–Hertz Leggett inequality Leggett–Garg inequality Mach–Zehnder Popper Quantum eraser Delayed-choice Schrödinger's cat Stern–Gerlach Wheeler's delayed-choice Formulations Overview Heisenberg Interaction Matrix Phase-space Schrödinger Sum-over-histories (path integral) Equations Dirac Klein–Gordon Pauli Rydberg Schrödinger Interpretations Bayesian Consciousness causes collapse Consistent histories Copenhagen de Broglie–Bohm Ensemble Hidden-variable Many-worlds Objective-collapse Quantum logic Superdeterminism Relational Transactional Advanced topics Relativistic quantum mechanics Quantum field theory Quantum information science Quantum computing Quantum chaos EPR paradox Density matrix Scattering theory Quantum statistical mechanics Quantum machine learning Scientists Aharonov Bell Bethe Blackett Bloch Bohm Bohr Born Bose de Broglie Compton Dirac Davisson Debye Ehrenfest Einstein Everett Fock Fermi Feynman Glauber Gutzwiller Heisenberg Hilbert Jordan Kramers Lamb Landau Laue Moseley Millikan Onnes Pauli Planck Rabi Raman Rydberg Schrödinger Simmons Sommerfeld von Neumann Weyl Wien Wigner Zeeman Zeilinger v t e The many-body problem is a general name for a vast category of physical problems pertaining to the properties of microscopic systems made of many interacting particles.

Terminology [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Many-body problem" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Microscopic here implies that quantum mechanics has to be used to provide an accurate description of the system.

Many can be anywhere from three to infinity (in the case of a practically infinite, homogeneous or periodic system, such as a crystal ), although three- and four-body systems can be treated by specific means (respectively the Faddeev and Faddeev–Yakubovsky equations) and are thus sometimes separately classified as few-body systems .

Explanation of the problem [ edit ] In general terms, while the underlying physical laws that govern the motion of each individual particle may (or may not) be simple, the study of the collection of particles can be extremely complex. In such a quantum system, the repeated interactions between particles create quantum correlations, or entanglement. As a consequence, the wave function of the system is a complicated object holding a large amount of information , which usually makes exact or analytical calculations impractical or even impossible.

This becomes especially clear by a comparison to classical mechanics. Imagine a single particle that can be described with k {\displaystyle k} numbers (take for example a free particle described by its position and velocity vector, resulting in k = 6 {\displaystyle k=6} ). In classical mechanics, n {\displaystyle n} such particles can simply be described by k ⋅ ⋅ n {\displaystyle k\cdot n} numbers. The dimension of the classical many-body system scales linearly with the number of particles n {\displaystyle n} .

In quantum mechanics, however, the many-body-system is in general in a superposition of combinations of single particle states - all the k n {\displaystyle k^{n}} different combinations have to be accounted for. The dimension of the quantum many body system therefore scales exponentially with n {\displaystyle n} , much faster than in classical mechanics.

Because the required numerical expense grows so quickly, simulating the dynamics of more than three quantum-mechanical particles is already infeasible for many physical systems.

[ 1 ] Thus, many-body theoretical physics most often relies on a set of approximations specific to the problem at hand, and ranks among the most computationally intensive fields of science.

In many cases, emergent phenomena may arise which bear little resemblance to the underlying elementary laws.

Many-body problems play a central role in condensed matter physics .

Examples [ edit ] Condensed matter physics ( solid-state physics , nanoscience , superconductivity ) Bose–Einstein condensation and Superfluids Quantum chemistry ( computational chemistry , molecular physics ) Atomic physics Molecular physics Nuclear physics ( Nuclear structure , nuclear reactions , nuclear matter ) Quantum chromodynamics ( Lattice QCD , hadron spectroscopy, QCD matter , quark–gluon plasma ) Approaches [ edit ] Mean-field theory and extensions (e.g.

Hartree–Fock , Random phase approximation ) Dynamical mean field theory Many-body perturbation theory and Green's function -based methods Configuration interaction Coupled cluster Various Monte-Carlo approaches Density functional theory Lattice gauge theory Matrix product state Neural network quantum states Numerical renormalization group Further reading [ edit ] Jenkins, Stephen.

"The Many Body Problem and Density Functional Theory" .

Thouless, D. J.

(1972).

The quantum mechanics of many-body systems . New York: Academic Press.

ISBN 0-12-691560-1 .

Fetter, A. L.

; Walecka, J. D.

(2003).

Quantum Theory of Many-Particle Systems . New York: Dover.

ISBN 0-486-42827-3 .

Nozières, P.

(1997).

Theory of Interacting Fermi Systems . Addison-Wesley.

ISBN 0-201-32824-0 .

Mattuck, R. D.

(1976).

A guide to Feynman diagrams in the many-body problem . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-040954-4 .

References [ edit ] ^ Hochstuhl, David; Bonitz, Michael; Hinz, Christopher (2014). "Time-dependent multiconfiguration methods for the numerical simulation of photoionization processes of many-electron atoms".

The European Physical Journal Special Topics .

223 (2): 177– 336.

Bibcode : 2014EPJST.223..177H .

doi : 10.1140/epjst/e2014-02092-3 .

S2CID 122869981 .

Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Many-body_problem&oldid=1304495891 " Categories : Quantum mechanics Computational physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from February 2025 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 10:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Many-body problem 10 languages Add topic

