Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Australia 2 Germany 3 Hong Kong 4 India 5 Ireland 6 Russia 7 United Kingdom 8 United States 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Statutory corporation 10 languages Čeština فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Suomi Українська Vèneto Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Public body ) Corporation with legal personhood directly created by the state "Public body" redirects here. For other uses, see Public body (disambiguation) .

See also: State-owned enterprise This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Statutory corporation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A statutory corporation is a corporation created by statute . Their precise nature varies by jurisdiction, but their powers are defined in, and controlled by, the creating legislation.

Bodies described in the English language as "statutory corporations" exist in the following countries in accordance with the associated descriptions (where provided).

Australia [ edit ] In Australia , statutory corporations are a type of statutory authority created by Acts of state or federal parliaments.

A statutory corporation is defined in the federal Department of Finance 's glossary as a "statutory body that is a body corporate, including an entity created under section 87 of the PGPA Act" (i.e. a statutory authority may also be a statutory corporation).

[ 1 ] An earlier definition describes a statutory corporation as "a statutory authority that is a body corporate", [ 2 ] and the New South Wales Government 's Land Registry Services defines a state-owned corporation as "a statutory authority that has corporate status".

[ 3 ] Current statutory corporations include Australia Post , Airservices Australia , the Australian Rail Track Corporation and the Australian Egg Corporation . The purpose of their separation from normal government operations is to ensure profitability, and in theory, independence of decision making from the state or national government (to ensure that decisions are made on a commercial basis with less or no political interference.) As statutory corporations, their regulatory and business conditions may be significantly different from private-sector companies.

[ citation needed ] A significant number of the statutory corporations are private commercial operations, a number of which have been privatised, in part or in whole, since the 1980s: these have included the national airline Qantas , Telstra (also previously known as Telecom Australia) and the Commonwealth Bank .

[ citation needed ] Germany [ edit ] A statutory corporation in Germany is called a Körperschaft des öffentlichen Rechts (KdöR). An example of a statutory corporation is a Kassenärztliche Vereinigung , a body involved in the provision of out-patient medical services in a German state. Other examples include public broadcasters, Jewish communities and Christian churches established in Germany and some public transport providers (depending on jurisdiction).

Hong Kong [ edit ] In Hong Kong, some corporations are incorporated by legislation. An example is the Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation , which owns the railway network and was previously also an operator. The MTR Corporation Limited was also such a company, then named as Mass Transit Railway Corporation. Other examples include the Ocean Park Corporation , and the former Industrial Estates Corporation and Land Development Corporation .

India [ edit ] Statutory corporations are government establishments brought into existence by a Special Act of the Parliament.  The Act defines its powers and functions, rules and regulations governing its employees and its relationship with government departments.

This is a body corporate created by the legislature with defined powers and functions and is financially independent with a clear control over a specified area or a particular type of commercial activity.  It is a corporate person and has the capacity of acting in its own name. Statutory corporations therefore have the power of the government and the considerable amount of operating flexibility of private enterprises.
A few are: Airports Authority of India Damodar Valley Corporation National Highways Authority of India Central Warehousing Corporation (cewacor.nic.in/) Inland Waterways Authority of India (www.iwai.gov.in/) Food Corporation of India (fciweb.nic.in/) Features: Generally financed by the central or state government.

May borrow funds from the public and government organisation through statutory sources.

They have separate legal entity.

They have to frame their own policies and procedures within the scope of state legislature.

Provide better services to public and make adequate profit.

They are autonomous in their functioning, thus, they enjoy operational flexibility.

They can recruit and appoint their employees with their service condition, since they are a corporate body.

They have to follow the special statute strictly.

There is less government interference in matters of the corporation.

The members of the corporation have limited liability.

a public corporation is public body incorporated under a separate statue Which define its objectives, power and duties. It is created by a special law 
Of parliament. It may be established by the central government are also known as National corporations.

Ireland [ edit ] Main article: State-sponsored bodies of the Republic of Ireland In Ireland , a statutory corporation is a body corporate, which is created under a particular Act of the Oireachtas . Some statutory corporations are expected to operate as if they were a commercial company (with or without a subsidy from the Exchequer , depending on whether or not it would make a profit without one). Such bodies do not have shareholders , but are typically boards appointed by a sponsor minister. The provisions of the Companies' Acts do not typically directly apply to such bodies, although their founding legislation may specify similar requirements.

The statutory corporation format was usually the form most state-sponsored bodies of Ireland took until recent years; however, the usual policy today is that a private limited company by shares or public limited company incorporated under the Companies' Acts is set up instead, with the relevant minister holding 100% of the issued share capital. Nonetheless, as of 2007 [update] several prominent statutory corporations continue to exist, such as Raidió Teilifís Éireann (RTÉ), the Electricity Supply Board (ESB), Bord Gáis Éireann , An Bord Pleanála , the Food Safety Authority of Ireland .

Russia [ edit ] See State corporation (Russia) .

United Kingdom [ edit ] In the United Kingdom , a statutory corporation is a corporate body controlled by, and normally created by, statute .  It typically has no shareholders and its powers are defined by the act of Parliament which creates it, and may be modified by later legislation. Such bodies have often been created to provide public services, examples including British Railways , the Ffestiniog Railway , the Talyllyn Railway , the National Coal Board , the former Post Office Corporation and Transport for London . Other examples include the county councils , the National Assembly for Wales , [ 4 ] Channel Four Television Corporation , and the Olympic Delivery Authority .

[ 5 ] Statutory corporations are widely used in education: sixth form college corporations and further education corporations, the legal form of sixth form colleges and further education colleges , as well as higher education corporations, the legal form of most post-1992 universities , are all statutory corporations created under the Education Reform Act 1988 and the Further and Higher Education Act 1992 ; a small number of older universities are also statutory corporations created under specific acts of Parliament.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The phrase is not used to describe a company which operates as a conventional shareholder-owned company registered under the Companies Acts.

See also A non-departmental public body is a classification to certain types of public bodies.

Quango (quasi-autonomous-non-governmental organisation) is a commonly used acronym to refer to a non-departmental public body.

The Scottish public bodies are all quangos and other organisations in Scotland.

A public body can have a variety of forms and is not inevitably a statutory corporation, nor is a statutory corporation necessarily a public body.

[ 8 ] United States [ edit ] Further information: State-owned enterprises of the United States At the state level, municipal corporations and counties are often created by legislative acts. Some organizations such as a transit district or special purpose corporations such as a university , are also created by statute.  In some states, a city or county can be created by petition of a certain number or percentage of voters or landholders of the affected area, which then causes a municipal corporation to be chartered as a result of compliance with the appropriate law.  Corporations to be established for most other purposes are usually just incorporated as any other non-profit corporation , by filing the paperwork with the appropriate agency as part of the formation of the entity.

At the Federal level, a small number of corporations are created by Congress . Prior to the District of Columbia being granted the ability to issue corporate charters in the late 19th century, corporations operating in the District required a congressional charter . With limited exceptions, most corporations created by Congress are not federally chartered, but are simply created as District of Columbia corporations as a result of the enabling law.

[ citation needed ] There are a number of federally chartered corporations that still exist. Some relatively famous ones include the Boy Scouts of America , each of the Federal Reserve Banks , and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation .  The basic advantage for being federally chartered is that no other corporation anywhere in the United States is allowed to have the same name.

See also [ edit ] Government agency Statutory authority Crown corporation Government-owned corporation Regulatory agency Non-departmental public body Établissement public à caractère industriel et commercial Crown corporations of Canada Tokushu hōjin (specially designated public corporation in Japan) Crown entity , similar bodies in New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ "Resource Management glossary - Statutory Corporation" .

Australian Government. Dept of Finance . 9 November 2017. Archived from the original on 2019-08-03 . Retrieved 3 August 2019 .

^ Australian Government. Dept of Finance (1 October 2009).

List of Australian Government Bodies and Governance Relationships (PDF) . Financial Management Reference no.1 (3rd ed.). p. 637.

ISBN 9780980543520 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-08-03.

^ "Statutory bodies" .

NSW Land Registry Services . Retrieved 3 August 2019 .

^ Government of Wales Act 1998 , Section 1 ^ London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Act 2006 ^ "FE and sixth-form college corporations: governance guide" .

Department for Education . 29 April 2024. The corporation . Retrieved 3 July 2024 .

^ Amerjit Basi (1 February 2013).

"Note to BIS Select Committee – higher education institutions' legal forms" (PDF) .

Department for Business, Innovation and Skills .

^ "Classification Of Public Bodies: Guidance For Departments" (PDF) .

Public Bodies Handbook . Vol. 1. Cabinet Office. p. 32 . Retrieved 17 July 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Garnaut, Ben.

Understanding statutory authorities and corporations in SA Bulletin (Law Society of South Australia), Vol. 40, No. 4, May 2018: 10, 12.

ISSN 1038-6777 .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐c9kzp
Cached time: 20250814220553
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.330 seconds
Real time usage: 0.427 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1659/1000000
Revision size: 13545/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 54855/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11545/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 32733/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.223/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16727098/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  391.360      1 -total
 28.98%  113.428      1 Template:Reflist
 22.30%   87.262      4 Template:Cite_web
 19.71%   77.150      1 Template:Lang
 16.54%   64.741      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 15.07%   58.993      1 Template:Short_description
 10.91%   42.681      2 Template:Ambox
  8.20%   32.089      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.11%   31.732      1 Template:Original_research
  6.49%   25.412      3 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7041747:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220553 and revision id 1303978123. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Statutory_corporation&oldid=1303978123 " Categories : Government bodies Corporate law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from August 2018 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from August 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing Irish-language text Articles with unsourced statements from June 2007 This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 05:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Statutory corporation 10 languages Add topic

