Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology and philosophical context 2 Viewpoints and historical development Toggle Viewpoints and historical development subsection 2.1 Religion 2.1.1 Christianity 2.2 Philosophy 3 Sexual rights as human rights Toggle Sexual rights as human rights subsection 3.1 Present and historical perspectives 3.2 Feminist views 3.3 Age of consent 4 Marriage Toggle Marriage subsection 4.1 Premarital sex 4.2 Extramarital sex 4.3 Non-monogamy 5 Individuals and societies Toggle Individuals and societies subsection 5.1 Public health 5.2 Public decency 6 Sex work 7 Homosexuality 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Sexual ethics 21 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of ethical conduct in sexual behavior "Sexual morality" redirects here. For the book, see Sexual Morality (book) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sexual ethics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( February 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sexual ethics (also known as sex ethics or sexual morality ) is a branch of philosophy that considers the ethics or morality of human sexual behavior .

[ 1 ] Sexual ethics seeks to understand, evaluate, and critique interpersonal relationships and sexual activities from social, cultural, and philosophical perspectives. Some people consider aspects of human sexuality such as gender identification and sexual orientation , as well as consent , sexual relations and procreation , as giving rise to issues of sexual ethics.

Historically, the prevailing notions of what is regarded as sexually ethical have been linked to religious teachings and philosophy.

[ 2 ] More recently, the sexual revolution challenged traditional ethical codes, and the feminist movement has emphasized personal choice and consent in sexual activities, especially for women.

Terminology and philosophical context [ edit ] The terms ethics and morality are often used interchangeably, but sometimes ethics is reserved for interpersonal interactions and morality is used to cover both interpersonal and inherent questions.

[ 3 ] Different approaches to applied ethics hold different views on inherent morality, for example: Moral nihilism is the meta-ethical view that nothing is inherently right or wrong, and that all value judgments are either human constructs or meaningless.

Moral relativism is the meta-ethical view that moral judgments are subjective. In some cases this is merely descriptive, in other cases this approach is normative – the idea that morality should be judged in the context of each culture's convictions and practices.

Moral universalism is the meta-ethical view that moral judgments are objectively true or false, that everyone should behave according to the same set of normative ethics .

[ 4 ] Many practical questions arise regarding human sexuality , such as whether sexual norms should be enforced by law, given social approval, or changed.

Viewpoints and historical development [ edit ] Religion [ edit ] See also: Religion and sexuality The Woman Taken in Adultery by Rembrandt depicts Jesus and the woman taken in adultery . Religion affects views on issues in sexual ethics, including adultery .

Morality and religion have historically been closely intertwined.

[ 5 ] Religious morality has usually looked down upon sex, with "...Christian philosophers condemn[ing] it".

[ 1 ] Christianity [ edit ] Christian denominations generally hold that sexual morality is defined by natural law, the Bible and tradition.

[ 6 ] The unity of a couple in marriage and procreation are key factors in Christian sexual ethics, particularly in the teachings of the Catholic Church.

[ 7 ] St. Thomas Aquinas and St. Augustine were some of the key figures in honing Christian ethics. Augustine underlined fidelity, offspring, and sacrament as the goods of sexual morality.

[ 6 ] Thomas Aquinas developed Augustine's thought to suggest that these ought to be understood as the three ends (telos) of marriage, and ranked them in order of importance, with procreation as the primary end.

Philosophy [ edit ] Not until contemporary times has sex been thought of as something generally good in the history of western philosophy: "Plato denigrated it, arguing that it should lead to something higher or better (Phaedrus, Symposium), Aristotle barely mentioned it, and Christian philosophers condemned it." [ 8 ] A major topic in the philosophy of sex and related to the question of the moral status of sex is objectification, where sexual objectification is treating a person only as a sex object. The concept originates in Kant's moral philosophy, and many modern thinkers have used it to criticize and analyze a wide range of ethical issues related to sex, such as pornography.

Kant views sex as only morally permissible in the context of a heterosexual, lifelong, and monogamous marriage, whereas any sexual act that is performed outside this context is considered morally wrong.

[ 9 ] This is due to Kant's interpretation of the Categorical Imperative with regard to sexual desire . He considers sex the only inclination that cannot satisfy the Categorical Imperative; in fact, sexual desire by its nature is objectifying and lends itself to the thing-like treatment of other persons.

The idea seems to be that sexual desire and pleasure cause very acute forms of sensation in a person's own body; that these sensations drive out, for a time, all other thoughts, including the thoughts of respect for humanity that are characteristic of the moral attitude to persons. ... In that condition of mind, one cannot manage to see the other person as anything but a tool of one's own interests, a set of bodily parts that are useful tools for one's pleasure, and the powerful urge to secure one's own sexual satisfaction will ensure that instrumentalization (and therefore denial of autonomy and of subjectivity) continues until the sexual act has reached its conclusion.

[ 10 ] : 224 The solution to the overall problem of objectification and sex, on Kant's view, is marriage: Only marriage can make objectification tolerable. Kant argues that in a marriage, which is "a relationship that is structured institutionally in ways that promote and, at least legally if not morally, guarantee mutual respect and regard", [ 10 ] : 225 objectification may be rendered harmless. Furthermore, not all sexual activity is necessarily objectifying here: sexual activity that does not involve sexual desire might treat another person as a mere thing and might thus not be objectifying. However, Kant does not distinguish between male and female sexuality, and his analysis does not consider social hierarchies or asymmetric formations of erotic desire in or outside of marriage.

[ 10 ] : 224 Kant's argument is seen as implausible by most modern thinkers.

[ 8 ] Sexual rights as human rights [ edit ] Sex and the law Social issues Abortion Access to abortion Age of consent Antisexualism Bodily integrity Circumcision Consent Deviant sexual intercourse Ethics Homophobia Capital punishment Criminalization LGBTQ rights Conversion therapy Decriminalization Civil union Same-sex marriage Adoption Intersex Transgender Marriageable age Miscegenation Norms Objectification Pedophile advocacy Pornography Laws Public morality Prostitution Reproductive rights Red-light district Reproductive rights Right to sexuality Sex industry Workers' rights Decriminalization World Charter Survival sex Specific offences ( varies by jurisdiction ) Adultery Laws Anti-miscegenation U.S. laws Bestiality Child pornography Laws Child prostitution Criminal transmission of HIV Cybersex trafficking Female genital mutilation Forced circumcision Forcible touching Fornication Incest Obscenity U.S. law Pimping Prostitution forced procuring Public indecency Rape statutory marital Revenge porn Seduction Sex trafficking Sexting Sexual abuse child Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual grooming Slavery Sodomy U.S. laws Female sodomy UK Section 63 (2008) Violence Trafficking Voyeurism Sex offender registration Sex offender registry Sex offender registries in the United States Portals Human sexuality portal Law portal v t e See also: Right to sexuality Present and historical perspectives [ edit ] Further information: Adultery , Fornication , Sodomy law , Marital rape , and Laws regarding rape From a human rights and international law perspective, consent has become a key issue in sexual ethics. Nevertheless, historically, this has not necessarily been the case. Throughout history, a whole range of consensual sexual acts, such as adultery , fornication , interracial or interfaith sex, 'sodomy' (see sodomy laws ) have been prohibited; while at the same time various forced sexual encounters such as rape of a slave, prostitute, war enemy, and most notably of a spouse, were not illegal. The criminalization of marital rape is recent, having occurred during the past few decades, and the act is still legal in many places around the world – this is due to some not essentially viewing the act as rape. In the UK, marital rape was made illegal as recently as 1992.

[ 11 ] Outside the West, in many countries, consent is still not central and some consensual sexual acts are forbidden. For instance, adultery and homosexual acts remain illegal in many countries.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Many modern systems of ethics hold that sexual activity is morally permissible only if all participants consent. Sexual ethics also considers whether a person is capable of giving consent and what sort of acts they can properly consent to. In western countries, the legal concept of " informed consent " often sets the public standards on this issue.

[ 14 ] Children, the mentally handicapped, the mentally ill, animals, prisoners, and people under the influence of drugs like alcohol might be considered in certain situations as lacking an ability to give informed consent. In the United States, Maouloud Baby v. State is a state court case ruling that a person can withdraw sexual consent and that continuing sexual activity in the absence of consent may constitute rape. Also, if infected with a sexually transmitted infection, it is important that one notifies the partner before sexual contact.

[ 15 ] Sexual acts which are illegal, and often considered unethical, because of the absence of consent include rape and molestation . Enthusiastic consent, as expressed in the slogan "Yes means yes", rather than marriage, is typically the focus of liberal sexual ethics.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Under that view passivity, not saying "No", is not consent.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] An individual can give consent for one act of sexual activity, however, it does not condone proceeding into other acts of sexual activity without reestablishing consent.

The concept of consent being the primary arbiter of sexual ethics and morality has drawn criticism from both feminist and religious philosophies. Religious criticisms argue that relying on consent alone to determine morality ignores other intrinsic moral factors, while feminist criticisms argue that consent is too broad and does not always account for disproportionate power dynamics.

[ 7 ] [ 21 ] Feminist views [ edit ] Main article: Feminist views on sexuality The feminist position is that women's freedom of choice regarding sexuality takes precedence over family, community, state, and church. Based on historical and cultural context, feminist views on sexuality has widely varied. Sexual representation in the media, the sex industry, and related topics pertaining to sexual consent are all questions which feminist theory attempts to address. The debate resulting from the divergence of feminist attitudes culminated in the late 1970s and the 1980s. The resulting discursive dualism was one which contrasted those feminists who believed that patriarchal structure made consent impossible under certain conditions, whereas sex-positive feminists attempted to redefine and regain control of what it means to be a woman. Questions of sexual ethics remain relevant to feminist theory.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Early feminists were accused of being 'wanton' as a consequence of stating that just as for men, women did not necessarily have to have sex with the intention of reproducing.

[ 27 ] At the beginning of the 20th century, feminist authors were already theorising about a relationship between a man and a woman as equals (although this has a heterosexual bias) and the idea that relationships should be sincere, that the mark of virtue in a relationship was its sincerity rather than its permanence. Setting a standard for reciprocity in relationships fundamentally changed notions of sexuality from one of duty to one of intimacy.

[ 27 ] Age of consent [ edit ] Main article: Age of Consent Age of consent is also a key issue in sexual ethics. It is a controversial question of whether or not minors should be allowed to have sex for recreation or engage in sexual activities such as sexting . The debate includes whether or not minors can meaningfully consent to have sex with each other, and whether they can meaningfully consent to have sex with adults. In many places in the world, people are not legally allowed to have sex until they reach a set age.

[ 28 ] The age of consent averages around the age of 16.

[ 29 ] Some areas have 'Romeo and Juliet' laws, which place a frame around teenage relationships within a certain age bracket, but do not permit sexual contact between those above or below a certain age.

Marriage [ edit ] See also: Marriage In all cultures, consensual sexual intercourse is acceptable within marriage. In some cultures sexual intercourse outside marriage is controversial, if not totally unacceptable, or even illegal. In some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, [ 30 ] Afghanistan, [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Iran, [ 32 ] Kuwait, [ 33 ] Maldives, [ 34 ] Morocco, [ 35 ] Oman, [ 36 ] Mauritania, [ 37 ] United Arab Emirates, [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Sudan, [ 40 ] Yemen, [ 41 ] any form of sexual activity outside marriage is illegal.

As the philosopher Michel Foucault has noted, such societies often create spaces or heterotopias outside themselves where sex outside marriage can be practiced. According to his theory, this was the reason for the often unusual sexual ethics displayed by persons living in brothels, asylums, on board ships, or in prisons. Sexual expression was freed of social controls in such places whereas, within society, sexuality has been controlled through the institution of marriage which socially sanctions the sex act. Many different types of marriage exist, but in most cultures that practice marriage, extramarital sex without the approval of the partner is often considered to be unethical. There are a number of complex issues that fall under the category of marriage.

When one member of a marital union has sexual intercourse with another person without the consent of their spouse, it may be considered to be infidelity . In some cultures, this act may be considered ethical if the spouse consents, or acceptable as long as the partner is not married while other cultures might view any sexual intercourse outside marriage as unethical, with or without consent.

Furthermore, the institution of marriage brings up the issue of premarital sex wherein people who may choose to at some point in their lives marry, engage in sexual activity with partners who they may or may not marry. Various cultures have different attitudes about the ethics of such behavior, some condemning it while others view it to be normal and acceptable.

Premarital sex [ edit ] Main articles: Premarital sex and Fornication There are persons, groups and cultures that consider premarital sex to be immoral, or even sinful, and refer to such behaviour as fornication .

[ 42 ] In recent decades, premarital sex has increasingly been regarded as less socially or morally objectionable, especially within Western cultures.

[ 43 ] Extramarital sex [ edit ] Main articles: Extramarital sex and Adultery Similarly, but perhaps more than sex by unmarried persons, extramarital sex may be regarded as immoral or sinful by some, and referred to as adultery , infidelity or "cheating", while some cultures, groups or individuals regard extramarital sex as acceptable.

Non-monogamy [ edit ] Main article: Monogamy Monogamy , especially in Christian societies, is widely regarded as a norm, and polygamy is deprecated. Even within polygamous societies, polyandry is regarded as unacceptable. Today, the practice, especially in Western cultures, of polyamory or open marriage raises ethical or moral issues.

Individuals and societies [ edit ] See also: Abuse of power , Sexual harassment , Incest , and Pedophilia Most societies disapprove of a person in a position of power to engage in sexual activity with a subordinate. This is often considered unethical simply as a breach of trust . When the person takes advantage of a position of power in the workplace, this may constitute sexual harassment , because subordinates may be unable to give proper consent to a sexual advance because of a fear of repercussions.

Child-parent incest is also seen as an abuse of a position of trust and power, in addition to the inability of a child to give consent . Incest between adults may not involve this lack of consent, and is, therefore, less clear-cut for most observers. Many professional organizations have rules forbidding sexual relations between members and their clients. Examples in many countries include psychiatrists, psychologists, therapists, doctors, and lawyers. In addition, laws exist against this kind of abuse of power by priests, preachers, teachers, religious counselors, and coaches.

[ citation needed ] Public health [ edit ] A billboard in Chad encouraging fidelity , abstinence , and condom use to help prevent AIDS In countries where public health is considered a public concern, there is also the issue of how sex impacts the health of individuals. In such circumstances, where there are health impacts resulting from certain sexual activities, there is the question of whether individuals have an ethical responsibility to the public at large for their behavior. Such concerns might involve the regular periodic testing for sexually transmitted infections , disclosure of infection with sexually transmitted infections, responsibility for taking safer sex precautions, ethics of sex without using contraception, leading to an increased level of unplanned pregnancies and unwanted children, and just what amount of personal care an individual needs to take in order to meet his or her requisite contribution to the general health of a nation's citizens.

Moving forward there is going to be more restrictions on conscription with the global population exponentially increasing like it is.

[ 44 ] But in terms of practicality, and by more modern Malthusianism , putting a limit on amount of babies one can have seems like one of the few going theories we have to limit it.

[ citation needed ] However, this brings in major ethical issues on what to do if families happen to go over the limit.

Public decency [ edit ] See also: Decency Legal and social dress codes are often related to sexuality. In the United States, there are many rules against nudity. An individual cannot be naked even on their own property if the public can see them. These laws are often considered a violation to the constitution regarding freedom of expression. Nevertheless, Hawaii, Texas, New York, Maine, and Ohio allow all women to go topless at all locations that let men be shirtless. In California it is not illegal to hike in the nude, however it is frowned upon. Also in state parks it is legal to sunbathe in the nude unless a private citizen complains then the individual is to be removed from the premise by force if the individual does not comply.

[ citation needed ] Breastfeeding in public is sometimes considered wrong and mothers are encouraged to either cover themselves in a blanket or go to the restroom to breastfeed their newborn. In many circumstances the appropriateness of public breastfeeding is determined by the mother's judgment. There are no actual laws that prohibit the action of breastfeeding in public except two places in Illinois and Missouri.

[ citation needed ] Sex work [ edit ] See also: Decriminalization of sex work and Sex workers' rights Various sexual acts are traded for money or other goods across the world. Ethical positions on sex work may depend on the type of sex act traded and the conditions in which it is traded, there are for example additional ethical concerns over the abrogation of autonomy in the situation of trafficked sex workers.

Sex work has been a particularity divisive issue within feminism . Some feminists may regard sex work as an example of societal oppression of the sex workers by the patriarchy . The ethical argument underlying this position is that despite the apparent consent of the sex worker, the choice to engage in sex work is often not an autonomous choice, because of economic, familial or societal pressures. Sex work may also be seen as an objectification of women. An opposing view held by other feminists such as Wendy McElroy is that sex work is a means of empowering women, the argument here being that in sex work women are able to extract psychological and financial power over men which is a justified correction of the power unbalance inherent in a patriarchal society. Some feminists regard to sex work as simply a form of labor which is neither morally good or bad, but subject to the same difficulties of other labor forms.

If sex work is accepted as unethical, there is then the dispute over which parties of the contract are responsible for the ethical or legal breach. Traditionally, in many societies, the legal and ethical burden of guilt has been placed largely on the sex worker rather than consumers. In recent decades, some countries such as Sweden, Norway and Iceland have rewritten their laws to outlaw the buying of sexual services but not its sale (although they still retain laws and use enforcement tactics which sex workers say are deleterious to their safety, such as pressuring to have sex workers evicted from their residences [ 45 ] ).

Homosexuality [ edit ] In the ancient Levant, persons who committed homosexual acts were stoned to death at the same period in history that young Alcibiades attempted to seduce Socrates to glean wisdom from him. As presented by Plato in his Symposium, Socrates did not "dally" with young Alcibiades, and instead treated him as his father or brother would when they spent the night sharing a blanket. In Xenophon's Symposium Socrates strongly speaks against men kissing each other, saying that doing so will make them slavish, i.e., risk something that seems akin to an addiction to homosexual acts.

[ citation needed ] Most modern secular ethicists since the heyday of Utilitarianism, e.g.

T.M. Scanlon and Bernard Williams , have constructed systems of ethics whereby homosexuality is a matter of individual choice and where ethical questions have been answered by an appeal to non-interference in activities involving consenting adults. However, Scanlon's system, notably, goes in a slightly different direction from this and requires that no person who meets certain criteria could rationally reject a principle that either sanctions or condemns a certain act. Under Scanlon's system, it is difficult to see how one would construct a principle condemning homosexuality outright, although certain acts, such as homosexual rape, would still be fairly straightforward cases of unethical behavior.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Human sexuality portal Anti-pornography movement Antisexualism Bugchasing and giftgiving Covert incest Free love Hookup culture Kantian sexual ethics Religion and sexuality Catholicism and sexuality Islamic sexual jurisprudence Right to sexuality Sex-positive movement Sexual and reproductive health and rights Sexual harassment Sexual immorality Sexual objectification Sexual revolution Swinging lifestyle References [ edit ] ^ a b Halwani, Raja (2023), "Sex and Sexuality" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2023 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-04-15 ^ "Sexual Ethics | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com .

^ See usage note on wikt:ethics .

^ Gowans, Chris (2004-02-19).

"Moral Relativism" . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Hare, John (2019), "Religion and Morality" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-04-15 ^ a b Cahill, Lisa (1987). "Current Teaching on Sexual Ethics".

Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review .

76 (301): 20– 28.

ISSN 0039-3495 .

JSTOR 30090816 .

^ a b BARNHILL, ANNE (2013). "Bringing the Body Back to Sexual Ethics".

Hypatia .

28 (1): 1– 17.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.2011.01243.x .

ISSN 0887-5367 .

JSTOR 23352272 .

S2CID 144579339 .

^ a b Halwani, Raja, "Sex and Sexuality", In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2020 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL= https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2020/entries/sex-sexuality .

^ Dimmock, Mark (2017).

Ethics for A-level . Andrew Fisher, Open Book Publishers. Cambridge.

ISBN 978-1-78374-390-2 .

OCLC 1004154714 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c Nussbaum, Martha (1999).

Sex and Social Justice . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ "Marital Rape Law in the UK: what is it?" .

Lawtons Solicitors (UK) . Retrieved 2019-04-12 .

^ "Where is it illegal to be gay?" .

BBC News . 10 February 2014.

^ "Maps - Sexual orientation laws | ILGA" .

Ilga . 14 September 2017 . Retrieved 2019-04-12 .

^ Scott, Katie (27 January 2017).

"Sexual Violence, Consent, and Contradictions: A Call for Communication Scholars to Impact Sexual Violence Prevention" . Retrieved 18 September 2020 .

^ Stein, Michael D.; Freedberg, Kenneth A.; Sullivan, Lisa M.; Savetsky, Jacqueline; Levenson, Suzette M.; Hingson, Ralph; Samet, Jeffrey H. (1998-02-09).

"Sexual Ethics" .

Archives of Internal Medicine .

158 (3): 253– 7.

doi : 10.1001/archinte.158.3.253 .

ISSN 0003-9926 .

PMID 9472205 .

^ Friedman, Jaclyn; Jessica Valenti (2008).

Yes Means Yes! Visions of Female Sexual Power and a World Without Rape . Seal Press.

ISBN 978-1-58005-257-3 .

^ Corinna, Heather (23 May 2007).

"What Is Feminist Sex Education?" .

Scarleteen . Retrieved October 3, 2010 .

^ Corinna, Heather (2010-05-11).

"How Can Sex Ed Prevent Rape?" .

Scarleteen . Retrieved October 3, 2010 .

^ Stephen J. Schulhofer (May 5, 2000).

Unwanted Sex: The Culture of Intimidation and the Failure of Law (trade paperback) (New ed.). Harvard University Press. pp. 1, 2.

ISBN 978-0674002036 .

^ A number of American Law Institute members (May 12, 2015).

"Sexual Assualt [sic] at the American Law Institute--Controversy Over the Criminalization of Sexual Contact in the Proposed Revision of the Model Penal Code" (quoted memorandum of ALI members) .

lcbackerblog.blogspot.com . Larry Catá Backer . Retrieved June 28, 2015 .

Section 213.0(5) defines "sexual contact" expansively, to include any touching of any body part of another person, whether done by the actor or by the person touched. Any kind of contact may qualify; there are no limits on either the body part touched or the manner in which it is touched….

^ McGuinness, Kate (1993). Sharp, Gene (ed.). "Gene Sharp's Theory of Power: A Feminist Critique of Consent".

Journal of Peace Research .

30 (1): 101– 115.

doi : 10.1177/0022343393030001011 .

ISSN 0022-3433 .

JSTOR 424728 .

S2CID 143552716 .

^ Duggan, Lisa; Hunter, Nan D. (1995).

Sex wars: sexual dissent and political culture . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-91036-1 .

^ Hansen, Karen Tranberg; Philipson, Ilene J. (1990).

Women, class, and the feminist imagination: a socialist-feminist reader . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

ISBN 978-0-87722-630-7 .

^ Gerhard, Jane F. (2001).

Desiring revolution: second-wave feminism and the rewriting of American sexual thought, 1920 to 1982 . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-11204-8 .

^ Leidholdt, Dorchen ; Raymond, Janice G (1990).

The Sexual liberals and the attack on feminism . New York: Pergamon Press.

ISBN 978-0-08-037457-4 .

^ Vance, Carole S. (1989).

Pleasure and Danger: Exploring Female Sexuality . Thorsons Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-04-440593-1 .

^ a b Parsons, Elsie Clews (July 1916).

"Feminism and Sex Ethics" .

The International Journal of Ethics .

26 (4): 462– 465.

doi : 10.1086/intejethi.26.4.2376467 .

ISSN 1526-422X .

^ "Age of Consent Laws By Country" .

www.ageofconsent.net . Retrieved 2016-09-25 .

^ "Are you old enough?" .

UNICEF.org . Retrieved 13 October 2016 .

^ "Human Rights Voices – , August 21, 2008" .

Eyeontheun.org . Archived from the original on January 21, 2013.

^ "Home" . AIDSPortal. Archived from the original on 2008-10-26.

^ a b "Iran" . Travel.state.gov. Archived from the original on 2013-08-01.

^ "United Nations Human Rights Website – Treaty Bodies Database" . Unhchr.ch.

^ "Culture of Maldives – history, people, clothing, women, beliefs, food, customs, family, social" .

Everyculture.com .

^ Fakim, Nora (9 August 2012).

"Morocco: Should pre-marital sex be legal?" .

BBC News .

^ "Legislation of Interpol member states on sexual offences against children – Oman" (PDF) . Interpol. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 May 2016.

^ "2010 Human Rights Report: Mauritania" . State.gov. 8 April 2011.

^ "Education in Dubai" .

Dubaifaqs.com .

^ Judd, Terri (10 July 2008).

"Briton faces jail for sex on Dubai beach" .

The Independent .

^ "Sudan must rewrite rape laws to protect victims" .

Reuters . 28 June 2007. Archived from the original on December 9, 2012.

^ "Women's Rights in the Middle East and North Africa" . UNHCR.

^ Sex and Society . New York: Marshall Cavendish Reference. 2010.

ISBN 978-0761479079 .

^ "Global Views on Morality: Premarital Sex" . 2014-04-15.

^ Stokes, Walter R. (1962).

"Our Changing Sex Ethics" .

Marriage and Family Living .

24 (3): 269– 272.

doi : 10.2307/349142 .

ISSN 0885-7059 .

JSTOR 349142 .

^ "The Human Cost of 'Crushing' the Market: Criminalization of Sex Work in Norway: Executive Summary" (PDF) .

Amnesty International . 2016.

Further reading [ edit ] Bertrand Russell. Our Sexual Ethics, 1936 Janet Smith. Natural Law and Sexual Ethics John Jefferson Davis: Evangelical Ethics. Issues Facing the Church Today . Presbyterian and Reformed Pub. Co., Phillipsburg, N.J., 1985.

N.B .: Over half of this study is devoted to issues of human sexuality, reproduction, and biology.

ISBN 0-87552-222-X Philosophy of sexuality. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Stephen J. Schulhofer, Unwanted Sex: The Culture of Intimidation and the Failure of Law , Harvard University Press; New edition (May 5, 2000), trade paperback, 336 pages ISBN 0674002032 ISBN 978-0674002036 Leuba, Clarence James (1948).

Ethics In Sex Conduct: A Manual on Youth, Sex, and Marriage . New York: Association Press.

The Ethical Slut External links [ edit ] Media related to Sexual ethics at Wikimedia Commons v t e Outline of human sexuality Physiology and biology Clitoral erection Erogenous zones Insemination Intersex Libido Nocturnal emission Orgasm Female and male ejaculation Pelvic thrust Penile erection Pre-ejaculate Pregnancy Sexual arousal Sexual response cycle Sexual stimulation Vaginal lubrication Health and education Birth control Condom Male contraceptive Masters and Johnson Obesity and sexuality Reproductive medicine Andrology Gynaecology Urology Safe sex Sex education Sex therapy ( PLISSIT model ) Sexology Sexual dysfunction Erectile dysfunction Hypersexuality Hyposexuality Sexual medicine Sexual surrogate Sexually transmitted infection Identity and diversity Gender binary Gender identity Men who have sex with men Sexual identity Sexual orientation Women who have sex with women Law Age of consent Criminal transmission of HIV Child sexual abuse Incest Indecent exposure Obscenity Sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Rape Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual misconduct Sexual slavery Sexual violence Revenge pornography History Blue Movie Counterculture of the 1960s Feminist sex wars Golden Age of Porn History of erotic depictions Sexual revolution Relationships and society Anarchism and love/sex Coital imperative Extramarital sex Family planning Flirting Free love Marriage Modesty Orgasm imperative Orgasm gap Polyamory Premarital sex Promiscuity Romance Sex-positive movement Sexual abstinence Sexual addiction Sexual attraction Sexual capital Sexual ethics Sexual objectification Sexual repression Sexual slang Split attraction model By country Ancient Rome China India Japan Philippines South Korea United States Sexual activities Conventional sex Anal sex Bareback BDSM Child sex Creampie Edging Erotic sexual denial Facial Fetishism Fisting Foot fetishism Footjob Forced orgasm Frot Gang bang Group sex Mammary intercourse Manual sex Anal fingering Fingering Handjob Masturbation Mechanics of sex Nipple stimulation Non-penetrative sex Oral sex 69 Anilingus Cunnilingus Fellatio Irrumatio Paraphilia Pompoir Quickie Sexercise Sex in space Sex positions Sexual fantasy Sexual fetishism Sexual intercourse Foreplay Sexual penetration Sumata Swinging Tribadism Urethral intercourse Urolagnia Virtual sex Cybersex Erotic talk Wet T-shirt contest Sex industry Adult video games Erotica Pornography Film actor Prostitution Sacred Survival sex Red-light district Sex museum Sex shop Sex tourism Child Female Sex worker Sex toy Doll Strip club Webcam model Religion and sexuality Buddhism and Hinduism Tantric sex Christianity and sexual orientation Christian demonology Clerical celibacy Buddhist monasticism Catholic Church Hindu monasticism Jain monasticism Daoism Islam Judaism LGBTQ people LGBTQ-affirming religions Mormonism Sacred prostitution Ancient Greece Thelema Sex magic Human sexuality portal v t e Sexual ethics Human sexuality Adolescent sexuality Rainbow party Adultery Education Fetishism Incest law Infidelity Miscegenation Obesity and sexuality Objectification Orientation Pornography gay law lesbian women's Pregnancy Abortion Prostitution law Reproductive rights Right to sexuality Sex-positive feminism Sex-positive movement Sex workers' rights Survival sex Child sexuality Child marriage Child pornography law Child prostitution Child sex tourism Sexual abuse Child-on-child sexual abuse Child sexual abuse law Cybersex trafficking Harassment Rape law Sex trafficking Sexual slavery Age of consent ( reform ) Africa Asia Europe North America United States Mexico Oceania South America Topical outline v t e Human sexuality and sexology Sexual relationship phenomena Aromanticism Asexuality Gray asexuality Demisexuality Fictosexuality Bisexuality Pansexuality Casual relationship Casual sex Celibacy Love shyness Celibacy syndrome Herbivore men Committed relationship Conventional sex Flirting Free love Foreplay Friends with benefits relationships Group sex Heterosexuality Homosexuality Hypersexuality LGBTQ Marriage One-night stand Polyamory Promiscuity Female Romantic love Romantic orientation Queer heterosexuality Sex life Sexual abstinence Sexual orientation Sexual partner Sexual repression Single person Split attraction model Swinging Sexual dynamics Hypergamy Physical attractiveness Sexual attraction Sexual capital Sexual ethics Sexual frustration Sociosexuality See also Abortion-rights movement Adolescent sexuality Age of consent Decriminalization of sex work Dogging (sexual slang) Human female sexuality Human male sexuality LGBTQ rights by country or territory Porn for women Public sex Reproductive rights Right to privacy Right to sexuality Sex Addicts Anonymous Sex and drugs Sex worker movements Sex workers' rights Sexecology Sex-positive feminism Sex-positive movement Sexual addiction Sexual and reproductive health and rights Sexual jealousy Sexual norm Sexual revolution Sexual surrogate Sexuality and disability Stanley v. Georgia Women's erotica v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hqql2
Cached time: 20250812015815
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.918 seconds
Real time usage: 1.125 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6494/1000000
Revision size: 35694/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 234398/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17020/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 220226/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.555/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9053580/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  919.202      1 -total
 34.40%  316.166      1 Template:Reflist
 11.54%  106.121      1 Template:Sex_and_the_Law
 11.24%  103.340      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.51%   87.371     19 Template:Cite_web
  8.52%   78.314      2 Template:Citation
  8.46%   77.784      1 Template:Multiple
  7.51%   68.989      4 Template:Navbox
  6.87%   63.180     11 Template:Cite_book
  6.48%   59.547      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3062837:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015815 and revision id 1301208968. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sexual_ethics&oldid=1301208968 " Categories : Sexual ethics Sexual misconduct Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2008 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2010 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 17:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sexual ethics 21 languages Add topic

