Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Differences from private property 2 In Marxism 3 Crown property 4 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 4.1 USSR 4.2 United States 4.3 Canada 4.4 Common land 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Public property 21 languages العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Shqip தமிழ் Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subset of state property for use of the public For other uses, see Public Property .

Public streets and parks like Tremont Street (left) and Boston Common are considered public properties.

Public property is property that is dedicated to public use. The term may be used either to describe the use to which the property is put, or to describe the character of its ownership (owned collectively by the population of a state ).

[ 1 ] State ownership , also called public ownership, government ownership or state property, are property interests that are vested in the state , rather than an individual or communities .

[ 2 ] Differences from private property [ edit ] American economist Armen A. Alchian explored what distinguishes public property from private property, concluding that a unique difference lies in the limitations put on its alienability .

[ 3 ] That is, a crucial feature of public property lies in the inability of their owners to sell or grant them to others. According to Alchian, private property is that which can be transferred at the discretion of its owners, whilst public property is that which cannot.

Consequently, because of the absence of exchange in much of what is public property and thereby the absence of market prices reflecting its value , it is difficult for a government to appraise its holdings. This can lead to problems with economic calculation .

Both rights with respect to public and private property are in part determined by governments. The owner of a private property can control it at own discretion, whilst the state reserves the right to charge taxes and nationalize it, or temporarily use it. The difference between public and private property lies in their alienability.

Most public property is government-provided and not charged for separately to users, but open to the public. However, it is incorrect to say that all public property can be used freely by the public. Many public goods are provided only to subsets of the population, such as care for the elderly and playgrounds for children. That is, the 'public' may vary and does not in fact determine its public or private nature.

In Marxism [ edit ] Karl Marx described private property as a fundamental social relation of bourgeois society, where it is used for appropriation of labor by capitalists. Marx considered that public property will replace the private property, as a natural historical change of a property relationship.

All property relations in the past have continually been subject to historical change consequent upon the change in historical conditions.

The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal property in favour of bourgeois property.

The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of property generally, but the abolition of bourgeois property. But modern bourgeois private property is the final and most complete expression of the system of producing and appropriating products, that is based on class antagonisms, on the exploitation of the many by the few.

In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in the single sentence: Abolition of private property.

– Marx & Engels: Library: 1848: The Communist Manifesto : Chapter 2 [ 4 ] Generally, in Marxism, private property is understood as property that is used by bourgeoisie to increase capital .

[ 5 ] Crown property [ edit ] In the modern representative democracy , "public property" is said to be owned by the people as a commons or held in trust by the government for common benefit. In many Commonwealth realms , such property is said to be owned by the Crown . Examples include Crown land , Crown copyright , and Crown Dependencies .

Examples [ edit ] USSR [ edit ] According to the 1977 Constitution of the Soviet Union : State property, i. e. the common property of the Soviet people, is the principal form of socialist property.

The land, its minerals, waters, and forests are the exclusive property of the state. The state owns the basic means of production in industry, construction, and agriculture; means of transport and communication; the banks; the property of state-run trade organisations and public utilities, and other state-run undertakings; most urban housing; and other property necessary for state purposes.

– Article 11 [ 6 ] But "public property" itself as a separate form was not foreseen, instead there was social ownership of the means of production .

United States [ edit ] In Alaska since the 1950s was working off the model of public property in the resource sector. There was almost one third of the state with huge reserves of oil. For the realization of the right onto the public property in 1976 was founded Alaska Permanent Fund , which included 25% of the annual fee of the incomes of private oil-producing companies.

That fund is the public property of the state population.What is expressed in payment of dividends to all citizens(except convicted criminals). The average value of the dividends is between $600 and $1500, for the 2020 it was $992.

[ 7 ] Canada [ edit ] In Canada, the Public Debt and Property are under the exclusive legislative authority of the parliament of Canada, [ 8 ] rather than the Queen or the local authority, according to the Constitution Acts, 1867 and 1982, article 91.

Common land [ edit ] Common land was in a public usage of a village community for cattle breeding, growing cereals, fishing. Forest lands were used for timber extraction.

See also [ edit ] Constitutional economics Municipalization Nationalization Public good (economics) Public sector Public space Public trust doctrine Res extra commercium Social capital State-owned enterprise Public domain in French public law References [ edit ] ^ Clarke, Alison; Kohler, Paul (2005).

Property Law: Commentary and Materials . Cambridge University Press. p. 207.

ISBN 978-0521614894 .

^ Clarke & Kohler 2005 , p. 40.

^ Alchian, Armen A.

(December 1965). "Some Economics of Property Rights".

Il Politico .

30 (4): 816– 829.

ISSN 0032-325X .

JSTOR 43206327 .

^ "Communist Manifesto (Chapter 2)" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2020-12-19 .

^ "Glossary of Terms: Pu" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2020-12-19 .

^ "1977 Constitution of the USSR, Part I" .

www.departments.bucknell.edu . Retrieved 2020-12-19 .

^ "Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation" . 2014-10-06. Archived from the original on 2014-10-06 . Retrieved 2020-12-19 .

^ "Constitution Acts, 1867 to 1982 – VI. Distribution Of Legislative Powers" .

Justice Laws website .

Government of Canada . Retrieved 2013-11-14 .

v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_property&oldid=1288817853 " Categories : Property law Public economics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 22:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Public property 21 languages Add topic

