Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design 2 Suburbs 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Tract housing 5 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Bahasa Indonesia Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of housing development Aerial view of housing developments near Markham, Ontario , Canada Tract housing , sometimes informally known as cookie cutter housing , is a type of housing development in which multiple similar houses are built on a tract (area) of land that is subdivided into smaller lots . Tract housing developments are found in suburb developments that were modeled on the " Levittown " concept and sometimes encompass large areas of dozens of square miles.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Design [ edit ] A tract housing development in San Jose, California Tract housing came about in the 1940s when the demand for cheap housing skyrocketed.

Economies of scale meant that large numbers of identical houses could be built in a "cookie cutter" fashion faster and more cheaply to fulfill the growing demand. Developers would purchase a dozen or more adjacent lots and conduct the building construction as an assembly-line process.

[ 3 ] Tract housing development makes use of few architectural designs, and labor costs are reduced because workers need to learn the skills and movements of constructing only those designs rather than repeat the learning curve . In addition, as all houses in the development will be built at the same time, the cost of purchasing and transporting building supplies may be reduced due to economies of scale . Components such as roof trusses , plumbing , and stair systems are often prefabricated in factories and installed on-site. This allows builders to offer lower prices, which in turn can make houses affordable to a larger percentage of the population.  Early tract houses were often identical, but many tracts since the late 20th century have several designs and other variations in footprint, roof form, and materials, along with options such as garage bays, for a more diverse appearance.

[ 3 ] Suburbs [ edit ] Tract housing in Cincinnati, Ohio The concept of tract housing is occasionally mocked in North American popular culture as the basis of suburbia ; notable examples are the songs " Little Boxes " by Malvina Reynolds , " Suburbia " by the Pet Shop Boys and " Subdivisions " by Rush . It is also often criticized by city planners and architects, as its construction tends to overlook required elements of successful community building, instead creating a homogeneous residential neighborhood with no walkability , local employment, commerce, services, or attractions within close commuting distance.  This leads to a heavy reliance on automobile travel, as residents are unable to address any of these needs locally.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Exurb Housing estate List of house styles List of house types Railroad apartment Row house References [ edit ] ^ Kershner, Kate (2012-05-02).

"Why do cookie-cutter neighborhoods exist?" .

HowStuffWorks . Retrieved 2017-03-23 .

^ Cray, Dan (2002-03-13).

"15 Milestones That Changed Housing" .

This Old House . Retrieved 2017-03-23 .

^ a b Custer, Jack (August 1988).

Orange Coast Magazine: Customizing your tract home . Emmis Communications. p. 160.

^ White, Shelley (15 April 2016).

"Why commuting costs can make the 'burbs more expensive than living downtown" .

The Globe and Mail . Retrieved 10 April 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Tract housing at Wikimedia Commons v t e Real estate developments Commercial Airport Business park Bus station Commercial area Mixed-use development Office building Port inland Power center Retail park Riverfront Shopping center ( Shopping mall ) Train station Shopping streets and districts Industrial Business cluster Industrial district Industrial park Technology centers Residential Agrihood Boarding house Bungalow court City block Closed community Company town Conservation community Executive home Golf course community Gated community Housing estate Intentional community Luxury apartment McMansion Mixed-use development Model dwellings for the poor Multifamily residential Penthouse apartment Private community Public housing Residential airpark Residential area Retirement community Revenue house Rooming house Single-room occupancy Subdivision Tract housing Disability Assisted living Behavior modification facility Residential treatment center Therapeutic boarding school Elderly care Age-restricted community Nursing home Retirement home Senior living Science/education Akademgorodok Atomgrad Campus Research park Satellite campus Science park Municipal Arcology Civic center Garden city movement Model village Planned cities Planned community Urban green space parks Buildings ( types ) Apartment House types Skyscraper Tower block Villa Miscellaneous Brownfield land Cemetery Residential cluster development Construction Context theory Eminent domain Greenfield land Greyfield land Groundscraper Land-use planning Nonbuilding NIMBY Park Parking ( Multistorey car park ) Planning permission Playground Redevelopment Regional planning Urban design Urban planning YIMBY Zoning Housing portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tract_housing&oldid=1229570247 " Categories : House types Planned residential developments Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 June 2024, at 14:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tract housing 5 languages Add topic

