Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Key characteristics Toggle Key characteristics subsection 1.1 Intangibility 1.2 Perishability 1.3 Variability 2 Service quality 3 Specification 4 Delivery 5 Service-commodity goods continuum 6 Service types 7 Statistics 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Service (economics) 73 languages Afrikaans العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kriyòl gwiyannen Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Activity for which payment is due This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Service" economics – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Economic sectors Three-sector model Primary sector ( raw materials ) Secondary sector ( goods manufacturing ) Tertiary sector ( services ) Additional sectors Quaternary sector (information services) Quinary sector (human services) Theorists AGB Fisher Colin Clark Jean Fourastié Sectors by ownership Business sector Private sector Public sector Voluntary sector v t e A restaurant waiter is an example of a service-related occupation.

A service is an act or use for which a consumer , company , or government is willing to pay .

[ 1 ] Examples include work done by barbers, doctors, lawyers, mechanics, banks, insurance companies, and so on. Public services are those that society (nation state, fiscal union or region) as a whole pays for. Using resources , skill, ingenuity, and experience, service providers benefit service consumers. Services may be defined as intangible acts or performances whereby the service provider provides value to the customer.

Key characteristics [ edit ] Services have three key characteristics: [ 2 ] Intangibility [ edit ] Services are by definition intangible. They are not manufactured, transported or stocked.

One cannot store services for future use. They are produced and consumed simultaneously.

Perishability [ edit ] Services are perishable in two regards: Service-relevant resources, processes, and systems are assigned for service delivery during a specific period in time. If the service consumer does not request and consume the service during this period, the related resources may go unused. From the perspective of the service provider, this is a lost business opportunity if no other use for those resources is available. Examples: A hairdresser serves another client. An empty seat on an airplane cannot be filled after departure.

When the service has been completely rendered to the consumer, this particular service irreversibly vanishes. Example: a passenger has been transported to the destination.

The service provider must deliver the service at the exact time of service consumption. The service is not manifested in a physical object that is independent of the provider. The service consumer is also inseparable from service delivery. Examples: The service consumer must sit in the hairdresser's chair, or in the airplane seat. Correspondingly, the hairdresser or the pilot must be in the shop or plane, respectively, to deliver the service.

Variability [ edit ] Each service is unique. It can never be exactly repeated as the time, location, circumstances, conditions, current configurations or assigned resources are different for the next delivery, even if the same service is requested by the consumer. Many services are regarded as heterogeneous and are typically modified for each service-consumer or for each service-context.

[ 2 ] Example: The taxi service which transports the service consumer from home to work is different from the taxi service which transports the same service consumer from work to home – another point in time, the other direction, possibly another route, probably another taxi-driver and cab. Another and more common term for this is heterogeneity .

[ citation needed ] Service quality [ edit ] Mass generation and delivery of services must be mastered for a service provider to expand. This can be seen as a problem of service quality . Both inputs and outputs to the processes involved providing services are highly variable, as are the relationships between these processes, making it difficult to maintain consistent service quality. Many services involve variable human activity, rather than a precisely determined process; exceptions include utilities . The human factor is often the key success factor in service provision. Demand can vary by season , time of day, business cycle , etc. Consistency is necessary to create enduring business relationships.

Specification [ edit ] Any service can be clearly and completely, consistently and concisely specified by means of standard attributes that conform to the MECE principle (Mutually Exclusive, Collectively Exhaustive).

Service consumer benefits – (set of) benefits that are triggerable, consumable and effectively utilizable for any authorized service consumer and that are rendered upon request. These benefits should be clearly defined in terms that are meaningful to consumers.

Service-specific functional parameters – parameters that are essential to the respective service and that describe the important dimension(s) of the servicescape , the service output or the service outcome, e.g. whether the passenger sits in an aisle or window seat.

Service delivery point – the physical location or logical interface where the benefits of the service are rendered to the consumer. At this point the service delivery preparation can be assessed and delivery can be monitored and controlled.

Service consumer count – the number of consumers that are enabled to consume a service.

Service delivery readiness time – the moments when the service is available and all the specified service elements are available at the delivery point Service consumer support times – the moments when the support team ("service desk") is available. The service desk is the Single Point of Contact (SPoC) for service inquiries. At those times, the service desk can be reached via commonly available communication methods (phone, web, etc.) Service consumer support language – the language(s) spoken by the service desk.

Service fulfillment target – the provider's promise to deliver the service, expressed as the ratio of the count of successful service deliveries to the count of service requests by a single consumer or consumer group over some time period.

Service impairment duration – the maximum allowable interval between the first occurrence of a service impairment and the full resumption and completion of the service delivery.

Service delivery duration – the maximum allowable period for effectively rendering all service benefits to the consumer.

Service delivery unit – the scope/number of action(s) that constitute a delivered service. Serves as the reference object for the Service Delivering Price, for all service costs as well as for charging and billing.

Service delivery price – the amount of money the customer pays to receive a service. Typically, the price includes a service access price that qualifies the consumer to request the service and a service consumption price for each delivered service.

Delivery [ edit ] Coffee house – a type of service delivery The delivery of a service typically involves six factors: Service provider (workers and managers) Equipment used to provide the service (e.g. vehicles, cash registers, technical systems, computer systems) Physical facilities (e.g. buildings, parking, waiting rooms) Service consumer Other customers at the service delivery location Customer contact The service encounter is defined as all activities involved in the service delivery process. Some service managers use the term "moment of truth" to indicate that point in a service encounter where interactions are most intense.

[ citation needed ] Many business theorists view service provision as a performance or act (sometimes humorously referred to as dramalurgy , perhaps in reference to dramaturgy ). The location of the service delivery is referred to as the stage and the objects that facilitate the service process are called props . A script is a sequence of behaviors followed by those involved, including the client(s). Some service dramas are tightly scripted, others are more ad lib . Role congruence occurs when each actor follows a script that harmonizes with the roles played by the other actors.

[ citation needed ] In some service industries, especially health care, dispute resolution and social services, a popular concept is the idea of the caseload, which refers to the total number of patients, clients, litigants, or claimants for which a given employee is responsible. Employees must balance the needs of each individual case against the needs of all other current cases as well as their own needs.

[ citation needed ] Under English law , if a service provider is induced to deliver services to a dishonest client by a deception, this is an offence under the Theft Act 1978 .

[ citation needed ] Lovelock used the number of delivery sites (whether single or multiple) and the method of delivery to classify services in a 2 x 3 matrix. Then implications are that the convenience of receiving the service is the lowest when the customer has to come to the service and must use a single or specific outlet. Convenience increases (to a point) as the number of service points increase.

[ citation needed ] Service-commodity goods continuum [ edit ] Service-Commodity Goods continuum The distinction between a good and a service remains disputed. The perspective in the late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth centuries focused on creation and possession of wealth. Classical economists contended that goods were objects of value over which ownership rights could be established and exchanged. Ownership implied tangible possession of an object that had been acquired through purchase, barter or gift from the producer or previous owner and was legally identifiable as the property of the current owner.

Adam Smith 's famous book, The Wealth of Nations , published in 1776 , distinguished between the outputs of what he termed "productive" and "unproductive" labor. The former, he stated, produced goods that could be stored after production and subsequently exchanged for money or other items of value. The latter, however useful or necessary, created services that perished at the time of production and therefore did not contribute to wealth. Building on this theme, French economist Jean-Baptiste Say argued that production and consumption were inseparable in services, coining the term "immaterial products" to describe them.

In the modern day, Gustofsson & Johnson describe a continuum with pure service on one terminal point and pure commodity good on the other.

[ 3 ] Most products fall between these two extremes. For example, a restaurant provides a physical good (the food ), but also provides services in the form of ambience, the setting and clearing of the table, etc. And although some utilities actually deliver physical goods — like water utilities that deliver water — utilities are usually treated as services.

[ citation needed ] Service types [ edit ] Marketing Management Key concepts Account-based marketing · Activation · Annoyance factor · Attribution · Distribution · Brand licensing · Brand management · Cannibalization · Co-creation · Communications · Consumer behaviour · Consumer culture · Digital marketing · Dominance · Effectiveness · Ethics · Horizontal integration · Influencer marketing · Mix · Pricing · Product marketing · Promotion · Retail · Segmentation · Service · Social marketing · Strategy · Vertical integration Promotional content Advertising · Ambush marketing · Branding · Corporate anniversary · Direct marketing · Franchising · Gender in advertising · Label · Loyalty marketing · Mobile marketing · On-hold messaging · Personal selling · Premiums · Prizes · Product placement · Propaganda · Publicity · Sales promotion · Sex in advertising · Underwriting spot Promotional media Behavioral targeting · Brand ambassador · Counter display unit · Display advertising · Display stand · Drip marketing · Endcap · Gondola · In-game advertising · Mobile advertising · Native advertising · New media · Online advertising · Out-of-home advertising · Point of sale · Product demonstration · Promotional merchandise (merchandising) · Promotional representative · Visual merchandising · Web banner · Word-of-mouth Research Market research · Marketing research · Mystery shopping · Consumer research v t e The following is a list of service industries, grouped into sectors. Parenthetical notations indicate how specific occupations and organizations can be regarded as service industries to the extent they provide an intangible service, as opposed to a tangible good.

Business functions (that apply to all organizations in general) Consulting Customer service Human resources administrators (providing services like ensuring that employees are paid accurately) Cleaning , patronage, repair and maintenance services Gardeners Janitors (who provide cleaning services) Mechanics Construction Carpentry Electricians (offering the service of making wiring work properly) Plumbing Death care Coroners (who provide the service of identifying cadavers and determining time and cause of death) Funeral homes (who prepare corpses for public display, cremation or burial) Dispute resolution and prevention services Arbitration Courts of law (who perform the service of dispute resolution backed by the power of the state ) Diplomacy Incarceration (provides the service of keeping criminals out of society) Law enforcement (provides the service of identifying and apprehending criminals) Lawyers (who perform the services of advocacy and decisionmaking in many dispute resolution and prevention processes) Mediation Military (performs the service of protecting states in disputes with other states) Negotiation (not really a service unless someone is negotiating on behalf of another) Education (institutions offering the services of teaching and access to information) Library Museum School Entertainment (when provided live or within a highly specialized facility) Gambling Movie theatres (providing the service of showing a movie on a big screen) Performing arts productions Sport Television Fabric care Dry cleaning Laundry Financial services Accountancy Banks and building societies (offering lending services and safekeeping of money and valuables) Real estate Stock brokerages Tax services Valuation Foodservice industry Health care (all health care professions provide services) Hospitality industry Information services Database services Data processing Interpreting Translation Logistics Transport Warehousing Stock management Packaging Personal grooming Body hair removal Dental hygienist Hairdressing Manicurist / pedicurist Public utility Electric power Natural gas Telecommunications Waste management Water industry Risk management Insurance Security Social services Social work Childcare Elderly care Statistics [ edit ] List of countries by GDP sector composition List of countries by service exports and imports See also [ edit ] As a service Deliverable Intangible good Services marketing Universal basic services References [ edit ] ^ McConnell, Campbell R.; et al. (2009).

Economics. Principles, Problems and Policies (PDF) (18th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-337569-4 . Archived from the original (PDF contains full textbook) on 6 October 2016.

, Glossary, p. G-25.

^ a b Harrison, Tina; Estelami, Hooman (5 December 2014).

The Routledge Companion to Financial Services Marketing . Routledge.

ISBN 9781134095629 .

^ Anders Gustofsson and Michael D. Johnson, Competing in a Service Economy (San Francisco: Josey-Bass, 2003), p.7.

Further reading [ edit ] SO Player : Zeithaml, Valarie A.; Parasuraman, A.; Berry, Leonard L. (1990).

Delivering Quality Service: Balancing Customer Perceptions and Expectations . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-02-935701-9 .

Valerie Zeithaml, A. Parasumaran, Leonhard Berry (1990): SERVQUAL [1] Sharon Dobson: Product and Services Strategy John Swearingen: Operations Management – Characteristics of services James A. Fitzsimmons, Mona J. Fitzsimmons: Service Management – Operations, Strategy, Information Technology Russell Wolak, Stavros Kalafatis, Patricia Harris: An Investigation Into Four Characteristics of Services Sheelagh Matear , Brendan Gray, Tony Garrett, Ken Deans: Moderating Effects of Service Characteristics on the Sources of Competitive Advantage – Positional Advantage Relationship Johnston, Robert; Clark, Graham (2008).

Service Operations Management: Improving Service Delivery . Financial Times/Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-1-4058-4732-2 .

Petit, Pascal (1991). "Services". In Eatwell, John; Newman, Peter K.; Milgate, Murray (eds.).

The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics . Vol. 4. Macmillan. pp.

314– 15.

ISBN 978-0-333-37235-7 .

Alan Pilkington , Kah Hin Chai, "Research Themes, Concepts and Relationships: A study of International Journal of Service Industry Management (1990 to 2005)", International Journal of Service Industry Management, (2008) Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 83–110.

Downton, Steve; Rustema, Hilbrand; van Veen, Jan (1 August 2010).

Service Economics: Profitable Growth with a Brand Driven Service Strategy . Novetum Service Management, Limited.

ISBN 978-9963-9838-0-3 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Services (economics) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Microeconomics Major topics Aggregation Budget set Consumer choice Convexity and non-convexity Cost Average Marginal Opportunity Implicit Social Sunk Transaction Cost–benefit analysis Deadweight loss Distribution Economies of scale Economies of scope Elasticity Cross elasticity of demand Income elasticity of demand Price elasticity of demand Price elasticity of supply Equilibrium General Exchange Externality Firms Goods and services Goods Service Household Income–consumption curve Information Indifference curve Intertemporal choice Market Market failure Market structure Competition Monopolistic Perfect Duopoly Monopoly Bilateral Complementary Monopsony Oligopoly Oligopsony Pareto efficiency Preferences Price Price controls Price ceiling Price floor Price discrimination Price signal Price system / Free Pricing Production Profit Public goods Rationing Rent Returns to scale Risk aversion Scarcity Shortage / Excess supply Substitution effect Surplus Social choice Supply and demand Demand / Law of demand Supply / Law of supply Uncertainty Utility Expected Marginal Wage Subfields Behavioral Business Computational Development Statistical decision theory Econometrics Engineering economics Civil engineering economics Evolutionary Experimental Game theory Green Industrial organization Institutional Labour Law Managerial Mathematical Microfoundations of macroeconomics Operations research Optimization Welfare See also Economics Applied Macroeconomics Political economy Business portal Category Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐zv974
Cached time: 20250814234454
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.483 seconds
Real time usage: 0.637 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2794/1000000
Revision size: 18294/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104407/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5753/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 60414/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.298/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6962194/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  504.141      1 -total
 19.70%   99.304      6 Template:Cite_book
 17.52%   88.346      2 Template:Navbox
 16.51%   83.215      1 Template:Reflist
 13.43%   67.730      1 Template:Economic_sectors
 13.39%   67.496      2 Template:Sidebar
 13.36%   67.368      1 Template:Economics
 12.62%   63.623      1 Template:Short_description
 10.11%   50.978      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.37%   47.238      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:181586:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234454 and revision id 1304973728. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Service_(economics)&oldid=1304973728 " Categories : Goods (economics) Services (economics) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Inconsistent wikidata for Commons category Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 08:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Service (economics) 73 languages Add topic

