Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Neolithic art 2 Cycladic sculptures 3 Early Cycladic art Toggle Early Cycladic art subsection 3.1 Early Cycladic I (Grotta-Pelos Culture, 3300–2700 BCE) 3.1.1 Pelos type (schematic) 3.1.2 Plastiras type (naturalistic) 3.1.3 Louros type (schematic and naturalistic) 3.2 Early Cycladic II (Keros-Syros culture, 2800–2300 BCE) 3.2.1 Kapsala variety 3.2.2 Spedos variety 3.2.3 Dokathismata variety 3.2.4 Chalandriani variety 4 Early Minoan examples Toggle Early Minoan examples subsection 4.1 Koumasa variety 5 Pottery 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Cycladic art 15 languages العربية Беларуская Català Español Français Italiano עברית Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Română Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pre-Greek artistic tradition Cycladic art Cycladic figurines, of the FAF type below, in the National Archaeological Museum of Athens History of art Periods and movements Prehistoric Ancient Medieval Pre-Romanesque Romanesque Gothic Renaissance Mannerism Baroque Rococo Neoclassicism Revivalism Romanticism Realism Pre-Raphaelites Modern Impressionism Symbolism Decorative Post-Impressionism Art Nouveau Fauvism Expressionism Cubism Contemporary Postmodern Conceptualism Pop Minimalism Periods in Western art history Regions Art of the Middle East Mesopotamian Egyptian Hittite Kurdish Persian Arabian South Arabian Phoenician Ottoman Art of Central Asia Art of East Asia Chinese Hong Kong Taiwan Japanese Korean Tibetan Art of South Asia Indian Bhutanese Newar Art of Southeast Asia Indonesian Filipino Vietnamese Thai Myanmar Malaysian Cambodian Khmer Lao Singaporean Bruneian Art of Europe Minoan Cycladic Etruscan Dacian Celtic Scythian Greek Hellenistic Iberian Roman Byzantine Anglo-Saxon Ottonian Viking Rus Art of Africa Igbo Yoruba Benin Kuba Luba Art of the Americas Pre-Columbian Maya Muisca Inuit Art of Oceania Australian Cook Islands Hawaiian Papuan Religions Buddhist Christian Catholic Protestant Hindu Islamic Jain Manichaean Sikh Taoist Vodou Vodun Techniques Sculpture Painting Pottery Calligraphy Architecture Photography Graphic arts Digital art Types Abstract Art history Art movement List Figurative Funerary Naïve Narrative Naturalist v t e The ancient Cycladic culture flourished in the islands of the Aegean Sea from c. 3300 to 1100 BCE.

[ 1 ] Along with the Minoan civilization and Mycenaean Greece , the Cycladic people are counted among the three major Aegean cultures.

Cycladic art therefore comprises one of the three main branches of Aegean art .

The best known type of artwork that has survived is the marble figurine, most commonly a single full-length female figure with arms folded across the front. The type is known to archaeologists as a "FAF" for "folded-arm figure(ine)".  Apart from a sharply defined nose, the faces are a smooth blank, although there is evidence on some that they were originally painted.  Considerable numbers of these are known, although most were removed illicitly from their unrecorded archaeological context, which seems usually to be a burial.

Neolithic art [ edit ] Almost all information known regarding Neolithic art of the Cyclades comes from the excavation site of Saliagos off Antiparos .  Pottery of this period is similar to that of Crete and the Greek mainland .

Sinclair Hood writes: "A distinctive shape is a bowl on a high foot comparable with a type which occurs in the mainland Late Neolithic." [ 2 ] Cycladic sculptures [ edit ] Marble harp Player (EC II; Badisches Landesmuseum, Karlsruhe ) The best-known art of this period are the marble figures usually called "idols" or "figurines", though neither name is exactly accurate: the former term suggests a religious function which is by no means agreed on by experts, and the latter does not properly apply to the largest figures, which are nearly life size. These marble figures are seen scattered around the Aegean, suggesting that these figures were popular amongst the people of Crete and mainland Greece.

[ 3 ] Perhaps the most famous of these figures are musicians: one a harp-player the other a pipe-player.

[ 4 ] Dating to approximately 2500 BCE, these musicians are sometimes considered “the earliest extant musicians from the Aegean.” [ 5 ] The majority of these figures, however, are highly stylized representations of the female human form, typically having a flat, geometric quality that influenced some 20th-century modern art . However, this may be a modern misconception as there is evidence that the sculptures were originally brightly painted.

[ 6 ] A majority of the figurines are female, depicted nude, and with arms folded across the stomach, typically with the right arm held below the left.  Some writers who view these artifacts from their own anthropological or psychological viewpoint have assumed that they are representative of a Great Goddess of nature, perhaps in a tradition continuous with that of Neolithic female figures such as the Venus of Willendorf .

[ 7 ] There is no consensus on their significance.  They have been variously interpreted as cult images of the gods, images of death, children's dolls, and other things. One authority feels they were "more than dolls and probably less than sacrosanct idols." [ 8 ] Part of a series on the History of Greek art Greek Bronze Age Aegean art Cycladic art Minoan art Minoan pottery Mycenaean art Mycenaean pottery Protogeometric art Ancient Greece Geometric art Archaic Greek art Ancient Greek art Ancient Greek architecture Ancient Greek pottery Ancient Greek sculpture Hellenistic art see also: Greco-Buddhist art Medieval Greece Byzantine art Byzantine Iconoclasm Macedonian art Post-Byzantine Greece Cretan school Heptanese school Modern Greece Modern Greek art Modern Greek architecture Munich School Contemporary Greek art v t e Suggestions that these images were idols in the strict sense—cult objects which were the focus of ritual worship—are unsupported by any archeological evidence.

[ 9 ] What the archeological evidence does suggest is that these images were regularly used in funerary practice: they have all been found in graves.  Yet at least some of them show clear signs of having been repaired, implying that they were objects valued by the deceased during life and were not made specifically for burial. Larger figures were also sometimes broken up so that only part of them was buried, a phenomenon for which there is no explanation. These figures apparently were buried equally with both men and women.

[ 10 ] Such figures were not found in every grave.

[ 8 ] While the sculptures are most frequently found laid on their backs in graves, larger examples may have been set up in shrines or dwelling places.

[ 11 ] Early Cycladic art [ edit ] Early Cycladic art is divided into three periods: EC I (2800–2500 BCE), EC II (2500–2200 BCE), and EC III (2200–2000 BCE). The art is by no means strictly confined to one of these periods, and in some cases, even representative of more than one of the Cycladic islands. The art of EC I is best represented on the islands of Paros , Antiparos , and Amorgos , while EC II is primarily seen on Syros , and EC III on Melos .

[ 12 ] Early Cycladic I (Grotta-Pelos Culture, 3300–2700 BCE) [ edit ] Female marble figure (c. 3000 BCE; Brooklyn Museum ) The most important earliest groups of the Grotta–Pelos culture are Pelos, Plastiras and Louros. Pelos figurines are of schematic type. Both males and females, in standing position with a head and face, compose the Plastiras type; the rendering is naturalistic but also strangely stylized. The Louros type is seen as transitional, combining both schematic and naturalistic elements.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Schematic figures are more commonly found and are very flat in profile, having simple forms and lack a clearly defined head. Naturalistic figures are small and tend to have strange or exaggerated proportions, with long necks, angular upper bodies, and muscular legs.

[ 15 ] Pelos type (schematic) [ edit ] The Pelos type figurines are different from many other Cycladic figurines as for most the gender is undetermined. The most famous of the Pelos type figurines are the "violin"-shaped figurines. On these figurines there is an implied elongated head, no legs and a violin-shaped body. One particular "violin" figurine, has breasts, arms under the breasts, and a pubic triangle. Since not all the figurines share these characteristics, no accurate conclusion can be made regarding their use at this time.

Cycladic marble figurine, Plastiras type Plastiras type (naturalistic) [ edit ] The Plastiras type is an early example of Cycladic figurines, named after the cemetery on Paros where they were found.

[ 16 ] The figures retain the violin-like shape, stance, and folded arm arrangement of their predecessors but differ in notable ways. The Plastiras type is the most naturalistic type of Cycladic figurine, marked by exaggerated proportions. An ovoid head with carved facial features, including ears, sits atop an elongated neck that typically takes up a full third of the figure's total height.

[ 17 ] The legs were carved separately for their entire length, often resulting in breakages. On female figures the pubic area is demarcated by an incision and the breasts are modeled. Representations of males differ in structure, but not remarkably, possessing narrower hips and carved representations of the male sexual organs. The figures are typically no larger than thirty centimeters, and are not able to stand on their own, as the feet are pointed. Surviving figurines have been carved from marble, but it is suggested by some that they may also have been carved from wood.

Female marble figurine from Naxos, Louros type (EC I–II, 2800–2700 BCE; Ashmolean Museum , Oxford) Female marble figurine, Kapsala type (EC II, 2700–2600 BCE; British Museum ) Louros type (schematic and naturalistic) [ edit ] The Louros type is a category of Cycladic figurines from the Early Cycladic I phase of the Bronze Age . Combining the naturalistic and schematic approaches of earlier figure styles, the Louros type have featureless faces, a long neck, and a simple body with attenuated shoulders that tend to extend past the hips in width. The legs are shaped carefully but are carved to separation no further than the knees or mid-calves.

[ 17 ] Though breasts are not indicated, figures of this type are still suggestive of the female form and tend to bear evidence of a carved pubic triangle.

Early Cycladic II (Keros-Syros culture, 2800–2300 BCE) [ edit ] Group of three figurines, early Spedos type, Keros-Syros culture (EC II) Kapsala variety [ edit ] The Kapsala variety is a type of Cycladic figure of the Early Cycladic II period. This variety is often thought to precede or overlap in period with that of the canonical Spedos variety of figures. Kapsala figures differ from the canonical type in that the arms are held much lower in the right-below-left folded configuration and the faces lack sculpted features other than the nose and occasionally ears.

[ 17 ] Kapsala figures show a tendency to slenderness, especially in the legs, which are much longer and lack the powerful musculature suggested in earlier forms of the sculptures. The shoulders and hips are much narrower as well, and the figures themselves are rarely larger than 30 cm in length. Evidence suggests that paint is now regularly used to demarcate features such as the eyes and pubic triangle, rather than carving them directly. One characteristic of note of the Kapsala variety is that some figures seem to suggest pregnancy, featuring bulging stomachs with lines drawn across the abdomen. Like other figures of the Early Cycladic II period, the most defining feature of the Kapsala variety is their folded-arm position.

Spedos variety [ edit ] Female marble figurine, probably from Amorgos , Dokathismata variety (EC II, 2800–2300 BCE; Ashmolean Museum) The Spedos type, named after an Early Cycladic cemetery on Naxos , is the most common of Cycladic figurine types. It has the widest distribution within the Cyclades as well as elsewhere, and the greatest longevity. The group as a whole includes figurines ranging in height from miniature examples of 8 cm to monumental sculptures of 1.5 m. With the exception of a statue of a male figure, now in the Museum of Cycladic Art Collection, all known works of the Spedos variety are female figures.

[ 18 ] Spedos figurines are typically slender elongated female forms with folded arms. They are characterized by U-shaped heads and a deeply incised cleft between the legs.

Dokathismata variety [ edit ] The Dokathismata type is a Cycladic figure from the end of the Early Cycladic II period of the Bronze Age. With characteristics that are developed from the earlier Spedos variety, the Dokathismata figures feature broad, angular shoulders and a straight profile. Dokathismata figures are considered the most stylized of the folded-arm figures, with a long, elegant shape that displays a strong sense of geometry that is especially evident in the head, which features an almost triangular shape. These figures were somewhat conservatively built compared to earlier varieties, with a shallow leg cleft and connected feet.

[ 17 ] Despite this, the figures were actually quite fragile and prone to breakage. The return of an incised pubic triangle is also noted in the Dokathismata variety of figures.

Female marble figurine, Chalandriani type (EC II, 2400–2200 BCE; British Museum) Chalandriani variety [ edit ] Female marble figurine from Crete, Koumasa variety (EC II, 2800–2200 BCE; Archaeological Museum of Chania ) The Chalandriani variety is a type of Cycladic figure from the end of the Early Cycladic II period of the Bronze Age. Named for the cemetery on the island of Syros on which they were found, these figures are somewhat similar in style and mannerism to the Dokathismata variety that preceded them. Chalandriani figures, however, feature a more truncated shape in which the arms are very close to the pubic triangle and the leg cleft is only indicated by a shallow groove.

[ 17 ] One feature of note with the Chalandriani variety is that the strict right-below-left configuration found in previous figures seemed to have relaxed, as some sculptures have reversed arms or even abandonment of the folded position for one or both arms. The reclining position of previous figures is also challenged, as the feet are not always inclined and the legs are somewhat rigid. The shoulders were expanded even further from the Dokathismata variety and were quite susceptible to damage as the upper arms and shoulders are also the thinnest point of the sculpture. The head is triangular or shield-shaped with few facial features other than a prominent nose, connected to the body by a pyramidal-shaped neck. Like figures of the Dokathismata variety, some Chalandriani figures appear to be presented as pregnant. The defining feature of these figures is their bold and exaggerated indication of the shoulders and upper arms.

Early Minoan examples [ edit ] Koumasa variety [ edit ] Koumasa figurines, from the Early Minoan II cemetery at Koumasa on Crete, are very small and flat. The folded-arm figures typically have short legs and broad shoulders, [ 19 ] and were prone to breakage given their delicate build.

[ 20 ] Cycladic “ frying pan ”, terracotta with stamped and cut spirals decoration (EC I–II, c. 2700 BCE, Kampos phase) Pottery [ edit ] The local clay proved difficult for artists to work with, and the pottery, plates, and vases of this period are seldom above mediocre.

[ 12 ] Of some importance are the so-called ' frying pans ', which emerged on the island of Syros during the EC II phase.  These are round decorated disks, which were not used for cooking, but perhaps as fertility charms or mirrors.

[ 21 ] Some zoological figurines and pieces depicting ships have also been found.

Besides these, other forms of functional pottery have been found. All pottery of early Cycladic civilization was made by hand, and typically was a black or reddish color, though pottery of a pale buff has also been found. The most common shapes are cylindrical boxes, known as pyxides , and collared jars.

[ 15 ] They are crude in construction, with thick walls and crumbling imperfections, but sometimes feature naturalistic designs reminiscent of the sea-based culture of the Aegean islands.  There are also figurines of animals.

Gallery [ edit ] Male harp player of the early Spedos type in the Getty Villa Female marble figurine from Naxos , Plastiras type (EC I, 3200–2800 BCE; Ashmolean Museum , Oxford) Female torso in darker stone with a hole in the throat and dírkama thighs, Plastiras type (EC I, 2800–2700 BCE; Museum of Prehistoric Thera ) A cycladic sculpture ( Heraklion Archaeological Museum ) Large female figure of the early Spedos variety (76.8cm long), British Museum [ 22 ] Female canonical type, early work of the Spedos variety ( Goulandris Museum of Cycladic Art ) Head of a female figure, Spedos type, rr culture (EC II, 2700–2300 BCE; Louvre ) Early terracotta figurines from Santorini (c. 2100 BCE; Museum of Cycladic Culture) Gold figure of an ibex from Santorini , late Cycladic (17th century BCE) Zintilis Idol, Cyprus, 3900-2500 BC See also [ edit ] External videos Male harp player from Keros (EC II, c. 2600–2300 BC; National Archaeological Museum, Athens ), Smarthistory [ 23 ] Akrotiri (prehistoric city) for additional artistic, decorative, and functional items excavated from an ancient Cycladic site.

Keros-Syros culture Grotta–Pelos culture Notes [ edit ] ^ Adams, Laurie (1999).

Art Across Time (fourth ed.). Mc-Graw Hill. p.

112 .

^ Hood 28 ^ Doumas, p. 81 ^ Higgins, p. 61 ^ Higgins, p. 60 ^ Getty Museum, past exhibition "Prehistoric Arts of the Eastern Mediterranean" ^ Marija Gimbutas, The Language of the Goddess, HarperCollins 1991 p. 203;  Erich Neumann, The Great Mother:  An Analysis of the Archetype tr. Ralph Manheim, Princeton University Press, 2nd ed. 1963, p. 113.) ^ a b Emily Vermeule, Greece in the Bronze Age, University of Chicago Press 1974, p. 52.

^ L. Marangou, Cycladic Culture:  Naxos in the 3rd Millennium BC Athens 1990 pp. 101, 141 [ sic ] ^ Marangou p. 101 ^ Bothmer, Bernard (1974).

Brief Guide to the Department of Egyptian and Classical Art . Brooklyn, NY: The Brooklyn Museum. p. 20.

^ a b Higgins 53 ^ "Cycladic Culture" . Lake Forest College . Retrieved 11 November 2014 .

^ Vianello, Andrea.

"Cycladic figurines in funerary rituals" .

BronzeAge.org.uk . Archived from the original on 21 April 2018 . Retrieved 11 November 2014 .

^ a b Fitton, J. Lesley (1989).

Cycladic Art . London: British Museum Press . p. 22.

ISBN 978-0714112930 .

^ Getz-Preziosi, Pat (1987).

Early Cycladic Art in North American Collections . Seattle and London: University of Washington Press. p. 52.

^ a b c d e Getz-Gentle, Pat (2001).

Personal Styles in Early Cycladic Sculpture . Seattle and London: University of Washington Press.

^ Spedos variety figurine Archived 2014-08-19 at the Wayback Machine The Museum of Cycladic Art ^ "Cycladic art: figure in the Koumasa variety" .

Bradshaw Foundation .

^ Getz-Preziosi, Pat (1982).

"Risk and Repair in Early Cycladic Sculpture" (PDF) .

Metropolitan Museum Journal .

18 : 24.

^ Higgins 54 ^ [1] ^ "Harp Player, Early Cycladic period (Bronze age)" .

Smarthistory at Khan Academy . 22 June 2014 . Retrieved September 8, 2014 .

References [ edit ] Doumas, Christos (1969).

Early Cycladic Art.

Frederick A. Praeger, Inc.

Higgins, Reynold (1967).

Minoan and Mycenaean Art.

Thames and Hudson.

Hood, Sinclair (1978).

The Arts in Prehistoric Greece.

Penguin Books.

External links [ edit ] The Cycladic Sculptures Greek art of the Aegean Islands , Issued in connection with an exhibition held  November 1, 1979 – February 10, 1980, Metropolitan Museum of Art,  New York, sponsored by the Government of the Republic of Greece, complemented by a loan from the Musée du Louvre v t e Pottery of ancient Greece Aegean Minyan ware Minoan Kamares ware Vasiliki ware Mycenaean Sub-Mycenaean Cycladic Frying pans Ancient Greece proper Bilingual Black-figure Black-glazed Ware Bucchero Red-figure South Italian West Slope Ware White-ground Potters Amasis Ergotimos Euphronios Euthymides Gryton Hypereides Nikosthenes Pamphaios Sophilos Little Masters Ergoteles Hermogenes Phrynos Sokles Tleson Special topics Conservation Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum Disjecta membra Hellenistic glass LIMC Name vase Slip Symposium Tanagra figurine Terracotta figurines Three-phase firing Vase types v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4fv4b
Cached time: 20250816030320
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.500 seconds
Real time usage: 0.663 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2234/1000000
Revision size: 21811/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 171986/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2579/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 94884/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.249/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5573986/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  454.903      1 -total
 30.58%  139.107      1 Template:Reflist
 20.55%   93.460      5 Template:Cite_book
 16.26%   73.964      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.42%   70.148      1 Template:History_of_art_sidebar
 13.47%   61.253      1 Template:Short_description
 12.09%   55.013      7 Template:Navbox
  8.10%   36.869      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.16%   32.549      1 Template:Greek_Vases
  6.10%   27.757      1 Template:External_media Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6785536:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816030320 and revision id 1306128043. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cycladic_art&oldid=1306128043 " Categories : Aegean art of the Bronze Age Ancient art Cycladic art Cycladic civilization Neolithic Greece Prehistoric art Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 03:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cycladic art 15 languages Add topic

