Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Early skyscrapers 1.2 Modern skyscrapers 2 Design and construction Toggle Design and construction subsection 2.1 Basic design considerations 2.2 Loading and vibration 2.3 Steel frame 2.4 Tube structural systems 2.5 The elevator conundrum 3 Economic rationale 4 Environmental impact Toggle Environmental impact subsection 4.1 Operational energy 4.1.1 Elevators 4.2 Embodied energy 4.3 Embodied carbon 4.4 Air pollution 4.5 LEED/green building rating 5 History of the tallest skyscrapers Toggle History of the tallest skyscrapers subsection 5.1 Gallery 6 Future developments Toggle Future developments subsection 6.1 Wooden skyscrapers 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Skyscraper 101 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Коми Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar मैथिली Македонски मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tall habitable building For other uses, see Skyscraper (disambiguation) .

Various skyscrapers across the world. From left to right: Row 1 : Bank of China Tower , Hong Kong; 30 Rockefeller Plaza , New York City; King Power MahaNakhon , Bangkok Row 2 : Commercial Bank of Ethiopia Headquarters , Addis Ababa; Premier Tower , Melbourne; Torre Colpatria , Bogotá Row 3 : Hilton Moscow Leningradskaya , Moscow; Cayan Tower , Dubai; The Gherkin , London A skyscraper is a tall continuously habitable building having multiple floors. Most modern sources define skyscrapers as being at least 100 metres (330 ft) [ 1 ] or 150 metres (490 ft) [ 2 ] in height, though there is no universally accepted definition, other than being very tall high-rise buildings . Skyscrapers may host offices, hotels, residential spaces, and retail spaces. Skyscrapers are a common feature of large cities, often due to a high demand for space and limited availability of land.

One common feature of skyscrapers is having a steel frame that supports curtain walls . These curtain walls either bear on the framework below or are suspended from the framework above, rather than resting on load-bearing walls of conventional construction. Some early skyscrapers have a steel frame that enables the construction of load-bearing walls taller than those made of reinforced concrete . Modern skyscraper walls are not load-bearing , and most skyscrapers are characterized by large surface areas of windows made possible by steel frames and curtain walls. However, skyscrapers can have curtain walls that mimic conventional walls with a small surface area of windows. Modern skyscrapers often have a tubular structure , and are designed to act like a hollow cylinder to resist wind, seismic , and other lateral loads. To appear more slender, allow less wind exposure and transmit more daylight to the ground, many skyscrapers have a design with setbacks , which in some cases is also structurally required.

Skyscrapers first appeared in the United States at the end of the 19th century, especially in the cities of New York City and Chicago . Following a building boom across the western world in the early 20th century, skyscraper development was halted in the 1930s by the Great Depression , and did not resume until the 1950s. A skyscraper boom in the downtowns of many American cities took place during the 1960s to 1980s. Towards the second half of the 20th century, skyscrapers began to be built more frequently outside the United States, particularly in East Asia and Southeast Asia during the 1990s.

China has since overtaken the United States as the country with the most skyscrapers. Skyscrapers are an increasingly global phenomenon, and can be found in over 70 countries.

[ 3 ] There are over 7 thousand skyscrapers over 150 m (492 ft) in height worldwide, most of which were built in the 21st century.

[ 4 ] Over three-quarters of skyscrapers taller than 150 m (492 ft) are located in Asia. Eighteen cities in the world have more than 100 skyscrapers that are taller than 150 m (492 ft), most recently Toronto and Singapore in 2025. The city with the most skyscrapers in the world is Hong Kong , with 569 skyscrapers, followed by Shenzhen in China with 444, New York City with 317, and Dubai in the United Arab Emirates with 270. Dubai is home to the tallest skyscraper in the world , the Burj Khalifa .

Definition [ edit ] By some measures, what came to be known as a "skyscraper" first appeared in Chicago with the 1885 completion of the world's first largely steel-frame structure, the Home Insurance Building . It was demolished in 1931.

The term "skyscraper" was first applied to buildings of steel-framed construction of at least 10 stories in the late 19th century, a result of public amazement at the tall buildings being built in major American cities like New York City , Philadelphia , Boston , Chicago , Detroit , and St. Louis .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The first steel-frame skyscraper was the Home Insurance Building , originally 10 stories with a height of 42 m or 138 ft, in Chicago in 1885; two additional stories were added.

[ 7 ] Some point to Philadelphia's 10-story Jayne Building (1849–50) as a proto-skyscraper, [ 8 ] or to New York's seven-floor Equitable Life Building , built in 1870.  Steel skeleton construction has allowed for today's supertall skyscrapers now being built worldwide.

[ 9 ] The nomination of one structure versus another being the first skyscraper, and why, depends on what factors are stressed.

[ 10 ] The structural definition of the word skyscraper was refined later by architectural historians, based on engineering developments of the 1880s that had enabled construction of tall multi-story buildings. This definition was based on the steel skeleton—as opposed to constructions of load-bearing masonry , which passed their practical limit in 1891 with Chicago's Monadnock Building .

What is the chief characteristic of the tall office building? It is lofty. It must be tall. The force and power of altitude must be in it, the glory and pride of exaltation must be in it. It must be every inch a proud and soaring thing, rising in sheer exaltation that from bottom to top it is a unit without a single dissenting line.

— Louis Sullivan 's The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered (1896) Some structural engineers define a high-rise as any vertical construction for which wind is a more significant load factor than earthquake or weight. Note that this criterion fits not only high-rises but some other tall structures, such as towers .

Different organizations from the United States and Europe define skyscrapers as buildings at least 150 m (490 ft) in height or taller, [ 11 ] [ 6 ] [ 12 ] with " supertall " skyscrapers for buildings higher than 300 m (984 ft) and " megatall " skyscrapers for those taller than 600 m (1,969 ft).

[ 13 ] The tallest structure in ancient times was the 146 m (479 ft) Great Pyramid of Giza in ancient Egypt , built in the 26th century BC. It was not surpassed in height for thousands of years, the 160 m (520 ft) Lincoln Cathedral having exceeded it in 1311–1549, before its central spire collapsed.

[ 14 ] The latter in turn was not surpassed until the 555-foot (169 m) Washington Monument in 1884. However, being uninhabited, none of these structures actually comply with the modern definition of a skyscraper.

[ citation needed ] High-rise apartments flourished in classical antiquity .

Ancient Roman insulae in imperial cities reached 10 and more stories.

[ 15 ] Beginning with Augustus (r. 30 BC-14 AD), several emperors attempted to establish limits of 20–25 m (66–82 ft) for multi-stories buildings, but were met with only limited success.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Lower floors were typically occupied by shops or wealthy families, with the upper rented to the lower classes.

[ 15 ] Surviving Oxyrhynchus Papyri indicate that seven-stories buildings existed in provincial towns such as in 3rd century AD Hermopolis in Roman Egypt .

[ 18 ] The skylines of many important medieval cities had large numbers of high-rise urban towers, built by the wealthy for defense and status. The residential Towers of 12th century Bologna numbered between 80 and 100 at a time, the tallest of which is the 97.2 m (319 ft) high Asinelli Tower. A Florentine law of 1251 decreed that all urban buildings be immediately reduced to less than 26 m (85 ft).

[ 19 ] Even medium-sized towns of the era are known to have proliferations of towers, such as the 72 towers that ranged up to 51 m (167 ft) height in San Gimignano .

[ 19 ] The medieval Egyptian city of Fustat housed many high-rise residential buildings, which Al-Muqaddasi in the 10th century described as resembling minarets .

Nasir Khusraw in the early 11th century described some of them rising up to 14 stories, with roof gardens on the top floor complete with ox-drawn water wheels for irrigating them.

[ 20 ] Cairo in the 16th century had high-rise apartment buildings where the two lower floors were for commercial and storage purposes and the multiple stories above them were rented out to tenants .

[ 21 ] An early example of a city consisting entirely of high-rise housing is the 16th-century city of Shibam in Yemen . Shibam was made up of over 500 tower houses, [ 22 ] each one rising 5 to 11 stories high, [ 23 ] with each floor being an apartment occupied by a single family. The city was built in this way in order to protect it from Bedouin attacks.

[ 22 ] Shibam still has the tallest mudbrick buildings in the world, with many of them over 30 m (98 ft) high.

[ 24 ] An early modern example of high-rise housing was in 17th-century Edinburgh , Scotland, where a defensive city wall defined the boundaries of the city. Due to the restricted land area available for development, the houses increased in height instead. Buildings of 11 stories were common, and there are records of buildings as high as 14 stories. Many of the stone-built structures can still be seen today in the old town of Edinburgh. The oldest iron framed building in the world, although only partially iron framed, is The Flaxmill in Shrewsbury , England. Built in 1797, it is seen as the "grandfather of skyscrapers", since its fireproof combination of cast iron columns and cast iron beams developed into the modern steel frame that made modern skyscrapers possible. In 2013 funding was confirmed to convert the derelict building into offices.

[ 25 ] Early skyscrapers [ edit ] Main article: Early skyscrapers Built in 1864, Oriel Chambers in Liverpool is the world's first metal framed glass curtain walled building. The stone mullions are decorative.

At its completion in 1928, Palacio Salvo in Montevideo , was the tallest reinforced concrete structure at 100 m (330 ft) high.

Early skyscrapers Wainwright Building (1891) in St. Louis Flatiron Building (1902), in New York City Royal Liver Building (1911), in Liverpool In 1857, Elisha Otis introduced the safety elevator at the E. V. Haughwout Building in New York City, allowing convenient and safe transport to buildings' upper floors. Otis later introduced the first commercial passenger elevators to the Equitable Life Building in 1870, considered by some architectural historians to be the first skyscraper. Another crucial development was the use of a steel frame instead of stone or brick, otherwise the walls on the lower floors on a tall building would be too thick to be practical. An early development in this area was Oriel Chambers in Liverpool , England, built in 1864. It was only five floors high.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] The Royal Academy of Arts states, "critics at the time were horrified by its 'large agglomerations of protruding plate glass bubbles'. In fact, it was a precursor to Modernist architecture, being the first building in the world to feature a metal-framed glass curtain wall , a design element which creates light, airy interiors and has since been used the world over as a defining feature of skyscrapers".

[ 28 ] Further developments led to what many individuals and organizations consider the world's first skyscraper, the ten-story Home Insurance Building in Chicago, built from 1884 to 1885.

[ 29 ] While its original height of 42.1 m (138 ft) does not qualify as a skyscraper today, it was record setting for the day. The building of tall buildings in the 1880s gave the skyscraper its first architectural movement, broadly termed the Chicago School , which developed what has been called the Commercial Style.

[ 30 ] The architect, Major William Le Baron Jenney , created a load-bearing structural frame. In this building, a steel frame supported the entire weight of the walls, instead of load-bearing walls carrying the weight of the building. This was then draped with a stone curtain for aesthetic purposes. This development led to the "Chicago skeleton" form of construction. In addition to the steel frame, the Home Insurance Building also utilized fireproofing, elevators, and electrical wiring, key elements in most skyscrapers today.

[ 31 ] Burnham and Root 's 45 m (148 ft) Rand McNally Building in Chicago, 1889, was the first all-steel framed skyscraper, [ 32 ] while Louis Sullivan 's 41 m (135 ft) Wainwright Building in St. Louis, Missouri, 1891, was the first steel-framed building with soaring vertical bands to emphasize the height of the building and is therefore considered to be the first early skyscraper. In 1889, the Mole Antonelliana in Italy was 197 m (549 ft) tall.

Most early skyscrapers emerged in the land-strapped areas of New York City and Chicago toward the end of the 19th century. A land boom in Melbourne , Australia between 1888 and 1891 spurred the creation of a significant number of early skyscrapers, though none of these were steel reinforced and few remain today. Height limits and fire restrictions were later introduced. In the late 1800s, London builders found building heights limited due to issues with existing buildings. High-rise development in London is restricted at certain sites if it would obstruct protected views of St Paul's Cathedral and other historic buildings.

[ 33 ] This policy, 'St Paul's Heights', has officially been in operation since 1927.

[ 34 ] Interwar skyscrapers Empire State Building (1931), in New York City , global standard of reference for the height and length of other mega-structures Boerentoren (1932), in Antwerp Edificio Kavanagh (1934), in Buenos Aires Concerns about aesthetics and fire safety had likewise hampered the development of skyscrapers across continental Europe for the first half of the 20th century. By 1940, there were around 100 high-rise buildings in Europe ( List of early skyscrapers ). Some examples of these are the 43 m (141 ft) tall 1898 Witte Huis (White House) in Rotterdam ; the 51.5 m (169 ft) tall PAST Building (1906–1908) in Warsaw ; the Royal Liver Building in Liverpool, completed in 1911 and 90 m (300 ft) high; [ 35 ] the 57 m (187 ft) tall 1924 Marx House in Düsseldorf , the 65 m (213 ft) tall Borsigturm in Berlin , built in 1924, the 65 m (213 ft) tall Hansahochhaus in Cologne , Germany, built in 1925; the 61 m (200 ft) Kungstornen (Kings' Towers) in Stockholm , Sweden, which were built 1924–25; [ 36 ] the 77 m (253 ft) Ullsteinhaus in Berlin, Germany, built in 1927; the 89 m (292 ft) Edificio Telefónica in Madrid , Spain, built in 1929; the 87.5 m (287 ft) Boerentoren in Antwerp, Belgium, built in 1932; the 66 m (217 ft) Prudential Building in Warsaw , Poland, built in 1934; and the 108 m (354 ft) Torre Piacentini in Genoa , Italy, built in 1940.

After an early competition between New York City and Chicago for the world's tallest building, New York took the lead by 1895 with the completion of the 103 m (338 ft) tall American Surety Building , leaving New York with the title of the world's tallest building for many years. America by far produced the most skyscrapers in this period.

Modern skyscrapers [ edit ] Skyscrapers and buildings in  (Abu Dhabi, Middle East) Modern skyscrapers are built with steel or reinforced concrete frameworks and curtain walls of glass or polished stone . They use mechanical equipment such as water pumps and elevators . Since the 1960s, according to the CTBUH (Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat) the skyscraper has been reoriented away from a symbol for North American corporate power to instead communicate a city or nation's place in the world.

[ 37 ] Stalinist skyscrapers Main building of Moscow State University (1953), in Moscow Palace of Culture and Science (1955), in Warsaw Grand Hotel International (1956), in Prague The construction of very tall skyscrapers entered a three-decades-long era of stagnation in 1930 due to the Great Depression and then World War II . Shortly after the war ended, Russia began construction on a series of skyscrapers in Moscow . Seven, dubbed the " Seven Sisters ", were built between 1947 and 1953; and one, the Main building of Moscow State University , was the tallest building in Europe for nearly four decades (1953–1990). Other skyscrapers in the style of Socialist Classicism were erected in East Germany ( Frankfurter Tor ), Poland ( PKiN ), Ukraine ( Hotel Moscow ), Latvia ( Academy of Sciences ), and other Eastern Bloc countries.

Western European countries also began to permit taller skyscrapers during the years immediately following World War II. Early examples include Edificio España (Spain) and Torre Breda (Italy).

From the 1930s onward, skyscrapers began to appear in various cities in East and Southeast Asia as well as in Latin America . Finally, they also began to be constructed in cities in Africa , the Middle East , South Asia , and Oceania from the late 1950s.

Skyscraper projects after World War II typically rejected the classical designs of the early skyscrapers , instead embracing the uniform international style ; many older skyscrapers were redesigned to suit contemporary tastes or even demolished—such as New York's Singer Building , once the world's tallest skyscraper.

German-American architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe became one of the world's most renowned architects in the second half of the 20th century. He conceived the glass façade skyscraper [ 38 ] and, along with Norwegian Fred Severud , [ 39 ] designed the Seagram Building in 1958, a skyscraper that is often regarded as the pinnacle of modernist high-rise architecture.

[ 40 ] Postwar modernist skyscrapers UN Secretariat Building (1952), in New York City Seagram Building (1958), in New York City Chałubińskiego 8 (1978), in Warsaw Skyscraper construction surged throughout the 1960s. The impetus behind the upswing was a series of transformative innovations [ 41 ] which made it possible for people to live and work in "cities in the sky".

[ 42 ] Sculpture honoring Fazlur Rahman Khan at the Willis Tower in Chicago. Khan made important advancements in skyscraper engineering.

[ 43 ] In the early 1960s Bangladeshi-American structural engineer Fazlur Rahman Khan , considered the "father of tubular designs " for high-rises, [ 44 ] discovered that the dominating rigid steel frame structure was not the only system apt for tall buildings, marking a new era of skyscraper construction in terms of multiple structural systems .

[ 45 ] His central innovation in skyscraper design and construction was the concept of the "tube" structural system , including the "framed tube", "trussed tube", and "bundled tube".

[ 46 ] His "tube concept", using all the exterior wall perimeter structure of a building to simulate a thin-walled tube, revolutionized tall building design.

[ 47 ] These systems allow greater economic efficiency, [ 48 ] and also allow skyscrapers to take on various shapes, no longer needing to be rectangular and box-shaped.

[ 49 ] The first building to employ the tube structure was the Chestnut De-Witt apartment building, [ 41 ] considered to be a major development in modern architecture.

[ 41 ] These new designs opened an economic door for contractors, engineers, architects, and investors, providing vast amounts of real estate space on minimal plots of land.

[ 42 ] Over the next fifteen years, many towers were built by Fazlur Rahman Khan and the " Second Chicago School ", [ 50 ] including the hundred-story John Hancock Center and the massive 442 m (1,450 ft) Willis Tower .

[ 51 ] Other pioneers of this field include Hal Iyengar , William LeMessurier , and Minoru Yamasaki , the architect of the World Trade Center .

Many buildings designed in the 1970s lacked a particular style and recalled ornamentation from earlier buildings designed before the 1950s. These design plans ignored the environment and loaded structures with decorative elements and extravagant finishes.

[ 52 ] This approach to design was opposed by Fazlur Khan and he considered the designs to be whimsical rather than rational. Moreover, he considered the work to be a waste of precious natural resources.

[ 53 ] Khan's work promoted structures integrated with architecture and the least use of material resulting in the smallest impact on the environment.

[ 54 ] The next era of skyscrapers will focus on the environment including performance of structures, types of material, construction practices, absolute minimal use of materials/natural resources, embodied energy within the structures, and more importantly, a holistically integrated building systems approach.

[ 52 ] Postmodern skyscrapers Messeturm (1990), in Frankfurt Petronas Towers (1998), in Kuala Lumpur Jin Mao Tower (1999), in Shanghai Modern building practices regarding supertall structures have led to the study of "vanity height".

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Vanity height, according to the CTBUH, is the distance between the highest floor and its architectural top (excluding antennae, flagpole or other functional extensions). Vanity height first appeared in New York City skyscrapers as early as the 1920s and 1930s but supertall buildings have relied on such uninhabitable extensions for on average 30% of their height, raising potential definitional and sustainability issues.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] The current era of skyscrapers focuses on sustainability , its built and natural environments, including the performance of structures, types of materials, construction practices, absolute minimal use of materials and natural resources, energy within the structure, and a holistically integrated building systems approach.

LEED is a current green building standard.

[ 60 ] Architecturally, with the movements of Postmodernism , New Urbanism and New Classical Architecture , that established since the 1980s, a more classical approach came back to global skyscraper design, that remains popular today.

[ 61 ] Examples are the Wells Fargo Center , NBC Tower , Parkview Square , 30 Park Place , the Messeturm , the iconic Petronas Towers and Jin Mao Tower .

Contemporary skyscrapers The Shard (2012), in London One World Trade Center (2013), in New York City Shanghai Tower (2014), in Shanghai Other contemporary styles and movements in skyscraper design include organic , sustainable , neo-futurist , structuralist , high-tech , deconstructivist , blob , digital , streamline , novelty , critical regionalist , vernacular , Neo Art Deco and neohistorist , also known as revivalist .

3 September is the global commemorative day for skyscrapers, called "Skyscraper Day".

[ 62 ] New York City developers competed among themselves, with successively taller buildings claiming the title of "world's tallest" in the 1920s and early 1930s, culminating with the completion of the 318.9 m (1,046 ft) Chrysler Building in 1930 and the 443.2 m (1,454 ft) Empire State Building in 1931, the world's tallest building for forty years. The first completed 417 m (1,368 ft) tall World Trade Center tower became the world's tallest building in 1972. However, it was overtaken by the Sears Tower (now Willis Tower ) in Chicago within two years. The 442 m (1,450 ft) tall Sears Tower stood as the world's tallest building for 24 years, from 1974 until 1998, until it was edged out by 452 m (1,483 ft) Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, which held the title for six years.

Design and construction [ edit ] Main article: Skyscraper design and construction The Sky Garden in London's 20 Fenchurch Street is an example of where top floors are used as restaurants or viewing areas, and in this case, both.

Contemporary skyscrapers in Shanghai The design and construction of skyscrapers involves creating safe, habitable spaces in very tall buildings. The buildings must support their weight, resist wind and earthquakes, and protect occupants from fire. Yet they must also be conveniently accessible, even on the upper floors, and provide utilities and a comfortable climate for the occupants. The problems posed in skyscraper design are considered among the most complex encountered given the balances required between economics , engineering , and construction management.

One common feature of skyscrapers is a steel framework from which curtain walls are suspended, rather than load-bearing walls of conventional construction. Most skyscrapers have a steel frame that enables them to be built taller than typical load-bearing walls of reinforced concrete. Skyscrapers usually have a particularly small surface area of what are conventionally thought of as walls. Because the walls are not load-bearing most skyscrapers are characterized by surface areas of windows made possible by the concept of steel frame and curtain wall. However, skyscrapers can also have curtain walls that mimic conventional walls and have a small surface area of windows.

The concept of a skyscraper is a product of the industrialized age , made possible by cheap fossil fuel derived energy and industrially refined raw materials such as steel and concrete . The construction of skyscrapers was enabled by steel frame construction that surpassed brick and mortar construction starting at the end of the 19th century and finally surpassing it in the 20th century together with reinforced concrete construction as the price of steel decreased and labor costs increased.

The steel frames become inefficient and uneconomic for supertall buildings as usable floor space is reduced for progressively larger supporting columns.

[ 63 ] Since about 1960, tubular designs have been used for high rises. This reduces the usage of material (more efficient in economic terms – Willis Tower uses a third less steel than the Empire State Building) yet allows greater height. It allows fewer interior columns, and so creates more usable floor space. It further enables buildings to take on various shapes.

Elevators are characteristic to skyscrapers. In 1852 Elisha Otis introduced the safety elevator, allowing convenient and safe passenger movement to upper floors. Today major manufacturers of elevators include Otis , ThyssenKrupp , Schindler , and KONE .

Advances in construction techniques have allowed skyscrapers to narrow in width, while increasing in height. Some of these new techniques include mass dampers to reduce vibrations and swaying, and gaps to allow air to pass through, reducing wind shear.

[ 64 ] Basic design considerations [ edit ] A view of the interior structural design can be seen in this residential skyscraper that was constructed in Florida , the Jade Signature .

Good structural design is important in most building design, but particularly for skyscrapers since even a small chance of catastrophic failure is unacceptable given the tremendous damage such failure would cause. This presents a paradox to civil engineers : the only way to assure a lack of failure is to test for all modes of failure, in both the laboratory and the real world. But the only way to know of all modes of failure is to learn from previous failures. Thus, no engineer can be absolutely sure that a given structure will resist all loadings that could cause failure; instead, one can only have large enough margins of safety such that a failure is acceptably unlikely. When buildings do fail, engineers question whether the failure was due to some lack of foresight or due to some unknown factor.

Loading and vibration [ edit ] The load a skyscraper experiences is largely from the force of the building material itself. In most building designs, the weight of the structure is much larger than the weight of the material that it will support beyond its own weight. In technical terms, the dead load , the load of the structure, is larger than the live load , the weight of things in the structure (people, furniture, vehicles, etc.). As such, the amount of structural material required within the lower levels of a skyscraper will be much larger than the material required within higher levels. This is not always visually apparent. The Empire State Building 's setbacks are actually a result of the building code at the time ( 1916 Zoning Resolution ), and were not structurally required. On the other hand, John Hancock Center 's shape is uniquely the result of how it supports loads. Vertical supports can come in several types, among which the most common for skyscrapers can be categorized as steel frames, concrete cores, tube within tube design, and shear walls.

The wind loading on a skyscraper is also considerable. In fact, the lateral wind load imposed on supertall structures is generally the governing factor in the structural design. Wind pressure increases with height, so for very tall buildings, the loads associated with wind are larger than dead or live loads.

Other vertical and horizontal loading factors come from varied, unpredictable sources, such as earthquakes.

Steel frame [ edit ] By 1895, steel had replaced cast iron as skyscrapers' structural material. Its malleability allowed it to be formed into a variety of shapes, and it could be riveted, ensuring strong connections.

[ 65 ] The simplicity of a steel frame eliminated the inefficient part of a shear wall, the central portion, and consolidated support members in a much stronger fashion by allowing both horizontal and vertical supports throughout. Among steel's drawbacks is that as more material must be supported as height increases, the distance between supporting members must decrease, which in turn increases the amount of material that must be supported. This becomes inefficient and uneconomic for buildings above 40 stories tall as usable floor spaces are reduced for supporting column and due to more usage of steel.

[ 63 ] Tube structural systems [ edit ] See also: Tube (structure) The Willis Tower in Chicago visibly expresses the bundled tube frame. Tube frame variations are commonly used in tall modern skyscapers.

A new structural system of framed tubes was developed by Fazlur Rahman Khan in 1963. The framed tube structure is defined as "a three dimensional space structure composed of three, four, or possibly more frames, braced frames, or shear walls, joined at or near their edges to form a vertical tube-like structural system capable of resisting lateral forces in any direction by cantilevering from the foundation".

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Closely spaced interconnected exterior columns form the tube. Horizontal loads (primarily wind) are supported by the structure as a whole. Framed tubes allow fewer interior columns, and so create more usable floor space, and about half the exterior surface is available for windows. Where larger openings like garage doors are required, the tube frame must be interrupted, with transfer girders used to maintain structural integrity. Tube structures cut down costs, at the same time allowing buildings to reach greater heights. Concrete tube-frame construction [ 46 ] was first used in the DeWitt-Chestnut Apartment Building , completed in Chicago in 1963, [ 68 ] and soon after in the John Hancock Center and World Trade Center .

The tubular systems are fundamental to tall building design. Most buildings over 40 stories constructed since the 1960s now use a tube design derived from Khan's structural engineering principles, [ 63 ] [ 69 ] examples including the construction of the World Trade Center , Aon Center , Petronas Towers , Jin Mao Building , and most other supertall skyscrapers since the 1960s.

[ 46 ] The strong influence of tube structure design is also evident in the construction of the current tallest skyscraper, the Burj Khalifa , [ 49 ] which uses a Buttressed core .

[ 70 ] Trussed tube and X-bracing: Changes of structure with height; the tubular systems are fundamental for supertall buildings.

Khan pioneered several other variations of the tube structure design. One of these was the concept of X-bracing , or the trussed tube , first employed for the John Hancock Center . This concept reduced the lateral load on the building by transferring the load into the exterior columns. This allows for a reduced need for interior columns thus creating more floor space. This concept can be seen in the John Hancock Center, designed in 1965 and completed in 1969. One of the most famous buildings of the structural expressionist style, the skyscraper's distinctive X-bracing exterior is actually a hint that the structure's skin is indeed part of its 'tubular system'. This idea is one of the architectural techniques the building used to climb to record heights (the tubular system is essentially the spine that helps the building stand upright during wind and earthquake loads ). This X-bracing allows for both higher performance from tall structures and the ability to open up the inside floorplan (and usable floor space) if the architect desires.

The John Hancock Center was far more efficient than earlier steel-frame structures. Where the Empire State Building (1931), required about 206 kilograms of steel per square metre and 28 Liberty Street (1961) required 275, the John Hancock Center required only 145.

[ 48 ] The trussed tube concept was applied to many later skyscrapers, including the Onterie Center , Citigroup Center and Bank of China Tower .

[ 71 ] The Bank of China Tower in Hong Kong uses a trussed tube design Bundled tube: An important variation on the tube frame is the bundled tube , which uses several interconnected tube frames. The Willis Tower in Chicago used this design, employing nine tubes of varying height to achieve its distinct appearance. The bundled tube structure meant that "buildings no longer need be boxlike in appearance: they could become sculpture." [ 49 ] Tube in tube: Tube-in-tube system takes advantage of core shear wall tubes in addition to exterior tubes. The inner tube and outer tube work together to resist gravity loads and lateral loads and to provide additional rigidity to the structure to prevent significant deflections at the top. This design was first used in One Shell Plaza .

[ 72 ] Later buildings to use this structural system include the Petronas Towers .

[ 73 ] Outrigger and belt truss: The outrigger and belt truss system is a lateral load resisting system in which the tube structure is connected to the central core wall with very stiff outriggers and belt trusses at one or more levels.

[ 74 ] BHP House was the first building to use this structural system followed by the First Wisconsin Center, since renamed U.S. Bank Center , in Milwaukee. The center rises 601 feet, with three belt trusses at the bottom, middle and top of the building. The exposed belt trusses serve aesthetic and structural purposes.

[ 75 ] Later buildings to use this include Shanghai World Financial Center .

[ 74 ] Concrete tube structures: The last major buildings engineered by Khan were the One Magnificent Mile and Onterie Center in Chicago, which employed his bundled tube and trussed tube system designs respectively. In contrast to his earlier buildings, which were mainly steel, his last two buildings were concrete. His earlier DeWitt-Chestnut Apartments building, built in 1963 in Chicago, was also a concrete building with a tube structure.

[ 46 ] Trump Tower in New York City is also another example that adapted this system.

[ 76 ] Shear wall frame interaction system: The Cook County Administration Building in Chicago was the first to utilize a shear wall frame interaction system Khan developed the shear wall frame interaction system for mid high-rise buildings. This structural system uses combinations of shear walls and frames designed to resist lateral forces.

[ 77 ] The first building to use this structural system was the 35-stories Brunswick Building.

[ 75 ] The Brunswick building (today known as the " Cook County Administration Building ") was completed in 1965 and became the tallest reinforced concrete structure of its time. The structural system of Brunswick Building consists of a concrete shear wall core surrounded by an outer concrete frame of columns and spandrels.

[ 78 ] Apartment buildings up to 70 stories high have successfully used this concept.

[ 79 ] The elevator conundrum [ edit ] The invention of the elevator was a precondition for the invention of skyscrapers, given that most people would not (or could not) climb more than a few flights of stairs at a time. The elevators in a skyscraper are not simply a necessary utility, like running water and electricity, but are in fact closely related to the design of the whole structure: a taller building requires more elevators to service the additional floors, but the elevator shafts consume valuable floor space. If the service core, which contains the elevator shafts, becomes too big, it can reduce the profitability of the building. Architects must therefore balance the value gained by adding height against the value lost to the expanding service core.

[ 80 ] Sky lobby at Central Plaza in Hong Kong which has clear signage of the floors served by the different elevators.

Many tall buildings use elevators in a non-standard configuration to reduce their footprint. Buildings such as the former World Trade Center Towers and Chicago's John Hancock Center use sky lobbies , where express elevators take passengers to upper floors which serve as the base for local elevators. This allows architects and engineers to place elevator shafts on top of each other, saving space. Sky lobbies and express elevators take up a significant amount of space, however, and add to the amount of time spent commuting between floors.

Other buildings, such as the Petronas Towers , use double-deck elevators , allowing more people to fit in a single elevator, and reaching two floors at every stop. It is possible to use even more than two levels on an elevator, although this has never been done. The main problem with double-deck elevators is that they cause everyone in the elevator to stop when only person on one level needs to get off at a given floor.

Buildings with sky lobbies include the World Trade Center , Petronas Twin Towers , Willis Tower and Taipei 101 . The 44th-floor sky lobby of the John Hancock Center also featured the first high-rise indoor swimming pool , which remains the highest in the United States.

[ 81 ] Economic rationale [ edit ] Hong Kong's high land prices and geographic limitations justify the construction of skyscrapers [ 82 ] Skyscrapers are usually situated in city centres where the price of land is high. Constructing a skyscraper becomes justified if the price of land is so high that it makes economic sense to build upward as to minimize the cost of the land per the total floor area of a building. Thus the construction of skyscrapers is dictated by economics and results in skyscrapers in a certain part of a large city unless a building code restricts the height of buildings.

Skyscrapers are rarely seen in small cities and they are characteristic of large cities, because of the critical importance of high land prices for the construction of skyscrapers. Usually only office, commercial and hotel users can afford the rents in the city center and thus most tenants of skyscrapers are of these classes.

Today, skyscrapers are an increasingly common sight where land is expensive, as in the centres of big cities, because they provide such a high ratio of rentable floor space per unit area of land.

Another disadvantage of very high skyscrapers is the loss of usable floorspace, as many elevator shafts are needed to enable performant vertical travelling. This led to the introduction of express lifts and sky lobbies where transfer to slower distribution lifts can be done.

Environmental impact [ edit ] Further information: Bird-skyscraper collisions The Gherkin in London is an example of a modern environmentally friendly skyscraper.

Constructing a single skyscraper requires large quantities of materials like steel, concrete, and glass, and these materials represent significant embodied energy . Skyscrapers are thus material and energy intensive buildings.

Skyscrapers have considerable mass, requiring a stronger foundation than a shorter, lighter building. In construction, building materials must be lifted to the top of a skyscraper during construction, requiring more energy than would be necessary at lower heights. Furthermore, a skyscraper consumes much electricity because potable and non-potable water have to be pumped to the highest occupied floors, skyscrapers are usually designed to be mechanically ventilated , elevators are generally used instead of stairs, and electric lights are needed in rooms far from the windows and windowless spaces such as elevators, bathrooms and stairwells.

Skyscrapers can be artificially lit and the energy requirements can be covered by renewable energy or other electricity generation with low greenhouse gas emissions . Heating and cooling of skyscrapers can be efficient, because of centralized HVAC systems, heat radiation blocking windows and small surface area of the building. There is Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification for skyscrapers. For example, the Empire State Building received a gold Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design rating in September 2011 and the Empire State Building is the tallest LEED certified building in the United States, [ 83 ] proving that skyscrapers can be environmentally friendly.

The Gherkin in London , the United Kingdom is another example of an environmentally friendly skyscraper.

[ 84 ] In the lower levels of a skyscraper a larger percentage of the building floor area must be devoted to the building structure and services than is required for lower buildings: More structure – because it must be stronger to support more floors above The elevator conundrum creates the need for more lift shafts—everyone comes in at the bottom and they all have to pass through the lower part of the building to get to the upper levels.

Building services – power and water enter the building from below and have to pass through the lower levels to get to the upper levels.

In low-rise structures, the support rooms ( chillers , transformers , boilers , pumps and air handling units ) can be put in basements or roof space—areas which have low rental value. There is, however, a limit to how far this plant can be located from the area it serves. The farther away it is the larger the risers for ducts and pipes from this plant to the floors they serve and the more floor area these risers take. In practice this means that in highrise buildings this plant is located on 'plant levels' at intervals up the building.

Operational energy [ edit ] The building sector accounts for approximately 50% of greenhouse gas emissions, with operational energy accounting for 80-90% of building related energy use.

[ 85 ] Operational energy use is affected by the magnitude of conduction between the interior and exterior, convection from infiltrating air, and radiation through glazing . The extent to which these factors affect the operational energy vary depending on the microclimate of the skyscraper, with increased wind speeds as the height of the skyscraper increases, and a decrease in the dry bulb temperature as the altitude increases.

[ 85 ] For example, when moving from 1.5 meters to 284 meters, the dry bulb temperature decreased by 1.85 °C while the wind speeds increased from 2.46 meters per seconds to 7.75 meters per second, which led to a 2.4% decrease in summer cooling in reference to the Freedom Tower in New York City. However, for the same building it was found that the annual energy use intensity was 9.26% higher because of the lack of shading at high altitudes which increased the cooling loads for the remainder of the year while a combination of temperature, wind, shading, and the effects of reflections led to a combined 13.13% increase in annual energy use intensity.

[ 86 ] In a study performed by Leung and Ray in 2013, it was found that the average energy use intensity of a structure with between 0 and 9 floors was approximately 80 kBtu/ft/yr, while the energy use intensity of a structure with more than 50 floors was about 117 kBtu/ft/yr. The slight decrease in energy use intensity over 30-39 floors can be attributed to the fact that the increase in pressure within the heating, cooling, and water distribution systems levels out at a point between 40 and 49 floors and the energy savings due to the microclimate of higher floors are able to be seen.

[ 87 ] There is a gap in data in which another study looking at the same information but for taller buildings is needed.

Elevators [ edit ] A portion of the operational energy increase in tall buildings is related to the usage of elevators because the distance traveled and the speed at which they travel increases as the height of the building increases. Between 5 and 25% of the total energy consumed in a tall building is from the use of elevators . As the height of the building increases it is also more inefficient because of the presence of higher drag and friction losses.

[ 88 ] Embodied energy [ edit ] The embodied energy associated with the construction of skyscrapers varies based on the materials used. Embodied energy is quantified per unit of material. Skyscrapers inherently have higher embodied energy than low-rise buildings due to the increase in material used as more floors are built.  For all floor types except for steel-concrete floors, it was found that after 60 stories, there was a decrease in unit embodied energy but when considering all floors, there was exponential growth due to a double dependence on height. The first of which is the relationship between an increase in height leading to an increase in the quantity of materials used, and the second being the increase in height leading to an increase in size of elements to increase the structural capacity of the building. A careful choice in building materials can likely reduce the embodied energy without reducing the number of floors constructed within the bounds presented.

[ 89 ] Embodied carbon [ edit ] Similar to embodied energy, the embodied carbon of a building is dependent on the materials chosen for its construction. Both methods of measuring the embodied carbon show that there is a point where the embodied carbon is lowest before increasing again as the height increases. For the total embodied carbon it is dependent on the structure type, but is either around 40 stories, or approximately 60 stories. For the square meter of gross floor area, the lowest embodied carbon was found at either 40 stories, or approximately 70 stories.

[ 90 ] Air pollution [ edit ] In urban areas, the configuration of buildings can lead to exacerbated wind patterns and an uneven dispersion of pollutants . When the height of buildings surrounding a source of air pollution is increased, the size and occurrence of both "dead-zones" and "hotspots" were increased in areas where there were almost no pollutants and high concentrations of pollutants, respectively. This progression shows how as the height of Building F increases, the dispersion of pollutants decreases, but the concentration within the building cluster increases. The variation of velocity fields can be affected by the construction of new buildings as well, rather than solely the increase in height.

[ 91 ] As urban centers continue to expand upward and outward, the present velocity fields will continue to trap polluted air close to the tall buildings within the city. Specifically within major cities, a majority of air pollution is derived from transportation, whether it be cars, trains, planes, or boats. As urban sprawl continues and pollutants continue to be emitted, the air pollutants will continue to be trapped within these urban centers.

[ 92 ] Different pollutants can be detrimental to human health in different ways. For example, particulate matter from vehicular exhaust and power generation can cause asthma, bronchitis, and cancer, while nitrogen dioxide from motor engine combustion processes can cause neurological disfunction and asphyxiation.

[ 93 ] LEED/green building rating [ edit ] Shanghai Tower , the tallest and largest LEED Platinum certified building in the world since 2015.

Like with all other buildings, if special measures are taken to incorporate sustainable design methods early on in the design process, it is possible to obtain a green building rating, such as a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification. An integrated design approach is crucial in making sure that design decisions that positively impact the whole building are made at the beginning of the process. Because of the massive scale of skyscrapers, the decisions made by the design team must take all factors into account, including the buildings impact on the surrounding community, the effect of the building on the direction in which air and water move, and the impact of the construction process, must be taken into account. There are several design methods that could be employed in the construction of a skyscraper that would take advantage of the height of the building.

[ 94 ] The microclimates that exist as the height of the building increases can be taken advantage of to increase the natural ventilation , decrease the cooling load, and increase daylighting. Natural ventilation can be increased by utilizing the stack effect , in which warm air moves upward and increases the movement of the air within the building. If utilizing the stack effect, buildings must take extra care to design for fire separation techniques, as the stack effect can also exacerbate the severity of a fire.

[ 95 ] Skyscrapers are considered to be internally dominated buildings because of their size as well as the fact that a majority are used as some sort of office building with high cooling loads. Due to the microclimate created at the upper floors with the increased wind speed and the decreased dry bulb temperatures, the cooling load will naturally be reduced because of infiltration through the thermal envelope. By taking advantage of the naturally cooler temperatures at higher altitudes, skyscrapers can reduce their cooling loads passively. On the other side of this argument, is the lack of shading at higher altitudes by other buildings, so the solar heat gain will be larger for higher floors than for floors at the lower end of the building. Special measures should be taken to shade upper floors from sunlight during the overheated period to ensure thermal comfort without increasing the cooling load.

[ 87 ] History of the tallest skyscrapers [ edit ] Main articles: History of the tallest buildings in the world and List of tallest buildings At the beginning of the 20th century, New York City was a center for the Beaux-Arts architectural movement, attracting the talents of such great architects as Stanford White and Carrere and Hastings . As better construction and engineering technology became available as the century progressed, New York City and Chicago became the focal point of the competition for the tallest building in the world. Each city's striking skyline has been composed of numerous and varied skyscrapers, many of which are icons of 20th-century architecture: The E. V. Haughwout Building in Manhattan was the first building to successfully install a passenger elevator, doing so on 23 March 1857.

[ 96 ] The Equitable Life Building in Manhattan was the first office building to feature passenger elevators.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] The Home Insurance Building by William Le Baron Jenney in Chicago, which was built in 1884, was the first tall building with a steel skeleton.

[ 99 ] The Singer Building , an expansion to an existing structure in Lower Manhattan was the world's tallest building when completed in 1908. Designed by Ernest Flagg , [ 100 ] it was 612 feet (187 m) tall.

[ 101 ] The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower , across Madison Square Park from the Flatiron Building , was the world's tallest building when completed in 1909. It was designed by the architectural firm of Napoleon LeBrun & Sons and stood 700 feet (210 m) tall.

[ 102 ] The Woolworth Building , a neo-Gothic "Cathedral of Commerce" overlooking New York City Hall , was designed by Cass Gilbert . At 792 feet (241 m), it became the world's tallest building upon its completion in 1913, an honor it retained until 1930.

[ 103 ] 40 Wall Street , a 71-story, 927-foot-tall (283 m) neo-Gothic tower designed by H. Craig Severance , was the world's tallest building for a month in May 1930.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] The Chrysler Building in New York City took the lead in late May 1930 as the tallest building in the world, reaching 1,046 feet (319 m).

[ 106 ] Designed by William Van Alen , an Art Deco style masterpiece with an exterior crafted of brick, [ 107 ] the Chrysler Building continues to be a favorite of New Yorkers to this day.

[ 108 ] The Empire State Building , nine streets south of the Chrysler in Manhattan, topped out at 1,250 feet (381 m) and 102 stories in 1931.  The first building to have more than 100 floors, it was designed by Shreve, Lamb and Harmon in the contemporary Art Deco style and takes its name from the nickname of New York State . The antenna mast added in 1951 brought pinnacle height to 1,472 feet (449 m), lowered in 1984 to 1,454 feet (443 m).

[ 109 ] The World Trade Center by Minoru Yamasaki officially surpassed the Empire State Building in 1970, was completed in 1973, and consisted of two tall towers and several smaller buildings. For a short time the World Trade Center's North Tower―completed in 1972―was the world's tallest building, until surpassed by the Sears Tower in 1973. Upon completion, the towers stood for 28 years, until the September 11 attacks destroyed the buildings in 2001.

The Sears Tower (now known as Willis Tower) was completed in 1974. It was the first building to employ the " bundled tube " structural system, designed by Fazlur Khan . It was surpassed in height by the Petronas Towers in 1998, but remained the tallest in some categories until Burj Khalifa surpassed it in all categories in 2010. It is currently the third tallest building in the United States , after One World Trade Center (which was built following 9/11), and Central Park Tower in New York City .

Momentum in setting records passed from the United States to other nations with the opening of the Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in 1998. The record for the world's tallest building has remained in Asia since the opening of Taipei 101 in Taipei, Taiwan, in 2004. A number of architectural records, including those of the world's tallest building and tallest free-standing structure, moved to the Middle East with the opening of the Burj Khalifa in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

This geographical transition is accompanied by a change in approach to skyscraper design. For much of the 20th century large buildings took the form of simple geometrical shapes. This reflected the "international style" or modernist philosophy shaped by Bauhaus architects early in the century. The last of these, the Willis Tower and World Trade Center towers in New York, erected in the 1970s, reflect the philosophy. Tastes shifted in the decade which followed, and new skyscrapers began to exhibit postmodernist influences. This approach to design avails itself of historical elements, often adapted and re-interpreted, in creating technologically modern structures. The Petronas Twin Towers recall Asian pagoda architecture and Islamic geometric principles. Taipei 101 likewise reflects the pagoda tradition as it incorporates ancient motifs such as the ruyi symbol. The Burj Khalifa draws inspiration from traditional Islamic art . Architects in recent years [ when?

] have sought to create structures that would not appear equally at home if set in any part of the world, but that reflect the culture thriving in the spot where they stand.

[ citation needed ] The following list measures height of the roof, not the pinnacle.

[ 110 ] [ failed verification ] The more common gauge is the "highest architectural detail"; such ranking would have included Petronas Towers, built in 1996.

Built Building City Country Official Height Floors Pinnacle Current status 1870 Equitable Life Building New York United States 43 m 142 ft 8 Destroyed by fire in 1912 1889 Auditorium Building Chicago 82 m 270 ft 17 Standing 1890 New York World Building New York 94 m 309 ft 20 106 m 349 ft Demolished in 1955 1894 Philadelphia City Hall Philadelphia 155.8 m 511 ft 9 167 m 548 ft Standing 1908 Singer Building New York 187 m 612 ft 47 Demolished in 1968 1909 Met Life Tower 213 m 700 ft 50 Standing 1913 Woolworth Building 241 m 792 ft 57 Standing 1930 40 Wall Street 282 m 925 ft 70 283 m 927 ft Standing 1930 Chrysler Building 319 m 1046 ft 77 319 m 1,046 ft Standing 1931 Empire State Building 381 m 1,250 ft 102 443 m 1,454 ft Standing 1972 World Trade Center (North Tower) 417 m 1,368 ft 110 526.8 m 1,728 ft Destroyed in 2001 in the September 11 attacks 1974 Willis Tower (formerly Sears Tower) Chicago 442 m 1,450 ft 110 527.3 m 1,729 ft Standing 1996 Petronas Towers Kuala Lumpur Malaysia 451.9 m 1,483 ft 88 451.9 m 1,483 ft Standing 2004 Taipei 101 Taipei Taiwan 508.3 m 1,667 ft 101 509.2 m 1,668 ft Standing 2010 Burj Khalifa Dubai United Arab Emirates 828 m 2,717 ft 163 829.8 m 2,722 ft Standing Gallery [ edit ] The Empire State Building was the tallest from 1931 to 1971. It was the first skyscraper to have over 100 floors.

The original 1 World Trade Center (North Tower) was the tallest in the world from 1971 to 1974 The Willis Tower in Chicago, formerly the Sears Tower, was the world's tallest building from 1974 to 1998 The Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur were the tallest from 1998 to 2004.

Taipei 101 in Taipei, the world's tallest skyscraper from 2004 to 2010, was the first to exceed the 500 m (1,600 ft) mark.

The Burj Khalifa is the current tallest building in the world. The setbacks at various heights are a typical skyscraper feature.

Future developments [ edit ] See also: List of visionary tall buildings and structures and List of future tallest buildings Proposals for such structures have been put forward, including the Burj Mubarak Al Kabir in Kuwait and Azerbaijan Tower in Baku . Kilometer-plus structures present architectural challenges that may eventually place them in a new architectural category.

[ 111 ] The first building under construction and planned to be over one kilometre tall is the Jeddah Tower .

Wooden skyscrapers [ edit ] Main article: List of tallest wooden buildings The 25-story Ascent MKE is the world highest mass timber structure.

[ 112 ] Several wooden skyscraper designs have been designed and built. A 14-story housing project in Bergen, Norway known as 'Treet' or 'The Tree' became the world's tallest wooden apartment block when it was completed in late 2015.

[ 113 ] The Tree's record was eclipsed by Brock Commons , an 18-story wooden dormitory at the University of British Columbia in Canada , when it was completed in September 2016.

[ 114 ] A 40-story residential building 'Trätoppen' has been proposed by architect Anders Berensson to be built in Stockholm, Sweden .

[ 115 ] Trätoppen would be the tallest building in Stockholm, though there are no immediate plans to begin construction.

[ 116 ] The tallest currently-planned wooden skyscraper is the 70-story W350 Project in Tokyo, to be built by the Japanese wood products company Sumitomo Forestry Co. to celebrate its 350th anniversary in 2041.

[ 117 ] An 80-story wooden skyscraper, the River Beech Tower, has been proposed by a team including architects Perkins + Will and the University of Cambridge . The River Beech Tower, on the banks of the Chicago River in Chicago, Illinois , would be 348 feet shorter than the W350 Project despite having 10 more storys.

[ 118 ] [ 117 ] Wooden skyscrapers are estimated to be around a quarter of the weight of an equivalent reinforced-concrete structure as well as reducing the building carbon footprint by 60–75%. Buildings have been designed using cross-laminated timber (CLT) which gives a higher rigidity and strength to wooden structures.

[ 119 ] CLT panels are prefabricated and can therefore save on building time.

[ 120 ] See also [ edit ] Architecture portal CTBUH Skyscraper Award Earthscraper Emporis Skyscraper Award Groundscraper List of cities with the most skyscrapers List of tallest buildings List of tallest structures Pencil tower Plyscraper Seascraper Skyscraper design and construction Skyscraper Index Skyscraper Museum in NYC Skyscrapers in film Skyline Vertical farming , "farmscrapers" World's littlest skyscraper drag-coefficient material-fatigue down-force Steel frame Notes [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ "Skyscraper, Emporis Standards" .

Emporis.com . Archived from the original on 11 May 2015 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 .

^ "What is a Skyscraper?" .

Theb1m.com . Retrieved 7 November 2020 .

^ "Countries by Number of 150m+ Buildings - The Skyscraper Center" .

www.skyscrapercenter.com . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

^ "Countries by Number of 150m+ Buildings - The Skyscraper Center" .

www.skyscrapercenter.com . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ Petruzzello, Melissa.

"Skyscraper" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 21 February 2022 .

Skyscraper, very tall, multistoried building. The name first came into use during the 1880s, shortly after the first skyscrapers were built, in the United States. The development of skyscrapers came as a result of the coincidence of several technological and social developments. The term skyscraper originally applied to buildings of 10 to 20 stories, but by the late 20th century the term was used to describe high-rise buildings of unusual height, generally greater than 40 or 50 stories.

^ a b Ambrose, Gavin; Harris, Paul; Stone, Sally (2008).

The Visual Dictionary of Architecture . Switzerland: AVA Publishing SA. p. 233.

ISBN 978-2-940373-54-3 .

Skyscraper: A tall, multi-story building. Skyscrapers are different from towers or masts because they are habitable. The term was first applied during the late-nineteenth century, as the public marvelled at the elevated, steel-frame buildings being erected in Chicago and New York, USA. Modern skyscrapers tend to be constructed from reinforced concrete. As a general rule, a building must be at least 150 metres high to qualify as a skyscraper.

^ "Magical Hystory Tour: Skyscrapers" . 15 August 2010. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015.

No one is certain which was the first true skyscraper, but Chicago's ten-story Home Insurance Building (1885) is a top contender.

^ Charles E. Peterson (October 1950). "Ante-Bellum Skyscraper".

Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians .

9 (3): 25– 28.

doi : 10.2307/987464 .

JSTOR 987464 .

In the annals of the American skyscraper there was, perhaps, nothing more daring than John McArthur, Jr.'s design for the Jayne Granite building, erected on lower Chestnut Street near the Philadelphia riverfront, just a century ago (FIG. 2). More than a generation older than the celebrated works of Louis Sullivan in Chicago and St. Louis. [..] Sullivan was for several months a cub draftsman in Furness and Hewitt's office just across the street. Although he does not seem to have mentioned in his writings Dr. Jayne's "proud and soaring" patent medicine headquarters, we may well wonder if some of the famous skyscraper designs of Chicago and St. Louis do not owe a real debt to Philadelphia.

^ "Magical Hystory Tour: Skyscrapers" . 15 August 2010. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015.

The thirteen-story Tower Building (1889) just down the avenue at 50 Broadway, was the first New York skyscraper to use skeletal steel construction.

^ Ivars Peterson (5 April 1986).

"The first skyscraper – new theory that Home Insurance Building was not the first" . CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012 . Retrieved 6 January 2010 .

"In my view, we can no longer argue that the Home Insurance Building was the first skyscraper," says Carl W. Condit, now retired from Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., and author of several books on Chicago architecture. "The claim rests on an unacceptably narrow idea of what constitutes a high-rise commercial building," he says. "If there is a building in which all these technical factors—structural system, elevator, utilities—converge at the requisite level of maturity," argues Condit, "it's the Equitable Life Assurance Building in New York." Completed in 1870, the building rose 7½ stories, twice the height of its neighbors.

^ "Huge New Rogers Skyscraper Proposed" . skyscrapernews.com. 3 December 2007. Archived from the original on 4 October 2018 . Retrieved 3 December 2007 .

...their eleventh proper skyscraper, that is by definition buildings above 150 metres ^ Data Standards: skyscraper (ESN 24419) [ usurped ] , Emporis Standards , accessed on line July 2020. "A skyscraper is defined on Emporis as a multi-story building whose architectural height is at least 100 meters. This definition falls midway between many common definitions worldwide, and is intended as a metric compromise which can be applied across the board worldwide" ^ "CTBUH Height Criteria: Tall, Supertall, and Megatall Buildings" .

CTBUH . 20 March 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2020 .

^ A.F.K.

"The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Cathedral Church of Lincoln, by A.F. Kendric, B.A" . Gwydir.demon.co.uk. Archived from the original on 4 February 2012 . Retrieved 5 June 2011 .

^ a b Aldrete, Gregory S. (2004).

Daily Life in the Roman City: Rome, Pompeii and Ostia . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 79f.

ISBN 978-0-313-33174-9 .

^ Strabo , 5.3.7 ^ Alexander G. McKay: Römische Häuser, Villen und Paläste, Feldmeilen 1984, ISBN 3-7611-0585-1 p. 231 ^ Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 2719, in: Katja Lembke, Cäcilia Fluck, Günter Vittmann: Ägyptens späte Blüte. Die Römer am Nil , Mainz 2004, ISBN 3-8053-3276-9 , p.29 ^ a b Werner Müller: "dtv-Atlas Baukunst I. Allgemeiner Teil: Baugeschichte von Mesopotamien bis Byzanz", 14th ed., 2005, ISBN 978-3-423-03020-5 , p.345 ^ Behrens-Abouseif, Doris (1992).

Islamic Architecture in Cairo .

Brill Publishers . p. 6.

ISBN 978-90-04-09626-4 .

^ Mortada, Hisham (2003).

Traditional Islamic principles of built environment .

Routledge . p. viii.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1700-2 .

^ a b UNESCO World Heritage Centre.

"Old Walled City of Shibam" .

^ Helfritz, Hans (April 1937). "Land without shade".

Journal of the Royal Central Asian Society .

24 (2): 201– 16.

doi : 10.1080/03068373708730789 .

^ Shipman, J. G. T. (June 1984). "The Hadhramaut".

Asian Affairs .

15 (2): 154– 62.

doi : 10.1080/03068378408730145 .

^ "Shrewsbury Flax Mill: Funding for offices and restoration" .

BBC News . 30 July 2013 . Retrieved 30 July 2013 .

^ "Oriel Chambers" . Liverpool Architectural Society. Archived from the original on 22 September 2008 . Retrieved 14 July 2009 .

^ Building Design Architect's website, 8 January 2010 ^ "Britain's top 10 maverick buildings" .

Royal Academy . Retrieved 8 July 2022 .

^ Smith, Chrysti M. (2006).

Verbivore's Feast: Second Course: More Word & Phrase Origins . Farcountry Press. p. 289.

ISBN 978-1-56037-402-2 .

The word skyscraper , in its architectural context, was first applied to the Home Insurance Building, completed in Chicago in 1885.

^ Marshall, Colin (2 April 2015).

"The world's first skyscraper: a history of cities in 50 buildings, day 9" .

The Guardian .

^ Dupré, Judith (2013).

Skyscrapers: A History of the World's Most Extraordinary Buildings-Revised and Updated . New York: Hachette/Black Dog & Leventhal. p. 14.

ISBN 978-1-57912-942-2 .

^ "The Plan Comes Together" .

Encyclopedia of Chicago . Retrieved 27 July 2013 .

^ "Policy 7.7 Location and design of tall and large buildings" .

London City Hall . Retrieved 10 July 2022 .

^ "Protected views and tall buildings" .

CityofLondon.gov.uk . Archived from the original on 1 November 2022 . Retrieved 10 July 2022 .

^ "Royal Liver Building" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 23 June 2011 .

^ Hultin, Olof; Bengt O H Johansson; Johan Mårtelius; Rasmus Wærn (1998).

The Complete Guide to Architecture in Stockholm . Stockholm: Arkitektur Förlag. p. 62.

ISBN 978-91-86050-43-6 .

^ "The 50 Most Influential Tall Buildings of the Last 50 Years" . CTBUH. Archived from the original on 10 October 2019 . Retrieved 10 October 2019 .

^ A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture . Oxford University Press. 2006. p.

880 .

ISBN 978-0-19-860678-9 .

^ Nordenson, Guy (2008).

Seven Structural Engineers: The Felix Candela Lectures . New York City: Museum of Modern Art. p. 21.

ISBN 978-0870707032 .

^ "Mies van der Rohe Dies at 83; Leader of Modern Architecture" .

The New York Times . 17 August 1969 . Retrieved 21 July 2007 .

Mies van der Rohe, one of the great figures of 20th-century architecture.

^ a b c Lynn Beadle (2001).

Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat . CRC Press. p. 482.

ISBN 978-0-203-46754-1 .

^ a b "Designing cities in the sky" . lehigh.edu. 14 March 2007.

^ "15 Genius Skyscraper Engineers You've Probably Never Heard Of" .

amp.interestingengineering.com . 27 January 2018.

^ Weingardt, Richard (2005).

Engineering Legends .

ASCE Publications . p. 75.

ISBN 978-0-7844-0801-8 .

^ Mir M. Ali, Kyoung Sun Moon.

"Structural developments in tall buildings: current trends and future prospects" .

Architectural Science Review (September 2007) . Retrieved 10 December 2008 .

^ a b c d Ali, Mir M. (2001).

"Evolution of Concrete Skyscrapers: from Ingalls to Jin mao" .

Electronic Journal of Structural Engineering .

1 (1): 2– 14.

doi : 10.56748/ejse.1111 .

S2CID 251690475 .

^ Weingardt, Richard (2005).

Engineering Legends .

ASCE Publications . p. 76.

ISBN 978-0-7844-0801-8 .

^ a b Alfred Swenson & Pao-Chi Chang (2008).

"Building construction: High-rise construction since 1945" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 9 December 2008 .

^ a b c Stephen Bayley (5 January 2010).

"Burj Dubai: The new pinnacle of vanity" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2010 .

^ Billington, David P. (1985).

The Tower and the Bridge: The New Art of Structural Engineering .

Princeton University Press . pp.

234–5 .

ISBN 978-0-691-02393-9 .

^ "List of Tallest skyscrapers in Chicago" . Emporis.com. 15 June 2009. Archived from the original on 1 March 2007 . Retrieved 5 June 2011 .

^ a b Strauss, Alfred; Frangopol, Dan; Bergmeister, Konrad (18 September 2012).

Life-Cycle and Sustainability of Civil Infrastructure Systems: Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Life-Cycle Civil Engineering (IALCCE'12), Vienna, Austria, October 3-6, 2012 . CRC Press.

ISBN 9780203103364 .

^ Strauss, Alfred; Frangopol, Dan; Bergmeister, Konrad (18 September 2012).

Life-Cycle and Sustainability of Civil Infrastructure Systems: Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Life-Cycle Civil Engineering (IALCCE'12), Vienna, Austria, October 3-6, 2012 . CRC Press.

ISBN 9780203103364 .

^ "IALCCE 2012: Keynote Speakers Details" .

ialcce2012.boku.ac.at . Archived from the original on 26 April 2013 . Retrieved 16 June 2012 .

^ "Tall Buildings in Numbers Vanity Height" . Ctbuh.org. Archived from the original on 17 November 2013 . Retrieved 21 September 2013 .

^ "CTBUH releases list of supertall towers with highest percentages of 'vanity height' " . World Architecture News . Retrieved 21 September 2013 .

^ "Most of the World's Tallest Buildings Game the System With 'Vanity Height' – Jenny Xie" .

The Atlantic Cities . 9 September 2013. Archived from the original on 25 April 2014 . Retrieved 21 September 2013 .

^ Lecher, Colin (6 September 2013).

"The World's Tallest Skyscrapers Have A Dirty Little Secret" . Popsci.com . Retrieved 21 September 2013 .

^ "World's tallest skyscapers? [ sic ] Only if 'useless' needles count" .

NY Daily News . 7 September 2013 . Retrieved 21 September 2013 .

^ Alfred Strauss; Dan Frangopol; Konrad Bergmeister (2012).

Life-Cycle and Sustainability of Civil Infrastructure Systems: Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Life-Cycle Civil Engineering (IALCCE'12), Vienna, Austria, October 3-6, 2012 . CRC Press.

ISBN 978-0-203-10336-4 .

^ Adam, Robert.

"How to Build Skyscrapers" .

City Journal . Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 20 September 2014 .

^ Whitman, Elizabeth (3 September 2015).

"Skyscraper Day 2015: 10 Facts, Photos Celebrating Ridiculously Tall Buildings Around The World" .

International Business Times . Retrieved 3 September 2015 .

^ a b c Khan, Yasmin S.

"Fazlur Rahman Khan Distinguished Lecture Series" . Lehigh University . Retrieved 14 June 2013 .

^ Capps, Kriston (26 June 2014).

"Why Can't We Build Skinny Skyscrapers Everywhere?" .

Bloomberg.com . Retrieved 31 December 2015 .

^ Leslie, Thomas (June 2010). "Built Like Bridges: Iron, Steel, and Rivets in the Nineteenth-century Skyscraper".

Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians .

69 (2): 234– 261.

doi : 10.1525/jsah.2010.69.2.234 .

JSTOR 10.1525/jsah.2010.69.2.234 .

Abstract only.

^ Ali, Mir M. (January 2001).

"Evolution of Concrete Skyscrapers" .

Electronic Journal of Structural Engineering .

1 (1): 2– 14.

doi : 10.56748/ejse.1111 .

S2CID 251690475 .

^ Khan, Fazlur Rahman ; Rankine, J. (1980). "Structural Systems".

Tall Building Systems and Concepts .

SC .

Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat , American Society of Civil Engineers : 42.

^ Alfred Swenson & Pao-Chi Chang (2008).

"building construction" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 9 December 2008 .

^ "Top 10 world's tallest steel buildings" .

Construction Week Online . Constructionweekonline.com. 27 September 2010 . Retrieved 14 June 2013 .

^ Baker, William; Pawlikowski, James.

"Higher and Higher: The Evolution of the Buttressed Core" (PDF) .

academic.csuohio.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 April 2017 .

^ D. M Chan.

"Introduction to Tall building Structures" (PDF) . Teaching.ust.hk. p. 34. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2010.

^ "One Shell Plaza - Fazlur Khan - Structural Artist of Urban Building Forms" . Khan.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

^ Lee, P. K. K. (January 1997).

Structures in the New Millennium - Google Books . CRC Press.

ISBN 9789054108986 . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

^ a b "SUPport Studytour 2007" . Support.tue.nl. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

^ a b "Major Works - Fazlur Khan - Structural Artist of Urban Building Forms" . Khan.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on 22 May 2015 . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

^ Seinuk, Ysrael A.; Cantor, Irwin G. (March 1984).

"Trump Tower: Concrete Satisfies Architectural, design, and construction demands" .

Concrete International .

6 (3): 59– 62.

ISSN 0162-4075 .

^ "0a_copy_NYC_2008_IBC.vp" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2017 . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

^ "Brunswick Building - Fazlur Khan - Structural Artist of Urban Building Forms" . Khan.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

^ Civil Engineer (12 March 2011).

"Shear Wall-Frame Interaction" . Civil Engineering Group. Archived from the original on 18 June 2014 . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

^ "How Skyscrapers Work: Making it Functional" . HowStuffWorks. 3 April 2001 . Retrieved 30 October 2008 .

^ Emporis GmbH.

"John Hancock Center" . Archived from the original on 15 April 2004.

^ "Dizzying Pics of Hong Kong's Massive High-Rise Neighborhoods" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

^ Dailey, Jessica (14 September 2011).

"Empire State Building Achieves LEED Gold Certification" .

Inhabitat.com . Archived from the original on 28 June 2017 . Retrieved 30 July 2013 .

^ "30 St Mary Axe Tower / Foster + Partners" .

ArchDaily . 12 November 2019 . Retrieved 9 August 2025 .

^ a b Saroglou, Tanya; Meir, Isaac A.; Theodosiou, Theodoros; Givoni, Baruch (August 2017).

"Towards energy efficient skyscrapers" .

Energy and Buildings .

149 : 437– 449.

Bibcode : 2017EneBu.149..437S .

doi : 10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.05.057 .

ISSN 0378-7788 .

^ Ellis, Peter (15 August 2005).

"Simulating Tall Buildings Using EnergyPlus" (PDF) .

National Renewable Energy Laboratory .

^ a b Leung, Luke (December 2013). "Low-energy Tall Buildings? Room for Improvement as Demonstrated by New York City Energy Benchmarking Data".

International Journal of High-Rise Buildings .

2 .

S2CID 6166727 .

^ Sachs, Harvey (April 2005).

"Opportunities for Elevator Energy Efficiency Improvements" (PDF) .

American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy .

^ Foraboschi, Paolo; Mercanzin, Mattia; Trabucco, Dario (January 2014).

"Sustainable structural design of tall buildings based on embodied energy" .

Energy and Buildings .

68 : 254– 269.

Bibcode : 2014EneBu..68..254F .

doi : 10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.09.003 .

ISSN 0378-7788 .

^ Gan, Vincent J.L.; Chan, C.M.; Tse, K.T.; Lo, Irene M.C.; Cheng, Jack C.P. (September 2017).

"A comparative analysis of embodied carbon in high-rise buildings regarding different design parameters" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

161 : 663– 675.

Bibcode : 2017JCPro.161..663G .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.05.156 .

ISSN 0959-6526 .

^ Aristodemou, Elsa; Boganegra, Luz Maria; Mottet, Laetitia; Pavlidis, Dimitrios; Constantinou, Achilleas; Pain, Christopher; Robins, Alan; ApSimon, Helen (February 2018).

"How tall buildings affect turbulent air flows and dispersion of pollution within a neighbourhood" .

Environmental Pollution .

233 : 782– 796.

Bibcode : 2018EPoll.233..782A .

doi : 10.1016/j.envpol.2017.10.041 .

hdl : 10044/1/58556 .

ISSN 0269-7491 .

PMID 29132119 .

^ Borck, Rainald (1 May 2016).

"Will skyscrapers save the planet? Building height limits and urban greenhouse gas emissions" .

Regional Science and Urban Economics .

58 : 13– 25.

Bibcode : 2016RSUE...58...13B .

doi : 10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2016.01.004 .

hdl : 10419/96835 .

ISSN 0166-0462 .

^ Kim, Ki-Hyun; Kumar, Pawan; Szulejko, Jan E.; Adelodun, Adedeji A.; Junaid, Muhammad Faisal; Uchimiya, Minori; Chambers, Scott (May 2017).

"Toward a better understanding of the impact of mass transit air pollutants on human health" .

Chemosphere .

174 : 268– 279.

Bibcode : 2017Chmsp.174..268K .

doi : 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.01.113 .

ISSN 0045-6535 .

PMID 28178609 .

^ Ali, Mir (2008).

"Overview of Sustainable Design Factors in High-Rise Buildings" (PDF) .

Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat .

^ Ayşin Sev; Görkem Aslan (4 July 2014).

"Natural Ventilation for the Sustainable Tall Office Buildings of the Future" .

Zenodo .

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.1094381 .

^ Nevius, Michelle & Nevius, James (2009), Inside the Apple: A Streetwise History of New York City , New York: Free Press , pp.

101– 103, ISBN 141658997X ^ Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States (November 1901).

"The Elevator Did It" .

The Equitable News: An Agents' Journal (23): 11.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2013 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

^ Gray, Christopher (8 September 1996).

"1915 Equitable Building Becomes a 1996 Landmark" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2020 . Retrieved 14 May 2020 .

^ "Home Insurance Building" .

HISTORY.com . 21 August 2018.

^ Gray, Christopher (2 January 2005).

"Streetscapes: Once the Tallest Building, but Since 1967 a Ghost" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 1 August 2010 .

^ "Singer Building" .

The Skyscraper Center .

Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2020 . Retrieved 2 July 2019 .

^ Gray, Christopher (26 May 1996).

"Streetscapes/Metropolitan Life at 1 Madison Avenue;For a Brief Moment, the Tallest Building in the World" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 5 July 2020 .

^ Gray, Christopher (15 November 1992).

"Streetscapes: 40 Wall Street; A Race for the Skies, Lost by a Spire" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 3 November 2017 .

^ Hoster, Jay (2014).

Early Wall Street 1830–1940 . Charleston: Arcadia Publishing . p. 127.

ISBN 978-1-4671-2263-4 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ "Bank of Manhattan Built in Record Time; Structure 927 Feet High, Second Tallest in World, Is Erected in Year of Work" .

The New York Times . 6 May 1930.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

^ "Chrysler Building. Quote: An exhibition in the building's lobby reports the height as 1046" . Skyscraperpage.com . Retrieved 5 June 2011 .

^ Emporis GmbH.

"– Chrysler Building statistics" . Emporis.com. Archived from the original on 15 April 2004 . Retrieved 5 June 2011 .

^ "America's Favorite Architecture: Chrysler Building ranked 9th" . Favoritearchitecture.org. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 5 June 2011 .

^ Pollak, Michael (23 April 2006).

"75 YEARS: F. Y. I." The New York Times . Retrieved 31 October 2009 .

^ "The World's Tallest Buildings | Statistics" . Emporis. Archived from the original on 27 January 2012 . Retrieved 12 March 2014 .

^ Owainati, Sadek (3 November 2008).

"Reaching for the stars" .

Arabian Business . ArabianBusiness.com . Retrieved 15 November 2008 .

^ "World's tallest timber building opens" . United States Department of Agriculture. Forest Service.

^ "Wooden 'plyscrapers' challenge concrete and steel" .

U.S. Reuters . Retrieved 22 March 2018 .

^ "The University of British Columbia's Brock Commons Takes the Title of Tallest Wood Tower" .

Architect . 16 September 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2016 .

^ "Anders Berensson proposes wooden skyscraper for Stockholm" .

Dezeen . 25 April 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2016 .

^ "Tratoppen, Stockholm - Designing Buildings Wiki" .

designingbuildings.co.uk . Retrieved 22 March 2018 .

^ a b Hunt, Elle (16 February 2018).

"Plyscraper city: Tokyo to build 350m tower made of wood" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 22 March 2018 .

^ "The Tallest Timber Tower Yet: Perkins + Will's Concept Proposal for River Beech Tower" .

ArchDaily . 6 October 2016 . Retrieved 22 March 2018 .

^ "Building materials: Top of the tree" .

The Economist . 10 September 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2016 .

^ "Are High-Rise Wood Buildings in Seattle's Future?" .

Seattle Business Magazine . 15 September 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] Adam, Robert.

"How to Build Skyscrapers" .

City Journal . Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 4 April 2014 .

Judith Dupré .

Skyscrapers: A History of the World's Most Extraordinary Buildings-Revised and Updated.

(2013). Hachette/Black Dog & Leventhal. 2013 ed.: ISBN 978-1-57912-942-2 Skyscrapers: Form and Function , by David Bennett, Simon & Schuster, 1995.

Landau, Sarah; Condit, Carl W. (1996).

Rise of the New York Skyscraper, 1865–1913 . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-07739-1 .

OCLC 32819286 .

Willis, Carol, Form Follows Finance: Skyscrapers and Skylines in New York and Chicago . Princeton Architectural Press, 1995. 224 P.

ISBN 1-56898-044-2 Van Leeuwen, Thomas A P, The Skyward Trend of Thought: The Metaphysics of the American Skyscraper , Cambridge: MIT Press, 1988.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Skyscrapers .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Skyscraper .

Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat SkyscraperCity construction updates magazine Skyscraper definition on Phorio Standards Skyscraper Museum SkyscraperPage Technical information and diagrams v t e Tallest buildings and structures By category Buildings ( History ) By region Africa Asia Indian subcontinent Southeast Europe Baltic states Scandinavia Oceania Southern Hemisphere The Americas North America Central America Latin America South America By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Cambodia Canada Chile China Hong Kong Macau Colombia Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Kenya Kosovo Kuwait Latvia Lebanon Lithuania Malaysia Malta Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Netherlands Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway New Zealand Panama Pakistan Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Romania Russia Saudi Arabia Serbia Singapore Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tanzania Thailand Turkey Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States By state Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Zimbabwe Lists 100+ floors Architects Buildings by height to roof By city Cities with most skyscrapers Countries with most skyscrapers Churches Eastern Orthodox Naves Demolished Designed by women Early skyscrapers Hindu temples Industrial Megatall Mosques Minarets Educational Future Hospitals Hotels Most expensive Residential Skyscrapers by floor area Supertall Twin buildings Visionary buildings Wood Structures of any type ( History ) By region Africa Asia Indian subcontinent West Asia Europe former Soviet Union The Americas South America By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Armenia Australia Austria Bahrain Belgium Bulgaria Canada China Czech Republic Denmark Egypt Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Italy Japan Kosovo Luxembourg Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Netherlands New Zealand Norway Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Saudi Arabia Serbia Slovakia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Thailand Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan United Kingdom United States By state By type Uzbekistan Lists Before the 20th century Bridges Chimneys Clock towers Cooling towers Crosses Dams Demolished Domes Elevator test towers Flagpoles Ferris wheels Freestanding steel Hyperboloid Lighthouses Mines Oil platforms Pyramids Roller coasters Statues Colossal sculpture in situ Hindu deity Twin structures Visionary structures Wood Related topics Air traffic obstacle Antenna height considerations Architectural engineering Construction Early skyscrapers Fires Groundscraper Guyed mast Height restriction laws Largest buildings Megaprojects Megastructure Skyscraper Skyscraper Index Storey Tower block Vanity height v t e Supertall skyscrapers (300 m/984 ft and taller) Completed Africa Egypt Iconic Tower Americas Chile Gran Torre Santiago Mexico Torres Obispado United States 1 Manhattan West 1 World Trade Center (1970–2001) † 111 West 57th Street 2 World Trade Center (1971–2001) † 3 World Trade Center 30 Hudson Yards 35 Hudson Yards 432 Park Avenue 50 Hudson Yards 53W53 875 North Michigan Avenue Aon Center Bank of America Plaza Bank of America Tower Brooklyn Tower Central Park Tower Chrysler Building Comcast Technology Center Empire State Building Franklin Center JPMorgan Chase Tower One57 One Vanderbilt One World Trade Center Salesforce Tower St. Regis Chicago The New York Times Building The Spiral Trump International Hotel and Tower Two Prudential Plaza U.S. Bank Tower Wells Fargo Plaza Willis Tower Wilshire Grand Center Asia China Baoneng Center Changsha A9 Financial District Changsha IFS Tower T1 China Resources Headquarters China World Trade Center Tower III China Zun Chongqing IFS T1 Chongqing World Financial Center CITIC Plaza Citymark Centre Dalian International Trade Center Diwang International Fortune Center Dongguan International Trade Center 1 East Pacific Center Eton Place Dalian Fortune Center Gate to the East Greenland Hangzhou Center Golden Eagle Tiandi Tower A Golden Eagle Tiandi Tower B Greenland Puli Center Guangxi China Resources Tower Guangzhou CTF Finance Centre Guangzhou International Finance Center Guiyang International Financial Center Tower 1 Hanking Center Heartland 66 Office Tower Hengqin International Finance Center Hon Kwok City Center Huachuang International Plaza Huaguoyuan Tower 1 Huaguoyuan Tower 2 Huijin Center Guangzhou Jiangxi Nanchang Greenland Central Plaza Jin Mao Tower Jin Wan Plaza 9 Jinan Center Financial City KK100 Leatop Plaza Logan Century Center 1 Longxi International Hotel Minsheng Bank Building Nanjing International Youth Cultural Centre Tower 1 One Shenzhen Bay Pearl River Tower Ping An International Finance Centre The Pinnacle Poly Pazhou Riverview Plaza Shanghai Tower Shanghai World Financial Center Shenglong Global Center Shenzhen Center Shenzhen CFC Changfu Centre Shimao Hunan Center Shimao International Plaza Shum Yip Upperhills Tower 1 Shun Hing Square Spring City 66 Suning Plaza 1, Wuxi Suning Plaza Tower 1, Zhenjiang Suzhou IFS Tianjin CTF Finance Centre Tianjin Modern City Office Tower Tianjin World Financial Center Wanda Plaza Wenzhou World Trade Center White Magnolia Plaza Wuhan Center Wuhan Greenland Center Wuhan Yangtze River Shipping Center Wuxi IFS Wuxi Maoye City – Marriott Hotel Xi'an Glory International Financial Center Xiangjiang Fortune Finance Center Yantai Shimao No.1 The Harbour Yuexiu Fortune Center Tower 1 Zhongzhou Holdings Financial Center Zhuhai Tower Zhujiang New City Tower Zifeng Tower Hong Kong Bank of China Tower Central Plaza International Commerce Centre International Finance Centre Nina Tower The Center Japan Abeno Harukas Azabudai Hills Mori JP Tower Kazakhstan Abu Dhabi Plaza Kuwait Al Hamra Tower Arraya Tower Malaysia The Exchange 106 Four Seasons Place Kuala Lumpur Merdeka 118 Petronas Towers Telekom Tower Philippines Metrobank Center Qatar Aspire Tower Lusail Plaza Towers 3 and 4 Saudi Arabia The Clock Towers Kingdom Centre PIF Tower South Korea Haeundae Doosan We've the Zenith Haeundae LCT The Sharp Lotte World Tower Parc1 Posco Tower-Songdo Taiwan 85 Sky Tower Taipei 101 Thailand Baiyoke Tower II ICONSIAM MahaNakhon Turkey CBRT Tower United Arab Emirates 23 Marina Address Boulevard Address Downtown ADNOC Headquarters Almas Tower Amna Tower Burj Al Arab Burj Khalifa Cayan Tower DAMAC Residenze Elite Residence Emirates Office Tower Etihad Towers Gevora Hotel HHHR Tower Il Primo Dubai The Index Jumeirah Emirates Towers Hotel JW Marriott Marquis Dubai The Landmark Marina 101 The Marina Torch Ocean Heights Princess Tower Rose Tower World Trade Center Abu Dhabi Vietnam Keangnam Hanoi Landmark Tower Landmark 81 Europe Poland Varso Tower Russia City of Capitals Eurasia Federation Tower Lakhta Center Mercury City Tower Neva Towers 2 OKO Tower United Kingdom The Shard Oceania Australia Australia 108 Q1 Tower † No longer standing.

Under construction Africa Ethiopia Ethiopian Electric Power Headquarters Côte d'Ivoire Tour F Asia China Chongqing Corporate Avenue 1 Evergrande Center Eye of Spring Trade Center Greenland Group Suzhou Center Haikou Tower Nanjing World Trade Center Tower 1 Ningbo Center North Bund Centre Shandong IFC South Asian Gate Suzhou Zhongnan Center Tianshan Gate of the World Plots 27 and 28 Wuhan CTF Finance Center Xi'an Greenland Center Xiamen International Centre Xiangmi Lake New Financial Center Other Burj Azizi Burj Binghatti Jacob & Co Residences Highwealth Huiguo 90 Jeddah Tower Legacy Tower One Bangkok Taipei Twin Towers Thamrin Nine Torch Tower North America 270 Park Avenue 520 Fifth Avenue Concord Sky SkyTower at Pinnacle One Yonge One Bloor West Waldorf Astoria Miami South America Senna Tower On hold 2 World Trade Center 45 Broad Street Baoneng Shenyang Global Financial Center Busan Lotte Town Tower Chengdu Greenland Tower Chongqing Tall Tower Dalian Greenland Center Diamond Tower (Jeddah) Dubai Pearl Dubai Towers Doha Forum 66 Gate of Kuwait Goldin Finance 117 Hyundai Global Business Center Lamar Towers Mandarin Oriental Chengdu Marina 106 Namaste Tower Nanjing Olympic Suning Tower One Tower Palais Royale, Mumbai Pentominium Runhua Global Center 1 Ryugyong Hotel Sino-Steel Tower Skycity Square Capital Tower The Stratford Residences Tameer Commercial Tower Tianjin R&F Guangdong Tower Tour Financial Hub Center Tower Infinity VietinBank Business Center Office Tower See also Proposed supertall skyscrapers List of architects of supertall buildings v t e Real estate developments Commercial Airport Business park Bus station Commercial area Mixed-use development Office building Port inland Power center Retail park Riverfront Shopping center ( Shopping mall ) Train station Shopping streets and districts Industrial Business cluster Industrial district Industrial park Technology centers Residential Agrihood Boarding house Bungalow court City block Closed community Company town Conservation community Executive home Golf course community Gated community Housing estate Intentional community Luxury apartment McMansion Mixed-use development Model dwellings for the poor Multifamily residential Penthouse apartment Private community Public housing Residential airpark Residential area Retirement community Revenue house Rooming house Single-room occupancy Subdivision Tract housing Disability Assisted living Behavior modification facility Residential treatment center Therapeutic boarding school Elderly care Age-restricted community Nursing home Retirement home Senior living Science/education Akademgorodok Atomgrad Campus Research park Satellite campus Science park Municipal Arcology Civic center Garden city movement Model village Planned cities Planned community Urban green space parks Buildings ( types ) Apartment House types Skyscraper Tower block Villa Miscellaneous Brownfield land Cemetery Residential cluster development Construction Context theory Eminent domain Greenfield land Greyfield land Groundscraper Land-use planning Nonbuilding NIMBY Park Parking ( Multistorey car park ) Planning permission Playground Redevelopment Regional planning Urban design Urban planning YIMBY Zoning Housing portal Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Korea Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8s6cn
Cached time: 20250811235225
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.437 seconds
Real time usage: 1.636 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9762/1000000
Revision size: 112574/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 483017/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5700/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 45/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 483389/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.844/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9469284/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1251.505      1 -total
 57.82%  723.574      2 Template:Reflist
 21.20%  265.361     47 Template:Cite_web
 10.42%  130.418     21 Template:Cite_journal
  8.82%  110.364     19 Template:Cite_book
  7.87%   98.554     13 Template:Navbox
  7.60%   95.149     21 Template:Cite_news
  5.72%   71.533      1 Template:Tallest_buildings_and_structures
  4.62%   57.809      1 Template:Short_description
  4.03%   50.394      5 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:29485:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235225 and revision id 1304929973. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Skyscraper&oldid=1304929973 " Categories : Skyscrapers Structural engineering Structural system Building types Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2024 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from March 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 01:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Skyscraper 101 languages Add topic

