Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Technical definitions 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Dusk 32 languages العربية Aragonés বাংলা Bikol Central Català الدارجة Eesti Euskara فارسی Frysk ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ Minangkabau 日本語 Norsk bokmål Олык марий پنجابی پښتو Polski Simple English سنڌي کوردی தமிழ் Taqbaylit اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Darkest stage of twilight, at end of astronomical twilight after sunset and just before night Not to be confused with Sunset or Evening .

For other uses, see Dusk (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dusk" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Landers, California at nautical dusk (20-second exposure) Dusk occurs at the darkest stage of twilight , or at the very end of astronomical twilight after sunset and just before nightfall.

[ 1 ] At predusk , during early to intermediate stages of twilight, enough light in the sky under clear conditions may occur to read outdoors without artificial illumination ; however, at the end of civil twilight (when Earth rotates to a point at which the center of the Sun 's disk is 6° below the local horizon ), such lighting is required to read outside.

[ 2 ] The term dusk usually refers to astronomical dusk , or the darkest part of twilight before night begins.

Technical definitions [ edit ] Civil, nautical, and astronomical twilight.

[ 3 ] Dusk is the darkest part of evening twilight.

The time of dusk is the moment at the very end of astronomical twilight, just before the minimum brightness of the night sky sets in, or may be thought of as the darkest part of evening twilight .

[ 4 ] However, technically, the three stages of dusk are as follows: At civil dusk , the center of the Sun's disc goes 6° below the horizon in the evening. It marks the end of civil twilight, which begins at sunset. At this time objects are still distinguishable and depending on weather conditions some stars and planets may start to become visible to the naked eye. The sky has many colors at this time, such as orange and red. Beyond this point artificial light may be needed to carry out outdoor activities, depending on atmospheric conditions and location.

At nautical dusk , the Sun moves to 12° below the horizon in the evening. It marks the end of nautical twilight, which begins at civil dusk. At this time, objects are less distinguishable, and stars and planets appear to brighten.

At astronomical dusk , the Sun's position is 18° below the horizon in the evening. It marks the end of astronomical twilight, which begins at nautical dusk. After this time the Sun no longer illuminates the sky, and thus no longer interferes with astronomical observations.

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] Gallery [ edit ] Scots pine at early dusk in New Forest, England Dusk at the shore Looking eastwards at dusk Sandakan , Malaysia at dusk Beached boats at dusk Curitiba at dusk, Brazil Nautical dusk in Marina Bay, Singapore Astronomical twilight as seen from a plane window See also [ edit ] Dawn Effets de soir Sunrise Sunset Twilight References [ edit ] ^ The Random House College Dictionary , "dusk".

^ a b "Rise, Set, and Twilight Definitions" .

USNO . Archived from the original on 2019-09-27 . Retrieved 2015-06-19 .

^ Van Flandern, T.; K. Pulkkinen (1980). "Low precision formulae for planetary positions".

Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series .

31 (3): 391.

Bibcode : 1979ApJS...41..391V .

doi : 10.1086/190623 .

^ "Full definition of Dusk" .

^ "Dusk – Definition and Meaning" .

www.timeanddate.com .

v t e Parts of a day Daytime Morning Noon Afternoon Night Evening Midnight Witching hour Brahmamuhurta Twilight Dawn Sunrise Sunset Dusk Blue hour Related Belt of Venus Golden hour Terminator Daylight Moonlight Midnight sun Polar night Zodiacal light Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dusk&oldid=1303983110 " Categories : Earth phenomena Parts of a day Night Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2018 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 07:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dusk 32 languages Add topic

