Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Key themes Toggle Key themes subsection 1.1 Abstract labor and value: a new social form 1.2 Abstract and historical time 1.3 Capital and Labor 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Time, Labor and Social Domination Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Moishe Postone Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory is a 1993 book by the scholar Moishe Postone released by Cambridge University Press . In the book Postone presents a reinterpretation of Marx's critical theory . The book provides a reexamination of the core categories in Marx's critique of political economy .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Key themes [ edit ] Postone states that Marx's later theories demonstrates that the core categories of modernity, such as commodity and capital , are temporally dynamic categories that are historically specific to modernity and its social form.

[ 4 ] Postone interprets these categories as both generating and obstructing the possibility of a liberated way of life and community. The origin of this historical dynamic lies in the peculiar form of wealth that is specific to capitalist modernity, namely value, which is also a form of social mediation that Marx distinguishes clearly from material wealth.

Part of a series on the Marxian critique of political economy Concepts Capitalist mode of production Capital Commodity Concrete and abstract labour Critique of political economy Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Relations of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Wage labour Wage slavery Wertkritik Wertabspaltungskritik Value-form Topics Crisis theory Imperialism Historical materialism Technological unemployment Falling profit-rate tendency Works Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 Wage Labour and Capital A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Grundrisse Das Kapital Theories of Surplus Value Value, Price and Profit People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Roman Rosdolsky Isaak Illich Rubin Étienne Balibar Robert Kurz Mark Fisher Claus Peter Ortlieb Moishe Postone NML Hans-Georg Backhaus Helmut Reichelt Michael Heinrich Journals Monthly Review New School Economic Review Crisis and Critique Historical Materialism Socialist register Capital & Class Related topics Critique of political economy Economics Marxist sociology Socialism portal v t e Furthermore, Postone states that the transformations undergone by the global capitalist order reveal a profound structural historical dynamic, which is what Marx analyzed. Postone asserts that, in contrast to the conventional view of the Soviet Union as a communist society, the differences between "West and East" are in fact part of a more complex whole, where the Soviet Union was a (failed) variant of the same capital accumulation regime rather than an alternative to capitalism. This is not only because the Soviet Union exploited the working class, but also because it was part of a global, temporal structuring and restructuring of capitalism.

Abstract labor and value: a new social form [ edit ] Postone provides an in-depth analysis of Marx 's category of the commodity , which is the most basic form of social relations in capitalism , and which is also the basis for the category of capital . Postone points out that Marx's categories are historically specific.

[ 5 ] On the basis of this understanding, Postone states that he can show that modernity and its categories that appear to be transhistorical are in fact reified appearances. This makes it possible to systematically differentiate the core of modernity from its various historical configurations.

Marx's analysis of the commodity shows that labor in capitalist society has a dual nature: it is concrete labor on the one hand and Abstract labor on the other. Postone examines the fact that abstract labor is not (concrete) labor in general but has a unique social dimension that cannot be derived from (concrete) labor as such: it mediates a new, quasi-objective form of social interdependence.

Abstract labor is a historically specific mediating function; it is the content or 'substance' of value. Labor in capitalism, according to Marx, is not only labor understood transhistorically but a historically specific socially mediating activity. Therefore, the objectification of labor—in the commodity , capital , etc.—is both concrete products of labor and objectified forms of social mediation. Basically, capitalist society is structured by a new underlying level of social relations constituted by this historically specific form of labor. These social relations have a special quasi-objective character and are dualistic in that they are characterized by the opposition between an abstract, general, homogeneous dimension and a concrete, particular, material dimension. The relations of capitalist society therefore appear to be 'natural' rather than social.

[ 6 ] The abstract nature of this social relation is also expressed in the form of wealth that is dominant in capitalist society.

Abstract labor creates value, which is different from the material wealth (in the form of use values) created by concrete labor. Marx analyzed value as a historically specific form of wealth that is tied to the historically unique role of labor in capitalism, and as a form of wealth, it is also a form of social mediation. Material wealth is measured by the quantity of products while value is only constituted by the acquisition of labor time .

Abstract and historical time [ edit ] The temporal dynamic of value is at the root of the historical logic of capital , according to the argument put forth by Postone.

[ 7 ] While Marx's theory of surplus value is often interpreted as a theory of exploitation, Postone rather examines the value in this temporal dynamic.

[ 8 ] In other words, the problem is not the unfair distribution of surplus value, but also the continued existence of the modern category of value itself. Postone argues that Marx's distinction between the production of use values and the creation of surplus value in the valorization process is critical to understanding this dynamic. Marx distinguished between absolute and relative surplus value, with the latter characterized by temporal acceleration. The higher the level of social productivity, the higher productivity must continue to increase to generate an increase in surplus value. However, this increase in material wealth does not reduce the need for labor. The sale of labor remains a necessary means of subsistence and a basic necessity for the production process, regardless of the level of productivity. In short, Postone's argument suggests that the commodity form structures and subjugates society through a historically specific and abstract form of temporality.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Capital and Labor [ edit ] Postone argues that Marx's introduction of the category of capital is not meant to describe a mystified power that controls workers, but rather to describe a real form of existence that has been historically constituted in an alienated form. According to Postones reinterpretation, capital is both dimensions of social labor, i.e., abstract and concrete labor, in alienated form.

Marx initially introduced the category of capital as a dimension of value-creating labor, i.e., self-propagating value. However, as Marx continued his analysis, he argued that the concrete aspect of labor, i.e., use-value-creating labor, also becomes an attribute of capital . In the case of cooperation and manufacture, capital's appropriation of concrete labor appears to be a question of ownership. However, in large-scale industries, the productive forces of concrete labor are no longer those of the workers, and labor is already constituted in an alienated form, separated and opposed to the workers.

Postone's analysis further suggests that capital is not a unitary totality and that the Marxist conception of the dialectical opposition between relations of production and forces of production is not an opposition between relations that are capitalist and forces of production that are external to the totality. Rather, the dialectical contradiction is a contradiction between two dimensions of capital. In other words, capitalist society generates a complex historical dynamic, a directed movement without external telos, as a dialectical and open totality.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Critique of political economy Critique of Economic Reason Who Cooked Adam Smith's Dinner?

References [ edit ] ^ Postone, Moishe (1993).

Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511570926 .

^ Best, Beverley (2018). O'Hara, Daniel (ed.).

Moishe Postone: Marx's Critique of Political Economy as Immanent Social Critique . SAGE Publications. pp.

482– 497.

^ Feenberg, Andrew (1996). "Review of Moishe Postone, Time, Labor, and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory".

Theory and Society .

25 (4): 607– 611.

^ Feenberg, Andrew (1996). "Review of Moishe Postone, Time, Labor, and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory".

Theory and Society .

25 (4): 607– 611.

^ Feenberg, Andrew (1996). "Review of Moishe Postone, Time, Labor, and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory".

Theory and Society .

25 (4): 607– 611.

^ Postone, Moishe (1993).

Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

^ Postone, Moishe (1993).

Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

^ Postone, Moishe (1993).

Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

^ Miller, Karen (2004). "The Question of Time in Postone's Time, Labor and Social Domination".

Historical Materialism .

12 (3): 209– 237.

^ Best, Beverley (2018). O'Hara, Daniel (ed.).

Moishe Postone: Marx's Critique of Political Economy as Immanent Social Critique . SAGE Publications. pp.

482– 497.

^ Postone, Moishe (1993).

Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

^ Zaretsky, Eli (1996). "Review essay: A Marx for our time? Moishe Postone's reading of Capital: Moishe Postone, Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory".

Philosophy & Social Criticism .

22 (2): 109– 116.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐74cbc45b88‐8wd7l
Cached time: 20250812040919
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.331 seconds
Real time usage: 0.394 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1105/1000000
Revision size: 10604/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 43831/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5053/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 67378/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.190/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5371851/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  345.724      1 -total
 46.22%  159.792      1 Template:Reflist
 29.74%  102.821      7 Template:Cite_book
 29.19%  100.920      1 Template:Marxian_critique_of_political_economy_sidebar
 28.56%   98.725      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.99%   72.576      1 Template:Short_description
 11.75%   40.613      5 Template:Cite_journal
 11.28%   39.008      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.87%   27.223      3 Template:Flatlist
  6.64%   22.948      6 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:73685595:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812040919 and revision id 1292245628. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Time,_Labor_and_Social_Domination&oldid=1292245628 " Category : 1993 non-fiction books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 23:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Time, Labor and Social Domination Add languages Add topic

