Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Linnaeus, 1735 1.2 Cuvier, 1817 1.3 Haeckel, 1866 1.4 Gould, 1979 2 Origin 3 Genetic basis 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Body plan 18 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk Galego हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of morphological features common to members of a phylum of animals Modern groups of animals can be grouped by the arrangement of their body structures, so are said to possess different body plans.

A body plan , Bauplan ( pl.

German : Baupläne ), or ground plan is a set of morphological features common to many members of a phylum of animals .

[ 1 ] The vertebrates share one body plan, while invertebrates have many.

This term, usually applied to animals, envisages a "blueprint" encompassing aspects such as symmetry , layers , segmentation , nerve , limb , and gut disposition.

Evolutionary developmental biology seeks to explain the origins of diverse body plans.

Body plans have historically been considered to have evolved in a flash in the Ediacaran biota ; filling the Cambrian explosion with the results, and a more nuanced understanding of animal evolution suggests gradual development of body plans throughout the early Palaeozoic . Recent studies in animals and plants started to investigate whether evolutionary constraints on body plan structures can explain the presence of developmental constraints during embryogenesis such as the phenomenon referred to as phylotypic stage .

History [ edit ] Among the pioneering zoologists , Linnaeus identified two body plans outside the vertebrates; Cuvier identified three; and Haeckel had four, as well as the Protista with eight more, for a total of twelve. For comparison, the number of phyla recognised by modern zoologists has risen to 36.

[ 1 ] Linnaeus, 1735 [ edit ] In his 1735 book Systema Naturæ , Swedish botanist Linnaeus grouped the animals into quadrupeds , birds , "amphibians" (including tortoises , lizards and snakes ), fish , "insects" (Insecta, in which he included arachnids , crustaceans and centipedes ) and "worms" (Vermes). Linnaeus's Vermes included effectively all other groups of animals, not only tapeworms , earthworms and leeches but molluscs , sea urchins and starfish , jellyfish , squid and cuttlefish .

[ 2 ] Cuvier, 1817 [ edit ] Haeckel 's 'Monophyletischer Stammbaum der Organismen' from Generelle Morphologie der Organismen (1866) with the three branches Plantae , Protista , Animalia In his 1817 work, Le Règne Animal , French zoologist Georges Cuvier combined evidence from comparative anatomy and palaeontology [ 3 ] to divide the animal kingdom into four body plans. Taking the central nervous system as the main organ system which controlled all the others, such as the circulatory and digestive systems, Cuvier distinguished four body plans or embranchements : [ 4 ] with a brain and a spinal cord (surrounded by skeletal elements) [ 4 ] with organs linked by nerve fibres [ 4 ] with two longitudinal, ventral nerve cords linked by a band with two ganglia below the oesophagus [ 4 ] with a diffuse nervous system, not clearly discernible [ 4 ] Grouping animals with these body plans resulted in four branches: vertebrates , molluscs , articulata (including insects and annelids ) and zoophytes or Radiata .

Haeckel, 1866 [ edit ] Ernst Haeckel , in his 1866 Generelle Morphologie der Organismen , asserted that all living things were monophyletic (had a single evolutionary origin), being divided into plants, protista, and animals. His protista were divided into moneres, protoplasts, flagellates, diatoms, myxomycetes, myxocystodes, rhizopods, and sponges. His animals were divided into groups with distinct body plans: he named these phyla . Haeckel's animal phyla were coelenterates , echinoderms , and (following Cuvier) articulates, molluscs, and vertebrates.

[ 5 ] Gould, 1979 [ edit ] Stephen J. Gould explored the idea that the different phyla could be perceived in terms of a Bauplan, illustrating their fixity. However, he later abandoned this idea in favor of punctuated equilibrium .

[ 6 ] Origin [ edit ] 20 out of the 36 body plans originated in the Cambrian period, [ 7 ] in the " Cambrian explosion ".

[ 8 ] However, complete body plans of many phyla emerged much later, in the Palaeozoic or beyond.

[ 9 ] The current range of body plans is far from exhaustive of the possible patterns for life: the Precambrian Ediacaran biota includes body plans that differ from any found in currently living organisms, even though the overall arrangement of unrelated modern taxa is quite similar.

[ 10 ] Thus the Cambrian explosion appears to have more or less completely replaced the earlier range of body plans.

[ 7 ] Genetic basis [ edit ] Further information: evolutionary developmental biology and morphogenesis Genes , embryos and development together determine the form of an adult organism's body, through the complex switching processes involved in morphogenesis .

Developmental biologists seek to understand how genes control the development of structural features through a cascade of processes in which key genes produce morphogens , chemicals that diffuse through the body to produce a gradient that acts as a position indicator for cells, turning on other genes, some of which in turn produce other morphogens. A key discovery was the existence of groups of homeobox genes , which function as switches responsible for laying down the basic body plan in animals. The homeobox genes are remarkably conserved between species as diverse as the fruit fly and humans, the basic segmented pattern of the worm or fruit fly being the origin of the segmented spine in humans. The field of animal evolutionary developmental biology ('Evo Devo'), which studies the genetics of morphology in detail, is rapidly expanding [ 11 ] with many of the developmental genetic cascades, particularly in the fruit fly Drosophila , catalogued in considerable detail.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Evolutionary biology portal Paleontology portal Anatomical terms of location – Standard terms for unambiguous description of relative placement of body parts Arthropod head problem – Dispute concerning the evolution of arthropods Deep homology Evolutionary developmental biology – Comparison of organism developmental processes Definition of Phylum based on body plan – High level taxonomic rank for organisms sharing a similar body plan Ediacaran biota – Life of the Ediacaran period Macroevolution – Evolution on a scale at or above the level of species Precambrian body plans – Structure and development of early multicellular organisms Sean B. Carroll – American evolutionary developmental biologist Segmentation (biology) – Division of some animal and plant body plans into a series of segments Supernumerary body part – Growth of an additional part of the body and a deviation from the body plan Symmetry in biology – Geometric symmetry in living beings References [ edit ] ^ a b Valentine, James W. (2004).

On the Origin of Phyla . University of Chicago Press. p. 33.

ISBN 978-0226845487 .

^ Linnaeus, Carolus (1735).

Systema naturae, sive regna tria naturae systematice proposita per classes, ordines, genera, & species . Leiden: Haak. pp.

1– 12.

^ Reiss, John (2009).

Not by Design: Retiring Darwin's Watchmaker . University of California Press. p. 108.

ISBN 978-0-520-94440-4 .

^ a b c d e De Wit, Hendrik Cornelius Dirk De Wit.

Histoire du Développement de la Biologie , Volume III, Presses Polytechniques et Universitaires Romandes, Lausanne, 1994, p. 94-96.

ISBN 2-88074-264-1 ^ Haeckel, Ernst.

Generelle Morphologie der Organismen : allgemeine Grundzüge der organischen Formen-Wissenschaft, mechanisch begründet durch die von Charles Darwin reformirte Descendenz-Theorie.

(1866) Berlin ^ Bowler, Peter J. (2009).

Evolution: the History of an Idea . California, p. 364.

^ a b Erwin, Douglas; Valentine, James; Jablonski, David (1997).

"The origin of animal body plans" .

American Scientist ( March– April).

^ Erwin, D. H. (1999).

"The Origin of Bodyplans" .

Integrative and Comparative Biology (American Zoologist) .

39 (3): 617– 629.

doi : 10.1093/icb/39.3.617 .

^ Budd, G. E.; Jensen, S. (2000). "A critical reappraisal of the fossil record of the bilaterian phyla".

Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society .

75 (2): 253– 95.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-185X.1999.tb00046.x .

PMID 10881389 .

S2CID 39772232 .

^ Antcliffe, J. B.; Brasier, M. D. (2007).

"Charnia and sea pens are poles apart" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

164 (1): 49– 51.

Bibcode : 2007JGSoc.164...49A .

doi : 10.1144/0016-76492006-080 .

S2CID 130602154 .

^ Hall, Brian K. (28 March 2005).

"Evo Devo is the New Buzzword..." .

Scientific American .

292 (4): 102– 104.

Bibcode : 2005SciAm.292d.102H .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0405-102 . Retrieved 13 September 2014 .

^ Arthur, Wallace.

(1997).

Animal Body Plans . Cambridge England: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-77928-6 .

External links [ edit ] Developmental Biology 8e Online: Patterning of the Mesoderm by Activin Videos The Science of Evolution: Sean B. Carroll explains the genetics of the fruit fly body plan.

v t e Anatomy and morphology Fields Gross anatomy Superficial anatomy Neuroanatomy brain morphometry Comparative anatomy Microscopic anatomy histology molecular Morphometrics Bacteria and fungi Bacterial cell structure cellular morphologies morphological plasticity Colonial morphology Lichen morphology Protists Structures Plants Plant anatomy fruit Plant habit Plant life-form Plant morphology reproductive Soil morphology Invertebrates Decapod anatomy Gastropod anatomy Insect morphology Diptera Odonata Spider anatomy Arthropod cuticle Mammals Human anatomy Neanderthal anatomy Cat anatomy Dog anatomy Horse anatomy Elephant anatomy Giraffe anatomy Other vertebrates Amphibian anatomy Bird anatomy Fish anatomy Shark anatomy Glossaries Anatomical terminology Anatomical terms of location Glossary of dinosaur anatomy Glossary of plant morphology leaf morphology Related topics Allometry Anatomical variation Anatomical plane Body plan Form classification Gracility Hertwig rule History of anatomy 19th century Physiognomy Standard anatomical position Transcendental anatomy Category Portal Index of anatomy articles v t e The development of phenotype Key concepts Genotype–phenotype distinction Reaction norm Gene–environment interaction Gene–environment correlation Operon Heritability Quantitative genetics Heterochrony Neoteny Heterotopy Genetic architecture Canalisation Genetic assimilation Dominance Epistasis Fitness landscape / evolutionary landscape Pleiotropy Plasticity Polygenic inheritance Transgressive segregation Sequence space Non-genetic influences Epigenetics Maternal effect Genomic imprinting Dual inheritance theory Polyphenism Developmental architecture Developmental biology Morphogenesis Eyespot Pattern formation Segmentation Metamerism Modularity Evolution of genetic systems Evolvability Robustness Neutral networks Evolution of sexual reproduction Tinkering Control of development Systems Regulation of gene expression Gene regulatory network Evo-devo gene toolkit Evolutionary developmental biology Homeobox Hedgehog signaling pathway Notch signaling pathway Elements Homeotic gene Hox gene Pax genes eyeless gene Distal-less Engrailed cis-regulatory element Ligand Morphogen Cell surface receptor Transcription factor Influential figures C. H. Waddington Richard Lewontin François Jacob + Jacques Monod Lac operon Eric F. Wieschaus Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard William McGinnis Mike Levine Sean B. Carroll Endless Forms Most Beautiful Debates Nature versus nurture Morphogenetic field Index of evolutionary biology articles v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Body_plan&oldid=1292336995 " Categories : Body plans Animal anatomy Comparative anatomy Evolution by phenotype Evolutionary biology Morphology (biology) Taxonomy (biology) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 13:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Body plan 18 languages Add topic

