Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early and family life Toggle Early and family life subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Marriage and family 2 Military career Toggle Military career subsection 2.1 First expedition 2.2 Second expedition 2.3 War of 1812 3 Confiscated papers 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Military 4.2 Landforms 4.3 Communities 4.4 Other 5 Notes and references 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Zebulon Pike 22 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Kotava Latina مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American general and explorer (1779–1813) Zebulon Pike Portrait by Charles Willson Peale , 1808 Birth name Zebulon Montgomery Pike Born ( 1779-01-05 ) January 5, 1779 Lamington, New Jersey , U.S.

Died April 27, 1813 (1813-04-27) (aged 34) York, Upper Canada (now Toronto , Ontario) Cause of death struck by debris from firearm magazine explosion Buried Military Cemetery , Sackets Harbor, New York Allegiance United States Branch United States Army Years of service 1794–1813 Rank Brigadier General Battles / wars Tecumseh's War Battle of Tippecanoe War of 1812 Battle of Lacolle Mills Battle of York ( DOW ) Spouse(s) Clarissa Harlow Brown ​ ​ ( m.

1801) ​ Children 5 Signature Zebulon Montgomery Pike (January 5, 1779 – April 27, 1813) was an American brigadier general and explorer for whom Pikes Peak in Colorado is named. As a U.S. Army officer he led two expeditions through the Louisiana Purchase territory, first in 1805–1806 to reconnoiter the upper northern reaches of the Mississippi River , and then in 1806–1807 to explore the southwest to the fringes of the northern Spanish-colonial settlements of New Mexico and Texas . Pike's expeditions coincided with other Jeffersonian expeditions, including the Lewis and Clark Expedition and the Red River Expedition in 1806.

[ 1 ] Pike's second expedition crossed the Rocky Mountains into what is now southern Colorado, which resulted in his capture by the Spanish colonial authorities near Santa Fe , who then sent Pike and his men to Chihuahua (present-day Mexico) for interrogation. Later in 1807, Pike and some of his men were escorted by the Spanish through Texas and released near U.S. territory in early Louisiana .

In 1810, Pike published an account of his expeditions, a book so popular that it was translated into several languages for publication in Europe. He later achieved the rank of brigadier general in the United States Army, and served in the War of 1812 until he was killed in April 1813 by an explosion at a gunpowder magazine outside the British colonial capital of Upper Canada during the Battle of York .

Early and family life [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Pike was born on January 5, 1779, in Lamington, New Jersey .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] He was the son of Isabella (Brown) and Zebulon Pike, and followed in the footsteps of his father, who had begun his own career in the military service of the United States in 1775 at the beginning of the American Revolutionary War . Through his father, he was a direct descendant of Robert Pike , who was famous being an opponent of the Salem witchcraft prosecutions of 1692 .

[ 5 ] Zebulon Pike Jr. grew to adulthood with his family at a series of outposts in Ohio and Illinois —the United States' northwestern frontier at the time. He was commissioned as a second lieutenant of infantry in 1799 and promoted to first lieutenant later that same year.

Marriage and family [ edit ] Pike married his cousin Clarissa Harlow Brown in 1801.

[ 6 ] They had one child who survived to adulthood, Clarissa Brown Pike, who later married President William Henry Harrison 's son, John Cleves Symmes Harrison. They had four other children who died before reaching adulthood.

[ 7 ] He was the great-granduncle of Medal of Honor recipient Emory Jenison Pike .

[ 8 ] Military career [ edit ] Pike's military career included working on logistics and payroll at a series of frontier posts, including Fort Belle Fontaine near today's St. Louis .

General-in-Chief James Wilkinson of the United States Army was appointed as the first Governor of the Upper Louisiana Territory by third President Thomas Jefferson , becoming Pike's mentor while headquartered there.

In 1796, Pike shadowed the expedition of General Georges Henri Victor Collot , a Royal, then Imperial French Army officer who had been tasked to tour the Mississippi frontier and draw maps that France might use if it were to try and seize the lightly settled heartland territory of the Mississippi River valley basin from the nascent United States further to the East.

[ 9 ] First expedition [ edit ] In the summer of 1805, General-in-Chief James  Wilkinson ordered young Lt. Pike to locate the northern source of the Mississippi River , explore the northern portion of the newly created and beginning-to-be-colonized Louisiana Territory , and to expel any British / Canadian roving fur traders illegally trading within the western borders of the newly-expanded United States . Pike left St. Louis on August 9, 1805, proceeding upstream by pirogue . He and his crew reached the confluence of the Mississippi and Minnesota Rivers on September 21, where he negotiated a Treaty of St. Peters agreement with the native Dakota Indians, purchasing the future site of Fort Snelling . The expedition proceeded further upriver, stopping to construct a winter camp at the mouth of the Swan River , south of present-day Little Falls, Minnesota , on October 16. On December 10, they continued upstream along the frozen river on foot, visiting several British North West Company fur posts along the way.

They reached the fur post at Leech Lake on February 1 and stayed nearly three weeks. Pike informed the traders they were within the new boundaries of the United States and henceforth required to abide by its American laws and regulations. Pike met with many prominent Ojibwe chiefs, prevailing on them to surrender the medals and flags given to them as tokens of allegiance by the British and offering American peace medals . He also relayed the new United States' desire that the Ojibwe and Lakota nations would cease hostilities, inviting the chiefs back to a peace conference in St. Louis (however, both First Nations tribes declined that invitation to travel through several hundred miles of hostile territory). On February 10, they ceremonially shot down the British red ensign from the fur company's flag pole, replacing it with the new United States fifteen-star, fifteen-stripe Star-Spangled Banner flag. On a side trip between February 12 and 14, Pike traveled to the North West Company fur post on Upper Red Cedar Lake (later renamed Cass Lake), designating the lake as the upper source of the Mississippi and taking celestial observations / calculations to determine its latitude .

Pike and his men left Leech Lake on February 18, carrying diplomatic tokens from the Ojibwe chiefs to present to the Dakota chiefs as a gesture of reconciliation, arriving at their winter encampment on March 5. They re-embarked in their pirogues for the downriver journey on April 7, reaching St. Louis on April 20. Pike's was the second expedition besides earlier Lewis and Clark , dispatched by the U.S. government into its new western territories , and the first to return.

Second expedition [ edit ] Pikes Peak , central Colorado After Lieutenant Pike returned from this first expedition, General Wilkinson almost immediately ordered him to mount a second expedition, this time to the Southwest to explore, map, and find the headwaters of the Arkansas River and parallel Red River of the South upstream from the lower Mississippi River . Additional objectives of this exploratory expedition into the southwestern part of the new Louisiana Territory were to evaluate natural resources and establish friendly relations with Native Americans. It is commonly said that his expedition was an innocent exploration of the West, but that is not the case. This was a mission to prepare for a possible American invasion of the neighboring Royal Spanish provinces of New Mexico and Texas over the disputed southwest border from France's sale of the Louisiana Purchase of 1803.

[ 10 ] Beginning July 15, 1806, Pike led what became known as the " Pike Expedition ".

In early November 1806, Pike and his team sighted and tried to climb to the summit of the peak later named after him ( Pikes Peak ). They made it as far as Mt. Rosa, located southeast of Pikes Peak, before giving up the ascent in waist-deep snow. They had already gone almost two days without food.

[ 11 ] They then continued south, searching for the Red River of the South's headwaters, and built a fort for shelter during the winter. However, they had crossed the border, whether through confusion or deliberation. Royal Spanish authorities captured Pike and some of his party on February 26, 1807.

Pike and his men were taken to the old colonial capital of Santa Fe of the Royal Spanish province of New Mexico and on further south to the Chihuahua City capital of Chihuahua province, and presented to Commandant General Salcedo , who was governor of the state.

[ 12 ] Pike was treated well and invited to formal social dinners but still not quite given the treatment of a visiting diplomatic dignitary, and his men were kept prisoner. Salcedo housed Pike with Juan Pedro Walker, a cartographer who also acted as an interpreter. Walker transcribed and translated Pike's confiscated documents, including his journal. Spanish authorities feared the spread of both their democracy and Protestant Christian sects that might undermine their rule.

During this time, Pike had access to various maps of the southwest and New Spain , and especially learned about colonial Mexico's increasing discontentment with Royal Spanish rule. Spain filed official protests with the United States about Pike's exploring expedition, but since the nations were not at war (and the Kingdom of Spain was rebelling against Napoleon Bonaparte's older brother, who was put in place to rule Spain and was also fighting Great Britain in the Peninsular War ), Commandant Salcedo released the American military men. The Spanish escorted Pike and most of his men back north, releasing them at the Louisiana border on July 1, 1807.

War of 1812 [ edit ] Pike was promoted to the rank of captain during the southwestern expedition. In 1811, Pike fought with the 4th Infantry Regiment at the Battle of Tippecanoe under General (and future ninth President) William Henry Harrison . He was promoted to colonel of the 15th Infantry Regiment in July 1812. Pike's military career also included service as deputy quartermaster -general in New Orleans and inspector general during the later part of the War of 1812 .

Pike commanded the advance guard of an American force which was defeated—primarily because of the poor planning and half-hearted effort of his commander, Henry Dearborn —at the first Battle of Lacolle Mills in November 1812. Pike was promoted to brigadier general in March 1813.

[ 13 ] Along with General Jacob Brown , Pike departed from the newly fortified rural military outpost of Sackets Harbor , on the New York shore of Lake Ontario , for what became his last military campaign. On this expedition, Pike commanded combat troops in the successful attack on York (now Toronto ) on April 27, 1813. Pike was mortally wounded and died, along with numerous other American troops, by flying rocks and other debris when the withdrawing British garrison blew up its ammunition magazine as Pike's troops approached Fort York .

[ 14 ] His body was brought by ship back to Sackets Harbor, where his remains were buried at the military cemetery.

[ 15 ] Confiscated papers [ edit ] The Spanish authorities confiscated some of Pike's papers, which were not recovered by the United States from Mexico until the 20th century. Pike wrote an account of his expeditions, some of which had to be recreated from memory, which was published in 1810 as The expeditions of Zebulon Montgomery Pike to Headwaters of the Mississippi River, through Louisiana Territory, and in New Spain, during the Years 1805–6–7 .

[ 16 ] These journals and maps gave Americans important information about trade opportunities along with the blueprints for the Santa Fe Trail.

[ 17 ] It was popular and was later translated into Dutch, French, and German editions. It became popular reading for all American explorers who followed him in the 19th century.

Pike's capture by the Spanish and travel through the Southwest gave Pike insight into the region. For example, he described the politics in Chihuahua, which led to the Mexican independence movement, and described trade conditions in the Spanish territories of New Mexico and Chihuahua.

In some eastern regions of North America, a tradition or legend pervades often referred to as The Lost City of Palanor or Zebulon's Gift which has been attributed to Pike's journals. The myth, said to be derived from a missing portion of Pike's confiscated journals, is usually told in two segments. The first sequence involves Pike's unlikely acquisition of a great treasure.

[ 18 ] The second is a description of Pike's discovery of the lost city "Palanor," said to be built by pre-Columbian European settlers, and his decision to hide the treasure there.

[ 18 ] Legacy [ edit ] As Michael Olsen shows, after Pike's death in battle, his military accomplishments were widely celebrated in terms of biographies, mourning memorials, paintings, poems, and songs, and he became the namesake for dozens of towns, counties, and ships. His memory faded after the Civil War but rebounded in 1906, at the centennial of his Southwest Expedition. His 20th-century reputation focused on his exploration, and his name appeared often on natural features, such as dams, islands, lakes, and parks.

[ 19 ] Pike's Peak remains the second most visited mountain in the world.

[ 20 ] Pike's expedition route of approximately 3,664 miles is maintained to this day by the Pike National Trail Association.

[ 21 ] Pike was honored in 1901 by General William Jackson Palmer with a marble statue placed near the main entrance of the Antlers Hotel .

[ 22 ] Pike was later honored in 1926 with a bronze medallion portrait placed in the pavilion at Tahama Spring (named after Pike's Dakota guide, Chief Tahama ) in Monument Valley Park, Colorado Springs.

[ 23 ] For over two hundred years, historians have debated whether Pike was truly an explorer, or if he was a spy.

[ 17 ] Military [ edit ] Fort Pike Camp Pike, Arkansas (A sub-section of Camp Joe T. Robinson Arkansas National Guard) USS General Pike A building at Fort Knox is named in his honor Liberty ship SS Zebulon Pike (appears in Episode 1 of Victory At Sea , and also in footage at the end of the film ' Action in the North Atlantic ) Landforms [ edit ] Pike Bay Pike Creek Pike Island at the confluence of the Mississippi and Minnesota Rivers in Fort Snelling State Park , Minnesota [ 24 ] Pikes Peak Zebulon Pike Lake Reservoir in Morrison County, Minnesota Communities [ edit ] Pike County in: Alabama Arkansas Georgia and its county seat Zebulon [ 25 ] Illinois Indiana Kentucky Mississippi Missouri Ohio Pennsylvania Pike, New York Piketon, Ohio Pikeville, Kentucky Pikesville, Kentucky (historic) Pikeville, Tennessee Pikesville, Maryland Pike Bay Township , Cass County, Minnesota Pike Creek Township , Morrison County, Minnesota Pike Township , Marion County, Indiana Pike Township , Wyoming County, New York Pike Township , Stark County, Ohio Zebulon, Kentucky [ 26 ] Other [ edit ] Pike National Forest in Colorado Pikes Peak Marathon in Colorado Pikes Peak State Park in Clayton County, Iowa Pike Trail League, Kansas high school activities league [ 27 ] Pike Valley School District, Kansas School District, U.S.D. 426 General Zebulon Pike Lock and Dam No. 11 in Dubuque, Iowa SRAM's RockShox division, whose R&D department is headquartered in Colorado Springs, Colorado have produced at least two shocks the Zeb and the Pike named after Zebulon [ 28 ] Zebulon Ice, a Colorado Department of Transportation snowplow, in a winning name submitted by a Colorado child as part of a 2021 contest.

[ 29 ] Nicholas King, Zebulon Pike, Anthony Nau, and Francis Shallus's Map of the Mississippi River , 1810 Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Berry, Trey; Beasley, Pam; Clements, Jeanne, eds. (2006).

The Forgotten Expedition, 1804–1805: The Louisiana Purchase Journals of Dunbar and Hunter . Louisiana State University Press. p. xi, fn2.

ISBN 978-0-8071-3165-7 .

^ Irving, Washington (November 1814). "Biographical Memoir of the Late Brigadier General Zebulon Montgomery Pike".

Analectic Magazine . Vol. 4. p. 380.

^ Wilson, Thomas (1822).

The Biography of the Principal American Military and Naval Heroes; Comprehending Details of Their Achievements During the Revolutionary and Late Wars . Vol. II (Second ed.). New York: John Low. p. 9.

^ Backes, William J. (October 1919).

"General Zebulon M. Pike, Somerset-Born" .

Somerset County Historical Quarterly .

8 (4): 241– 251.

^ Calvert, Patricia (2005).

Zebulon Pike: Lost in the Rockies . Marshall Cavendish.

ISBN 978-0761416128 .

^ Buckley, Jay H.; Harris, Matthew L., eds. (2012).

Zebulon Pike, Thomas Jefferson, and the Opening of the American West . Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press.

ISBN 978-0806142432 .

^ Zebulon Pike, Thomas Jefferson, and the Opening of the American West ^ "Henry County IAGenWeb" .

iagenweb.org . Retrieved February 1, 2025 .

^ Tom Eblen (March 19, 2017).

"Kentucky invasion? Rare spy map shows French plans for frontier America" .

Kentucky Herald-Leader .

Maysville, Kentucky . Retrieved September 29, 2019 .

Alas, Collot was not very secretive. Before he left Pittsburgh on his journey, American authorities discovered his mission and shadowed him. Zebulon Pike, a U.S. Army officer who would later become an explorer and the namesake of Pike's Peak in Colorado, arrested Collot at Fort Massac near what is now Metropolis, Ill., but had no legal grounds to detain him.

^ Matthews, George R. 2016. Zebulon Pike : Thomas Jefferson's Agent for Empire. Santa Barbara, California: Praeger, An Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC.

^ Orsi, Jared (2013).

Citizen explorer : the life of Zebulon Pike . Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-931454-6 .

OCLC 862077026 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) [ page needed ] ^ Buescher, John.

"Trailing Lewis and Clark" . TeachingHistory.org . Retrieved July 12, 2011 .

^ Valkenburg, Samuel Van (1976). "Pike, Zebulon Montgomery". In William D. Halsey (ed.).

Collier's Encyclopedia . Vol. 19. New York: Macmillan Educational Corporation. p. 46.

^ Peppiatt, Liam.

"Chapter 31B: Fort York" .

Robertson's Landmarks of Toronto . Archived from the original on June 6, 2016 . Retrieved July 30, 2015 .

^ Graves of Upstate New York ^ Pike, Zebulon Montgomery (1965). Elliott Coues (ed.).

The expeditions of Zebulon Montgomery Pike to headwaters of the Mississippi River, through Louisiana Territory, and in New Spain, during the years 1805–6–7 . Ross & Haines (published 1895).

^ a b Harris, Matthew L.; Buckley, Jay H. (2012).

Zebulon Pike, Thomas Jefferson, and the Opening of the American West . University of Oklahoma Press.

ISBN 978-0-8061-8844-7 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b Simmons, Shane (2016). Legends & Lore of East Tennessee (American Legends) Mount Pleasant, South Carolina: The History Press. p. 113.

^ Olsen, Michael L. (Spring 2006).

"Zebulon Pike and American Popular Culture – or – Has Pike Peaked?" (PDF) .

Kansas History .

29 (1): 48– 59.

^ Orsi, Jared (2014).

Citizen Explorer: The Adventurous Life of Zebulon Pike . OUP USA.

ISBN 978-0-19-976872-1 .

OCLC 930952953 .

[ page needed ] ^ United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Energy and Natural Resources (2018).

Pike National Historic Trail Study Act: report (to accompany S. 2876) (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office) . Report / 115th Congress, 2d session, Senate. Washington, D.C.: [U.S. Government Publishing Office].

OCLC 1106557995 .

[ page needed ] ^ "William J. Palmer".

Facts Illustrated Vol. 9 No. 13/14 . January 1, 1902. pp.

31– 32.

^ "Bronze Medallions" (PDF) .

Sunday Gazette and Telegraph . March 26, 1927. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 22, 2018 . Retrieved October 21, 2018 .

^ Upham, Warren (1920).

Minnesota Geographic Names: Their Origin and Historic Significance . Minnesota Historical Society. p. 441.

^ Krakow, Kenneth K. (1975).

Georgia Place-Names: Their History and Origins (PDF) . Macon, GA: Winship Press. p. 176.

ISBN 0-915430-00-2 .

^ "Zebulon, Kentucky" .

www.kyatlas.com . Retrieved February 9, 2024 .

^ Garman-Schlaefli, Gloria (January 31, 2008).

"Pike Trail League formed 60 years ago" .

Jewell County Record . No. 5 . Retrieved February 8, 2016 .

^ "First Ride: RockShox's New Zeb Fork" .

Pinkbike . July 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2022 .

^ "Name That Plow – Colorado Department of Transportation" .

Further reading [ edit ] Harris, Matthew L; Buckley, Jay H., eds. (2012).

Zebulon Pike, Thomas Jefferson, and the opening of the American West . University of Oklahoma Press.

ISBN 9780806142432 .

Hollon, W. Eugene (1949).

The Lost Pathfinder, Zebulon Montgomery Pike . Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press.

ISBN 978-0-8061-0193-4 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Orsi, Jared (2014).

Citizen Explorer: The Adventurous Life of Zebulon Pike . OUP USA.

ISBN 978-0-19-976872-1 .

OCLC 930952953 .

External links [ edit ] Works by Zebulon Pike at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Zebulon Pike at the Internet Archive Works by Zebulon Pike at Open Library National Park Service biography Santa Fe Trail Research "Butler County connections to the Mexican War" Hamilton Journal-News Hamilton, Ohio Pike's Explorations Archived May 12, 2014, at the Wayback Machine – related to Pike's journey to find the source of the Mississippi River and the building of his fort in what is now Morrison County, Minnesota Pike's Menagerie Archived May 12, 2014, at the Wayback Machine – the animals Pike and his men encountered in central Minnesota Was Pike a Failure?

– an examination of the often-heard critique of Pike's Mississippi River expedition Zebulon Pike and the Blue Mountain – The award-winning film produced with the help of Pike Historian W. Eugene Hollon, the U.S. Army, the Smithsonian, and the National Archives about the explorer's time in what is now Colorado. Winner CINE Golden Eagle award and Certificate of Commendation from the American Association for State and Local History. Narrated by Burgess Meredith.

Military offices Preceded by Thomas H. Cushing Adjutant Generals of the U. S. Army March 12, 1813 – April 27, 1813 Succeeded by vacant Preceded by Alexander Smyth Inspector General of the U. S. Army March 12, 1813 – April 27, 1813 Succeeded by vacant v t e Inspectors general of the United States Army La Balme du Coudray Conway von Steuben North De Butts Rudolph Butler Mills Haskell Butler Cushing Hamilton Cushing Nickoll Smyth Pike Winder Parker Hayne Gadsden Archer Wool Croghan Churchill McCall Mansfield Scott Marcy Sackett Van Rensselaer Schriver Hardie Davis Baird Jones Breckinridge Vroom Burton Garlington Chamberlain Helmick Rivers Drum Preston Reed Peterson Sultan Wyche Craig Noce Zimmerman Ogden Pierson McDaniel Ives Richardson Garrison Enemark Woodward Maples Fuller Trefry Thompson Doctor Corns Griffith Jordan Ackerman Mikolashek Green Whitcomb Vangjel Quantock Smith Martin Brady Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Croatia Greece Sweden Israel Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zebulon_Pike&oldid=1304277574 " Categories : 1779 births 1813 deaths Adjutants general of the United States Army United States Army personnel of the War of 1812 American explorers of North America American people of English descent Pre-statehood history of Minnesota History of United States expansionism Inspectors general of the United States Army Military personnel from Trenton, New Jersey Pikes Peak United States Army generals American military personnel killed in the War of 1812 Explorers of the United States Red River of the South People from Bedminster, New Jersey Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2022 CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Open Library ID different from Wikidata Articles with Open Library links Webarchive template wayback links Template:Succession box: 'after' parameter includes the word 'vacant' S-aft: 'after' parameter includes the word 'vacant' This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 02:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zebulon Pike 22 languages Add topic

