Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 1.1 Composition 1.2 Meetings 2 Members Toggle Members subsection 2.1 Executive Meeting 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents State Council of China 39 languages العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from State Council of the People's Republic of China ) Chief administrative authority of China "Central People's Government" redirects here. For the central government of the PRC during 1949–1954, see Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China (1949–1954) .

State Council of the People's Republic of China 中华人民共和国国务院 Zhōnghuá Rénmín Gònghéguó Guówùyuàn National Emblem of China The State Council's First Conference Room Agency overview Formed 27 September 1954 ; 70 years ago ( 1954-09-27 ) Preceding agency Government Administration Council of the Central People's Government (1949–1954) Type Executive body of the National People's Congress Highest organ of State administration Jurisdiction Government of the People's Republic of China Headquarters State Council Office Secretariat , Zhongnanhai , Beijing Agency executives Li Qiang , Premier Ding Xuexiang , He Lifeng , Zhang Guoqing , Liu Guozhong , Vice Premiers Wang Xiaohong , Wu Zhenglong , Shen Yiqin , State councillors Child agencies General Office 26 Constituent Departments (cabinet-level) Website english .www .gov .cn State Council of China Simplified Chinese 中华人民共和国国务院 Traditional Chinese 中華人民共和國國務院 Literal meaning "People's Republic of China State Affairs Court" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōnghuá Rénmín Gònghéguó Guówùyuàn State Council (commonly used abbreviation) Simplified Chinese 国务院 Traditional Chinese 國務院 Literal meaning "The Court of State Affairs" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Guówùyuàn IPA [kwǒ.û.ɥɛ̂n] Central People's Government (Constitutional synonym [ 1 ] ) Chinese 中央人民政府 Literal meaning Central People Government Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōngyāng Rénmín Zhèngfǔ Politics of China Leadership Leadership generations Succession of power Hu–Wen Administration (2002–2012) Xi–Li Administration (2012–2017) Xi's general secretaryship (since 2012) 4th Leadership Core : Xi Jinping 20th Party Politburo : Xi Jinping 14th State Council : Li Qiang Current state leaders Current provincial leaders Party and state leaders Orders of precedence Paramount leader : Xi Jinping First lady : Peng Liyuan Communist Party leader : Xi Jinping State representative : Xi Jinping Head of government : Li Qiang Congress Chairman : Zhao Leji Conference Chairman : Wang Huning Commander-in-chief : Xi Jinping Politburo Standing Committee longest-serving members Related systems Unified power Democratic centralism Collective leadership Organization Department Elections Civil service Constitution Law Constitution Previous constitutions 1954 1975 1978 "People's democratic dictatorship" (Article 1) Democratic centralism (Article 3) Constitutional oath of office (Article 27) Protection of human rights (Article 33) Freedom of religion (Article 36) Highest state organ of power (Article 57) Chinese legal system Civil law tradition Socialist law tradition Laws Legislation Law List of statutes General Principles of the Civil Law (to 2020) Civil Code (from 2021) Marriage Law Labour law Labour Law Labour Contract Law Property law Property Law Intellectual property law Patent law Administrative law Administrative Procedure Law Criminal law Capital punishment Capital offences Death sentence with reprieve Communist Party History Principal leaders Constitution and ideology Admission Oath (Article 6) Socialism with Chinese characteristics Communism Marxism–Leninism Mao Zedong Thought Deng Xiaoping Theory Primary stage of socialism Four Cardinal Principles Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Harmonious Socialist Society Xi Jinping Thought Chinese Dream Democracy Whole-process people's democracy Organization National Party Congress ( 20th ) Central Committee ( 20th ) General Secretary ( list ) Xi Jinping Central Politburo ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Central Secretariat ( 20th ) First-ranked secretary: Cai Qi Central Military Commission Chairman : Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia , He Weidong National Security Commission Chairman: Xi Jinping Vice-Chairman: Li Qiang , Zhao Leji , Cai Qi Office Chief: Cai Qi Comprehensively Deepening Reforms Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Directors: Li Qiang , Wang Huning , Cai Qi Secretary-General: Wang Huning Financial & Economic Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Office Chief: He Lifeng General Office Director : Cai Qi Office of the General Secretary Director: Han Shiming Central Guard Bureau Central Guard Unit Office of the Central Secrecy Commission Organization Department Head : Shi Taifeng Central Commission for Discipline Inspection ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Secretary : Li Xi Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Central Military Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Central Leading Group for Inspection Work Leader: Li Xi Provincial committee Standing committee Secretary Deputy secretaries Party group National People's Congress ( 14th ) Elections Democracy System of people's congress Standing Committee ( 14th ) Council of Chairpersons Chairman : Zhao Leji Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Li Hongzhong Secretary-General : Liu Qi Special Committees Ethnic Affairs Constitution and Law Supervisory and Judicial Affairs Financial and Economic Affairs Education, Science, Culture and Public Health Foreign Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Environmental Protection and Resources Conservation Agriculture and Rural Affairs Social Development Affairs Presidium State representative President ( list ): Xi Jinping Presidential Office Chief: Han Shiming Vice President : Han Zheng Executive organ State Council (Central People's Government) Li Qiang Cabinet Premier ( list ): Li Qiang Vice-Premiers ( list ) Ding Xuexiang He Lifeng Zhang Guoqing Liu Guozhong State Councilors Wang Xiaohong Wu Zhenglong Shen Yiqin Secretary-General : Wu Zhenglong Cabinet-level departments National Development & Reform Commission Central bank National Audit Office General Office Secretary-General Deputy Secretaries-General State-owned Assets Supervision & Administration Commission most Central Enterprises Military organ Central Military Commission (CMC) Chairman ( supreme commander ): Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia He Weidong Members: Liu Zhenli Miao Hua Zhang Shengmin Departments: General Office Director: Zhong Shaojun Joint Staff Dept.

Chief : Liu Zhenli Political Work Dept.

Director: Miao Hua Logistic Support Dept.

Director: Zhang Lin Equipment Development Dept.

Director: Xu Xueqiang Training and Administration Dept.

Director: Wang Peng National Defense Mobilization Dept.

Director: Liu Faqing Discipline Inspection Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Politics and Legal Affairs Commission Science and Technology Commission Strategic Planning Office Reform & Organizational Structure Office Int'l Military Cooperation Office Audit Office Offices Administration Agency National armed forces: People's Liberation Army Theater commands People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Militia State Council National Defense Mobilization Commission Chairman : Li Qiang Ministry of National Defense Minister : Dong Jun Ministry of Veterans Affairs State Administration for Sci., Tech. & Industry for National Defense Military history Armed conflicts Military modernization Military reform since 2015 CMC Leading Group for Military Reform Leader: Xi Jinping Supervisory organ National Supervisory Commission Director : Liu Jinguo Corruption in China Anti-corruption campaign since 2012 Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong) Commission Against Corruption (Macau) Judicial organs Supreme People's Court President : Zhang Jun People's Courts Judicial Police Supreme People's Procuratorate Procurator-General : Ying Yong People's Procuratorates Judicial Police Judiciary of Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Department of Justice Prosecutions Division Law enforcement in Hong Kong Disciplined Services Security Bureau Hong Kong Police Force Judiciary of Macau Court of Final Appeal Public Prosecutions Office Secretariat for Security Macau Security Force Unitary Police Services [ zh ] Public Security Police Judiciary Police [ zh ] United front System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Political Consultative Conference National Committee ( 14th ) Chairman : Wang Huning Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Shi Taifeng Secretary-General : Wang Dongfeng Political parties : CCP (ruling) United Front Work Department Head : Li Ganjie Democratic parties RCCK CDL CNDCA CAPD CPWDP CZGP JS TDSL Historical parties: KMT CDSP YCP Federation of Industry and Commerce People's organizations Law enforcement CCP Central Politics and Law Commission Secretary : Chen Wenqing Enforced disappearance Ministry of Public Security Minister : Wang Xiaohong Public Security Organs People's Police State Immigration Administration Local public security bureaus Ministry of State Security Minister : Chen Yixin State Security Organs People's Police Ministry of Justice Minister : He Rong Judicial Administrative Organs People's Police People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Bureau of Prison Administration [ zh ] Office for Safeguarding National Security Urban Management (chengguan) Propaganda Central Leading Group for Propaganda, Ideology and Culture Leader: Cai Qi Deputy Leaders: Li Shulei , Shen Yiqin Central Guidance Commission on Building Spiritual Civilization Director: Cai Qi Deputy Director: Li Shulei Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party Head : Li Shulei General Administration of Press and Publication China Film Administration State Council Information Office China Daily Ministry of Culture and Tourism National Radio and Television Administration China Media Group China Central Television China Global Television Network China National Radio China Radio International Xinhua News Agency Reference News China News Service People's Daily Global Times China Today Censorship in China Great Cannon Great Firewall Overseas censorship Radio jamming Media of China Internal media International communication centers Publishing industry in China Internet in China Internet censorship Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission Director: Cai Qi Cyberspace Administration of China Director: Zhuang Rongwen Hong Kong Macau Central Leading Group on Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Leader: Ding Xuexiang HK & Macau Affairs Office Director: Xia Baolong Hong Kong Liaison Office Macau Liaison Office One country, two systems Special administrative regions Hong Kong Basic Law Chief Executive : John Lee Ka-chiu Hong Kong SAR Government Politics of Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Pro-democracy camp Independence movement Mainland & HK CEPA Macao Basic Law Chief Executive : Ho Iat-seng Macau SAR Government Politics of Macau Mainland & Macau CEPA Cross-strait relations Cross-strait relations Chinese Civil War One China Political status of Taiwan Republic of China on Taiwan Taiwan Area "Taiwan Province", PRC Taiwan independence movement Anti-Secession Law Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Chinese unification Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs Leader: Xi Jinping Deputy Leader: Wang Huning Taiwan Affairs Office Director: Song Tao Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Foreign relations Central Foreign Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Secretary-General: Wang Yi Ministry of Foreign Affairs Minister : Wang Yi Spokespersons Diplomatic missions Diplomatic missions of China / in China Foreign aid from China / to China International Development Cooperation Agency Ministry of Commerce Exim Bank of China China Development Bank Belt and Road Initiative Silk Road Fund Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank BRICS New Development Bank Ministry of National Defense International Military Cooperation Office NPC Foreign Affairs Committee CCP International Department State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Office Chinese nationality law Chinese passports ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) Visa requirements for Chinese citizens ( Hong Kong , Macau ) Visa policy of China ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) National Immigration Administration Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Panda diplomacy Beijing Consensus Community of Common Destiny China and the United Nations China and the World Trade Organization Shanghai Cooperation Organisation China–Africa relations China–Arab relations China–Caribbean relations China–European Union relations China–Latin America relations China–Pacific relations China–Russia relations China–United States relations Related topics Administrative divisions Chinese information operations Ethnic minorities Family planning Hukou system Human rights in China Chinese intelligence activity abroad China portal Other countries v t e The State Council of the People's Republic of China , synonymous with Central People's Government , is the supreme administrative organ of China's unified state apparatus and the executive organ of the National People's Congress , the supreme organ of state power . It is composed of a premier, vice-premiers, state councilors, ministers, chairpersons of commissions, an auditor-general, the governor of the People's Bank of China , and a secretary-general.

The premier of the State Council is responsible for the State Council and exercises overall leadership of its work. The secretary-general of the State Council, under the leadership of the premier, is responsible for handling the daily work of the State Council and heads the General Office of the State Council. The executive meeting of the State Council , consisting of the premier, vice-premiers, state councilors, and the secretary-general, is held two to three times a month, while the plenary meeting , consisting of all members of the State Council, is held every six months.

The State Council directly oversees provincial-level People's Governments, and in practice maintains membership with top levels of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). The State Council is legally required to implement the policies of the CCP. Aside from a few, members of the State Council are also members of the CCP's Central Committee .

Organization [ edit ] Main article: Constituent departments of the State Council See also: Institutional reform of the State Council The State Council is described by the Chinese constitution as the executive organ of the National People's Congress (NPC), as well as the "highest state administrative organ".

[ 2 ] Constitutionally, the main functions of the State Council are to formulate administrative measures, issue decisions and orders, and monitor their implementation; draft legislative bills for submission to the NPC or its Standing Committee; and prepare the economic plan and the state budget for deliberation and approval by the NPC.

[ 2 ] The State Council has flexibility in decision-making, especially with regard to economic matters, but the Politburo has ultimate authority.

[ 3 ] According to the Organic Law of the State Council , the CCP Central Committee exercises leadership over the State Council.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The law also stipulates the State Council must follow the CCP's ideology and policies.

[ 4 ] Composition [ edit ] The State Council is composed of the premier , several vice premiers , several state councillors , ministers of ministries, directors of committees, the auditor general, and the secretary-general . The premier leads the State Council [ 6 ] : 58 and is appointed by the NPC upon the nomination by the president , [ 2 ] though in practice the premier is chosen within the CCP leadership, including the Politburo Standing Committee .

[ 7 ] The vice premiers (one executive and generally three others), state councillors, and a secretary-general (who normally also serves as a state councillor) all assist the premier.

[ 8 ] The premier leads the Leading Party Members Group , which responsible for overseeing the implementation of CCP Central Committee policies in the State Council.

[ 9 ] Each vice premier oversees certain areas of administration in support of the premier.

[ 10 ] In practice, the vice premiers and State Councillors assume responsibility for one or more sectors or issues, and remain in contact with the various bodies responsible for policy related to that area. This allows the Standing Committee to oversee a wide range of government functions.

[ 11 ] Each State Councillor performs duties as designated by the Premier. The secretary-general heads the General Office which handles the day-to-day work of the State Council.

[ 8 ] The State Council includes 26 constituent departments, and oversees the province-level governments throughout China.

[ 3 ] Each ministry supervises one sector. Commissions outrank ministries and set policies for and coordinate the related activities of different administrative organs. Offices deal with matters of ongoing concern. The establishment, dissolution, or merger of the constituent departments are proposed by the premier and decided by the NPC or its Standing Committee.

[ 8 ] Bureaus and administrations rank below ministries. In addition to the ministries, there are 38 centrally administered government organizations that report directly to the state council. The heads of these organizations attend full meetings of the state committee on an irregular basis.

[ citation needed ] The State Council controls the Ministry for National Defense but does not control the People's Liberation Army, which is instead controlled by the Central Military Commission (CMC).

[ 12 ] The State Council previously had joint command over the People's Armed Police (PAP) together with the CMC, principally through the Ministry of Public Security , though 2018 reforms placed the PAP solely under CMC command.

[ 13 ] : 15 Meetings [ edit ] The plenary meeting of the State Council meets every six months, composed of all members of the State Council. Between meetings it is guided by an executive meeting of the State Council which is held two to three times a month, and can be called at the discretion of the premier.

[ 14 ] The Executive Meeting is composed of the premier, vice premiers, state councilors, and the secretary-general.

[ 8 ] Members [ edit ] Executive Meeting [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Executive meeting of the State Council § Current executive meeting .

[ edit ] Members of the Executive Meeting of the 14th State Council (March 2023 – March 2028) # Office Portrait Name Party Party memberships 1 Premier Li Qiang 李强 CCP Politburo Standing Committee Secretary, Leading Party Members Group 2 Vice Premier (first-ranked) Ding Xuexiang 丁薛祥 CCP Politburo Standing Committee Deputy Secretary, Leading Party Members Group 3 Vice Premier He Lifeng 何立峰 CCP Politburo Leading Party Members Group 4 Vice Premier Zhang Guoqing 张国清 CCP Politburo Leading Party Members Group 5 Vice Premier Liu Guozhong 刘国中 CCP Politburo Leading Party Members Group 6 State Councillor Minister of Public Security Wang Xiaohong 王小洪 CCP Secretariat Deputy Secretary, Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission Leading Party Members Group 7 State Councillor Secretary-General of the State Council Wu Zhenglong 吴政隆 CCP Leading Party Members Group Secretary, State Council Organs Party Group [ zh ] 8 State Councillor Shen Yiqin 谌贻琴 CCP Leading Party Members Group See also [ edit ] China portal Politics portal Department of State Affairs in the Three Departments and Six Ministries system Ming dynasty : Central Secretariat → Grand Secretariat Qing dynasty : Grand Secretariat → Grand Council → Cabinet Republic of China : State Council (1912–28) → Executive Yuan (1928–present) People's Republic of China : Government Administration Council of the Central People's Government (1949–54) ; Constituent departments of the PRC References [ edit ] ^ Article 85 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China ^ a b c "Constitution of the People's Republic of China" .

National People's Congress .

Archived from the original on 2022-01-03 . Retrieved 2022-08-08 .

^ a b Cheng, Li; Prytherch, Mallie (7 March 2023).

"China's new State Council: What analysts might have missed" .

Brookings Institution .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 .

^ a b Zheng, William (2024-03-06).

"Xi's dominance in Chinese politics to grow with change to State Council: expert" .

South China Morning Post .

Archived from the original on 2024-03-07 . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

It includes specific clauses saying the council will closely follow the Communist Party's ideology, leadership and instructions, further defining its role as faithful policy implementer of the ruling party.

^ Chu, Mei Mei; Chen, Laurie (March 11, 2024).

"China passes law granting Communist Party more control over cabinet" .

Reuters . Retrieved March 11, 2024 .

^ Li, David Daokui (2024).

China's World View: Demystifying China to Prevent Global Conflict . New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0393292398 .

^ "China's backroom power brokers block reform candidates" .

South China Morning Post . 21 November 2012.

Archived from the original on 13 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 September 2021 .

^ a b c d Wei, Changhao (2024-03-11).

"NPC 2024: Annotated Translation of the Revised State Council Organic Law" .

NPC Observer . Retrieved 2024-04-15 .

^ He, Alex (December 2018).

"The Emerging Model of Economic Policy Making under Xi Jinping" (PDF) .

Centre for International Governance Innovation . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ He, Laura (4 March 2023).

"Meet the 4 men tapped to run China's economy" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 .

^ Thomas, Neil (5 April 2023).

"What are the Policy Assignments of China's New State Council Leadership?" .

Asia Society .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 .

^ Boswell, Matthew (2009).

"Media Relations in China's Military: The Case of the Ministry of National Defense Information Office" .

Asia Policy (8): 97– 120.

ISSN 1559-0968 .

JSTOR 24904949 .

Archived from the original on 2023-11-03 . Retrieved 2023-10-24 .

^ Wuthnow, Joel (16 April 2019).

China's Other Army: The People's Armed Police in an Era of Reform (PDF) . Washington: Institute for National Strategic Studies.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2020 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ Zheng, William (28 March 2023).

"New work rules for China's State Council put the party firmly in charge" .

South China Morning Post .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e State Council of China Incumbent ( 14th ): Li Qiang Cabinet State Council Members Executive meeting Premier Vice Premiers State Councilors Secretary-General Ministers in charge of ministries/commissions Auditor-General Departments Foreign Defense Development Education Science Industry and Information Tech Ethnic Public Security State Security Civil Justice Finance Human Resources and Social Security Natural Resources Ecology and Environment Housing Transport Water Agriculture Commerce Culture and Tourism Health Veterans Emergency People's Bank Audit Office Agencies General Office Secretary-General Deputy Secretaries-General Special State Assets Affiliated Customs Taxation Market Regulation Anti-Monopoly Standardization Cert. & Accred.

Financial Regulation Securities Radio and TV Sport Complaints & Proposals Statistics Intellectual Property International Development Healthcare Security Counsellors Government Offices Press and Publication (☭ Publicity Dept.) Religious ( ☭ United Front Dept.

) Offices Research Hong Kong and Macao ( ☭ Leading Group ) Overseas Chinese ( ☭ United Front Dept.

) Taiwan ( ☭ Leading Group ) Cyberspace ( ☭ Cyberspace ) Information ( ☭ Publicity ) Institutions Xinhua News Agency Development Research China Media Group Meteorology Academies Sciences Engineering Social Sciences Governance ( a.k.a.

☭ Central Party School ) Bureaus Food and Strategic Reserves Energy Data Defense Industry Tobacco Immigration Forestry and Grassland Railway Civil Aviation Post Cultural Heritage Traditional Medicine Disease Control Mine Safety Fire & Rescue Foreign Exchange Medical Products State Secrets ( ☭ Secrecy Comm.

) National Archives ( a.k.a.

☭ Central Archives) Civil Service ( ☭ Org. Dept.

) Cryptography ( ☭ Leading Group ) State Council = Central People's Government ( constitutionally since 1954 ) ☭ denotes name reserved by Communist Party agencies .

v t e Central state organs of the People's Republic of China National People's Congress NPC Standing Committee President State Council Central Military Commission National Supervisory Commission Supreme People's Court Supreme People's Procuratorate v t e Politics of China Constitution Laws Ideology Communist Party Central Committee Politburo Standing Committee General Secretary Secretariat Military Commission Central Commission for Discipline Inspection Secretary Provincial standing committees Constitution Central government Paramount leader National People's Congress Standing Committee Chairman President Vice President State Council Premier Vice Premiers State Councilors Ministries Central Military Commission Chairman People's Liberation Army People's Armed Police Militia National Supervisory Commission Director Supreme People's Court President Supreme People's Procuratorate Procurator-General United front Political Consultative Conference National Committee Chairperson Democratic parties People's organization United Front Work Department Politics of province-level divisions ( current leaders ) Municipalities Beijing Chongqing Shanghai Tianjin Provinces Anhui Fujian Gansu Guangdong Guizhou Hainan Hebei Heilongjiang Henan Hubei Hunan Jiangsu Jiangxi Jilin Liaoning Qinghai Shaanxi Shandong Shanxi Sichuan Yunnan Zhejiang Autonomous regions Guangxi Inner Mongolia Ningxia Xinjiang Tibet ( leaders ) SARs Hong Kong Macau Claimed province Taiwan See also Elections v t e National cabinets of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Australia Norway Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=State_Council_of_China&oldid=1305825297 " Categories : State Council of China National cabinets Government agencies established in 1954 1954 establishments in China Zhongnanhai Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 08:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents State Council of China 39 languages Add topic

