Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Work 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Giuseppe Veronese 20 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Deutsch Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Nederlands 日本語 Piemontèis Português Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian mathematician (1854–1917) Giuseppe Veronese Born ( 1854-05-07 ) 7 May 1854 Chioggia Died 17 July 1917 (1917-07-17) (aged 63) Padua Nationality Italian Alma mater Istituto Tecnico di Venezia Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions University of Padua Doctoral advisor Luigi Cremona Doctoral students Guido Castelnuovo Giuseppe Veronese (7 May 1854 – 17 July 1917) was an Italian mathematician . He was born in Chioggia , near Venice .

Education [ edit ] Veronese earned his laurea in mathematics from the Istituto Tecnico di Venezia in 1872.

Work [ edit ] Although Veronese's work was severely criticised as unsound by Peano , he is now recognised as having priority on many ideas that have since become parts of transfinite numbers and model theory , and as one of the respected authorities of the time, his work served to focus Peano and others on the need for greater rigor.

He is particularly noted for his hypothesis of relative continuity which was the foundation for his development of the first non- Archimedean linear continuum .

Veronese produced several significant monographs. The most famous appeared in 1891, Fondamenti di geometria a più dimensioni e a più specie di unità rettilinee esposti in forma elementare , normally referred to as Fondamenti di geometria to distinguish it from Veronese' other works also styled Fondamenti . It was this work that was most severely criticised by both Peano and Cantor , however Levi-Civita described it as masterful and Hilbert as profound .

See also [ edit ] Veronese surface References [ edit ] Fondamenti di geometria a piu dimensioni e a piu specie di unità rettilinee , 1891 Philip Ehrlich (ed) Real Numbers, Generalisations of the Reals, and Theories of Continua , 1994.

Paola Cantu' , Giuseppe Veronese e i fondamenti della geometria [Giuseppe Veronese and the Foundations of Geometry], Milano, Unicopli, "Biblioteca di cultura filosofica, 10", 1999, 270 pp.

ISBN 978-88-400-0589-8 .

Philip Ehrlich: The rise of non-Archimedean mathematics and the roots of a misconception. I. The emergence of non-Archimedean systems of magnitudes. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 60 (2006), no. 1, 1–121.

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Giuseppe Veronese" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Fondamenti di geometria , full text in Italian, as HTML and as image files.

Foundations of geometry in higher dimensions and more species of rectilinear units exposed in elemental form. Lessons for school teaching in mathematics , full text in Google-English translation.

Grundzüge der Geometrie von mehreren Dimensionen und mehreren Arten gradliniger Einheiten in elementarer Form entwickelt,  1894, German translation.

Peano's dismissal of Veronese' work.

'Generic points' attributed to Veronese.

Biography & Bibliography by P. Cantù Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX This article about an Italian mathematician is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giuseppe_Veronese&oldid=1264773200 " Categories : 1854 births 1917 deaths People from Chioggia Algebraic geometers Italian algebraic geometers 20th-century Italian mathematicians 19th-century Italian mathematicians Italian historians of mathematics Academic staff of the University of Padua Italian mathematician stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All stub articles This page was last edited on 23 December 2024, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Giuseppe Veronese 20 languages Add topic

