Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Syndrome 2 Allergies 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Anemophily 31 languages العربية Беларуская Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Кыргызча മലയാളം 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wind pollination Main article: Pollination syndrome Wind-pollination (anemophily) syndrome The flowers of wind-pollinated flowering plants, such as this saw-tooth oak ( Quercus acutissima ), are less showy than insect-pollinated flowers.

Anemophilous plants, such as this pine ( Pinus ) produce large quantities of pollen, which is carried on the wind.

Anemophily or wind pollination is a form of pollination whereby pollen is distributed by wind .

[ 1 ] Almost all gymnosperms are anemophilous, as are many plants in the order Poales , including grasses , sedges , and rushes .

[ 1 ] Other common anemophilous plants are oaks , pecans , pistachios , sweet chestnuts , alders , hops , and members of the family Juglandaceae (hickory or walnut family).

[ 2 ] Approximately 12% of plants across the globe are pollinated by anemophily, including cereal crops like rice and corn and other prominent crop plants like wheat , rye , barley , and oats .

[ 3 ] In addition, many pines , spruces , and firs are wind-pollinated.

[ 2 ] Syndrome [ edit ] A pine with male flowers releasing pollen into the wind Features of the wind-pollination syndrome include a lack of scent production, a lack of showy floral parts (resulting in small, inconspicuous flowers), reduced production of nectar , and the production of enormous numbers of pollen grains.

[ 4 ] This distinguishes them from entomophilous and zoophilous species (whose pollen is spread by insects and vertebrates respectively).

[ citation needed ] Anemophilous pollen grains are smooth, light, and non-sticky, so that they can be transported by air currents.

[ 5 ] Wind-pollinating plants have no predisposition to attract pollinating organisms.

[ 2 ] They freely expel a myriad of these pollen grains, and only a small percentage of them ends up captured by the female floral structures on wind-pollinated plants.

[ 3 ] They are typically 20–60 micrometres (0.0008–0.0024 in) in diameter, although the pollen grains of Pinus species can be much larger and much less dense.

[ 1 ] Anemophilous plants possess lengthy, well-exposed stamens to catch and distribute pollen.

[ 2 ] These stamens are exposed to wind currents and also have large, feathery stigma to easily trap airborne pollen grains.

[ 5 ] Pollen from anemophilous plants tends to be smaller and lighter than pollen from entomophilous ones, with very low nutritional value to insects due to their low protein content.

[ 2 ] However, insects sometimes gather pollen from staminate anemophilous flowers at times when higher- protein pollens from entomophilous flowers are scarce. Anemophilous pollens may also be inadvertently captured by bees ' electrostatic field. This may explain why, though bees are not observed to visit ragweed flowers, its pollen is often found in honey made during the ragweed floral bloom. Other flowers that are generally anemophilous are observed to be actively worked by bees, with solitary bees often visiting grass flowers, and the larger honeybees and bumblebees frequently gathering pollen from corn tassels and other grains.

[ citation needed ] Anemophily is an adaptation that helps to separate the male and female reproductive systems of a single plant, reducing the effects of inbreeding .

[ 6 ] It often accompanies dioecy – the presence of male and female reproductive structures on separate plants.

[ citation needed ] Anemophily is adaptively beneficial because it promotes outcrossing and thus the avoidance of inbreeding depression that can occur due to the expression of recessive deleterious mutations in inbred progeny plants.

[ 7 ] Allergies [ edit ] Almost all pollens that are allergens are from anemophilous species.

[ 8 ] People allergic to the pollen produced by anemophilous plants often have symptoms of hay fever.

[ 2 ] Grasses ( Poaceae ) are the most important producers of aeroallergens in most temperate regions, with lowland or meadow species producing more pollen than upland or moorland species.

[ 8 ] In Morocco, it was found that asthma caused by pollen from Poaceae accounted for 10% of the clinical respiratory diseases that patients faced.

[ 9 ] The nature of how species of Poaceae grasses flower results in an increase in the time that the allergenic pollen circulates through the air, which is not favorable to people who are hypersensitive to it.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c A. K. Shukla; M. R. Vijayaraghavan; Bharti Chaudhry (1998).

"Abiotic pollination" .

Biology Of Pollen .

APH Publishing . pp.

67– 69.

ISBN 9788170249245 .

^ a b c d e f University of California, Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources.

"Wind" .

ucanr.edu . Retrieved 2020-12-01 .

^ a b "Wind Pollination" .

seeds.ca . Retrieved 2020-12-15 .

^ Dave Moore (2001).

"Insects of palm flowers and fruits" . In F.W. Howard; D. Moore; R.M. Giblin-Davis; R.G. Abad (eds.).

Insects on Palms .

CAB International . pp.

233– 266.

ISBN 9780851997056 .

^ a b "Wind and Water Pollination" .

www.fs.fed.us . Retrieved 2020-12-15 .

^ J. D. Ackerman (2000). "Abiotic pollen and pollination: ecological, functional, and evolutionary perspectives".

Plant Systematics and Evolution .

222 ( 1– 4): 167– 185.

Bibcode : 2000PSyEv.222..167A .

doi : 10.1007/BF00984101 .

^ Charlesworth D, Willis JH. The genetics of inbreeding depression. Nat Rev Genet. 2009 Nov;10(11):783-96. doi: 10.1038/nrg2664. PMID: 19834483 ^ a b Jean Emberlin (2009).

"Grass, tree, and weed pollen" . In A. Barry Kay ; Allen P. Kaplan; Jean Bousquet; Patrick G. Holt (eds.).

The Scientific Basis of Allergy . Allergy and Allergic Diseases. Vol. 1 (2nd ed.).

John Wiley & Sons . pp.

942– 962.

ISBN 9781444300925 .

^ a b Aboulaich, Nadia; Bouziane, Hassan; Kadiri, Mohamed; del Mar Trigo, María; Riadi, Hassane; Kazzaz, Mohamed; Merzouki, Abderrahman (2008-12-09).

"Pollen production in anemophilous species of the Poaceae family in Tetouan (NW Morocco)" .

Aerobiologia .

25 (1): 27.

doi : 10.1007/s10453-008-9106-2 .

ISSN 1573-3025 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Wind pollination at Wikimedia Commons v t e Pollination Anemophily Hydrophily Zoophily Entomophily Ornithophily Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anemophily&oldid=1294659528 " Categories : Plant morphology Pollination Wind Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 02:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anemophily 31 languages Add topic

