Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Critique of mathematics education 3 Critique of mathematics research 4 Publications 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Morris Kline 16 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Nederlands Português Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American mathematician, teacher and author (1908–1992) Morris Kline (May 1, 1908 – June 10, 1992) was a professor of mathematics , a writer on the history , philosophy , and teaching of mathematics , and also a popularizer of mathematical subjects.

Education and career [ edit ] Kline was born to a Jewish family in Brooklyn and resided in Jamaica, Queens .  After graduating from Boys High School in Brooklyn, he studied mathematics at New York University , earning a bachelor's degree in 1930, a master's degree in 1932, and a doctorate (Ph.D.) in 1936. He continued at NYU as an instructor until 1942.

[ 1 ] During World War II , Kline was posted to the Signal Corps (United States Army) stationed at Belmar, New Jersey . Designated as a physicist , he worked in the engineering lab where radar was developed. After the war, he continued investigating electromagnetism , and from 1946 to 1966, he was director of the division for electromagnetic research at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences .

Kline resumed his mathematical teaching at NYU, becoming a full professor in 1952.
He taught at New York University until 1975, and wrote many papers and more than a dozen books on various aspects of mathematics and particularly teaching of mathematics . He repeatedly stressed the need to teach the applications and usefulness of mathematics rather than expecting students to enjoy it for its own sake. Similarly, he urged that mathematical research concentrate on solving problems posed in other fields rather than building structures of interest only to other mathematicians.
One can get a sense of Kline's views on teaching from the following: I would urge every teacher to become an actor. His classroom technique must be enlivened by every device used in theatre. He can be and should be dramatic where appropriate. He must not only have facts but fire. He can utilize even eccentricities of behavior to stir up human interest. He should not be afraid of humor and should use it freely. Even an irrelevant joke or story perks up the class enormously.

[ 2 ] Critique of mathematics education [ edit ] Morris Kline was a protagonist in the curriculum reform in mathematics education that occurred in the second half of the twentieth century, a period including the programs of the new math . An article by Kline in 1956 in The Mathematics Teacher was titled "Mathematical texts and teachers: a tirade".  Calling out teachers who blame students for their failures, he wrote "There is a student problem, but there are also three other factors which are responsible for the present state of mathematical learning, namely, the curricula, the texts, and the teachers." The tirade touched a nerve, and changes started to happen. But then Kline switched to being a critic of some of the changes. In 1958, he wrote "Ancients versus moderns: a new battle of the books". The article was accompanied by a rebuttal by Albert E. Meder Jr. of Rutgers University .

[ 3 ] He says, "I find objectionable: first, vague generalizations, entirely undocumented, concerning views held by 'modernists', and second, the inferences drawn from what has not been said by the 'modernists'." 
By 1966, Kline proposed an eight-page high school plan.

[ 4 ] The rebuttal for this article was by James H. Zant; it asserted that Kline had "a general lack of knowledge of what was going on in schools with reference to textbooks, teaching, and curriculum." Zant criticized Kline's writing for "vagueness, distortion of facts, undocumented statements and overgeneralization." In 1966 [ 5 ] and 1970, [ 6 ] Kline issued two further criticisms. In 1973, St. Martin's Press contributed to the dialogue by publishing Kline's critique, Why Johnny Can't Add: the Failure of the New Math . Its opening chapter is a parody of instruction as students' intuitions are challenged by the new jargon . The book recapitulates the debates from Mathematics Teacher , with Kline conceding some progress: He cites Howard Fehr of Columbia University who sought to unify the subject through its general concepts: sets , operations , mappings , relations , and structures in the Secondary School Mathematics Curriculum Improvement Study .

In 1977, Kline turned to undergraduate university education; he took on the academic mathematics establishment with his Why the Professor Can't Teach: The Dilemma of University Education . Kline argues that the onus on professors in the United States to conduct research misdirects the scholarly method that characterizes good teaching. He lauds scholarship as expressed by expository writing or reviews of original work of others. For scholarship, he expects critical attitudes to topics, materials and methods. Among the rebuttals are those by D.T. Finkbeiner, Harry Pollard, and Peter Hilton .

[ 7 ] Pollard conceded, "The society in which learning is admired and pursued for its own sake has disappeared." The Hilton review was more direct: Kline has "placed in the hand of enemies…[a] weapon". Having started in 1956 as an agitator for change in mathematics education, he became a critic of some trends. Skilled expositor that he was, editors frequently felt his expressions were best tempered with rebuttal.

In considering what motivated Morris Kline to protest, consider Professor Meder's opinion: [ 8 ] I am wondering whether in point of fact, Professor Kline really likes mathematics [...] I think that he is at heart a physicist, or perhaps a 'natural philosopher', not a mathematician, and that the reason he does not like the proposals for orienting the secondary school college preparatory mathematics curriculum to the diverse needs of the twentieth century by making use of some concepts developed in mathematics in the last hundred years or so is not that this is bad mathematics, but that it minimizes the importance of physics.

It might appear so, as Kline recalls E. H. Moore 's recommendation to combine science and mathematics at the high school level.

[ 9 ] But a closer reading shows Kline calling mathematics a "part of man's efforts to understand and master his world", and he sees that role in a broad spectrum of sciences.

Critique of mathematics research [ edit ] In Mathematics: The Loss of Certainty (ch. XIII: "The Isolation of Mathematics"), Kline deplored the way mathematics research was being conducted, complaining that often mathematicians are not willing to become acquainted with the (sometimes deep) context needed to solve applied problems in sciences, and instead prefer to invent pure mathematics problems that are not necessarily of any consequence. Kline also blamed the publish or perish academic culture for this state of affairs.

[ citation needed ] Publications [ edit ] Books Introduction to Mathematics (with Irvin W. Kay), Houghton Mifflin, 1937 The Theory of Electromagnetic Waves (ed), Inter-science Publishers, 1951 Mathematics in Western Culture , Oxford University Press,1953 Mathematics and the Physical World , T. Y. Crowell Co., 1959 Mathematics, A Cultural Approach , Addison-Wesley, 1962 Mathematics for the Nonmathematician , Dover Publications, 1967 Electromagnetic Theory and Geometrical Optics (with Irvin W. Kay) , John Wiley and Sons, 1965 Calculus, An intuitive and Physical Approach , John Wiley and Sons, 1967, 1977, Dover Publications 1998 reprint ISBN 0-486-40453-6 Mathematics for Liberal Arts , Addison-Wesley, 1967, (republished as Mathematics for the Nonmathematician , Dover Publications, Inc., 1985) ( ISBN 0-486-24823-2 ) Mathematics in the Modern World (ed), W. H. Freeman and Co., 1968 Mathematical Thought From Ancient to Modern Times , Oxford University Press, 1972 Why Johnny Can't Add: The Failure of the New Mathematics , St. Martin's Press, 1973 Why the Professor Can't Teach: Mathematics and the Dilemma of University Education , St. Martin's Press, 1977 ( ISBN 0-312-87867-2 ) Mathematics: The Loss of Certainty , Oxford University Press, 1980 ( ISBN 0-19-502754-X ); OUP Galaxy Books pb. reprint ( ISBN 0-19-503085-0 ) Mathematics: An Introduction to Its Spirit and Use; readings from Scientific American Mathematics in the Modern World; readings from Scientific American The Language of Shapes (with Abraham Wolf Crown ) Mathematics and the Search for Knowledge , Oxford University Press, 1985 ( ISBN 0-19-503533-X ) References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Alexanderson, G. L.

(2008). "Morris Kline". In Donald J. Albers; Gerald L. Alexanderson (eds.).

Mathematical People: Profiles and Interviews (2nd ed.).

A K Peters , Ltd. pp.

173– 183.

ISBN 978-1-56881-340-0 .

^ Mathematics Teacher 49:171.

^ The Mathematics Teacher 51:428–33 ^ Mathematics Teacher 59:322–330 ^ M. Kline (1966) "Intellectuals and the schools: a case history" in Harvard Educational Review 36:505–11 ^ M. Kline (1970) "Logic versus pedagogy" in American Mathematical Monthly (77:264–82) ^ D.T. Finkbeiner, Harry Pollard, Peter Hilton (May 1979) American Mathematical Monthly 86:401–412 ^ Mathematics Teacher 51:433 ^ Why Johnny Can’t Add , page 147 Sources [ edit ] Pace, Eric (June 11, 1992).

"Morris Kline, 84, Math Professor And Critic of Math Teaching, Dies" .

The New York Times .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Morris Kline .

A website having links to two of his books Why Johnny Can't Add?

and Why The Professor Can't Teach , a lecture titled Pea Soup, Tripe and Mathematics , and an obituary .

A wide-ranging 2016 interview: Morris Kline, a renowned mathematician, talks about concepts of mathematics, the new math, and God in a vintage interview .

[1] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Morris Kline" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Morris_Kline&oldid=1247253996 " Categories : 1908 births 1992 deaths 20th-century American mathematicians Jewish American military personnel Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences alumni Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences faculty American historians of mathematics Institute for Advanced Study visiting scholars 20th-century American historians Boys High School (Brooklyn) alumni Mathematicians from New York (state) 20th-century American Jews United States Army personnel of World War II Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2009 This page was last edited on 23 September 2024, at 14:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Morris Kline 16 languages Add topic

