Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Market economy 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Capitalism and Islam 2 languages العربية বাংলা Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Relationship between capitalism and Islam Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Islamic capitalism was active during the Islamic Golden Age and Arab Agricultural Revolution , where an early market economy and form of merchant capitalism took root between the 8th–12th centuries. A vigorous monetary economy was based on a widely-circulated currency (the dinar ) and the integration of monetary areas that were previously independent. Business techniques and forms of business organisation employed during this time included contracts , bills of exchange , long-distance international trade , forms of partnership ( mufawadha ) such as limited partnerships ( mudharaba ), and forms of credit , debt , profit , loss , capital ( al-mal ), capital accumulation ( nama al-mal ), [ 1 ] [ failed verification ] circulating capital , capital expenditure , revenue , cheques , promissory notes , [ 2 ] trusts (see Waqf ), savings accounts , transactional accounts , pawning , loaning , exchange rates , bankers , money changers , ledgers , deposits , assignments , the double-entry bookkeeping system , [ 3 ] and lawsuits .

[ 4 ] Organizational enterprises independent from the state also existed in the medieval Islamic world, while the agency institution was also introduced.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Many of these early capitalist concepts were adopted and further advanced in medieval Europe from the 13th century onwards.

[ 1 ] Some have argued that these economic activities laid the foundations for the development of modern capitalism.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Market economy [ edit ] See also: Islamic economics in the world A market economy was established in the Islamic world on the basis of an economic system resembling merchant capitalism .

Capital formation was promoted by labour in medieval Islamic society, and financial capital was developed by a considerable number of owners of monetary funds and precious metals .

Riba ( usury ) was prohibited by the Qur'an , but this did not hamper the development of capital in any way. The capitalists ( sahib al-mal ) were at the height of their power between the 9th–12th centuries, but their influence declined after the arrival of the ikta (landowners) and after production was monopolized by the state, both of which hampered the development of industrial capitalism in the Islamic world.

[ 9 ] Some state enterprises still had a capitalist mode of production , such as pearl diving in Iraq and the textile industry in Egypt.

[ 10 ] During the 11th–13th centuries, the " Karimis ", an early enterprise and business group controlled by entrepreneurs, came to dominate much of the Islamic world's economy.

[ 11 ] The group was controlled by about fifty Muslim merchants labelled as "Karimis" who were of Yemeni , Egyptian and sometimes Indian origins.

[ 12 ] Each Karimi merchant had considerable wealth, ranging from at least 100,000 dinars to as much as 10 million dinars. The group had considerable influence in most important eastern markets and sometimes [politics through its financing activities and through a variety of customers, including Emirs , Sultans , Viziers , foreign merchants, and common consumers. The Karimis dominated many of the trade routes across the Mediterranean Sea, Red Sea , and Indian Ocean, and as far as Francia in the north, China in the east, and sub-Saharan Africa in the south, where they obtained gold. Strategies employed by the Karimis include the use of agents, the financing of projects as a method of acquiring capital, and a banking institution for loans and deposits. Another important difference between the Karimis and other entrepreneurs before and during their time was that they were not tax collectors or landlords, but their capitalism was due entirely to trade and financial transactions.

[ 13 ] Though medieval Islamic economics appears to have somewhat resembled a form of capitalism, some Orientalists also believe that there exist a number of parallels between Islamic economics and communism , including the Islamic ideas of zakat and riba .

[ citation needed ] Others see Islamic economics as neither completely capitalistic nor completely socialistic , but rather a balance between the two, emphasizing both "individual economic freedom and the need to serve the common good." [ 14 ] Others point out that Islam has an inherently capitalist nature and argue this most through respect for private property as the foundation of capitalism in Islam, as well as the historical fact that the Muhammad was an entrepreneur, a merchant.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Islamic socialism Religious views on capitalism References [ edit ] ^ a b Jairus Banaji (2007), "Islam, the Mediterranean and the rise of capitalism", Historical Materialism 15 (1), pp. 47–74, Brill Publishers .

^ Robert Sabatino Lopez, Irving Woodworth Raymond, Olivia Remie Constable (2001), Medieval Trade in the Mediterranean World: Illustrative Documents , Columbia University Press , ISBN 0231123574 .

^ Subhi Y. Labib (1969), "Capitalism in Medieval Islam", The Journal of Economic History 29 (1), pp. 79–96 [92–3].

^ Ray Spier (2002), "The history of the peer-review process", Trends in Biotechnology 20 (8), p. 357-358 [357].

^ Said Amir Arjomand (1999), "The Law, Agency, and Policy in Medieval Islamic Society: Development of the Institutions of Learning from the Tenth to the Fifteenth Century", Comparative Studies in Society and History 41 , pp. 263–93.

Cambridge University Press .

^ Samir Amin (1978), "The Arab Nation: Some Conclusions and Problems", MERIP Reports 68 , pp. 3–14 [8, 13].

^ Heck, Gene W. (2006), Charlemagne, Muhammad, and the Arab roots of capitalism , Walter de Gruyter , ISBN 978-3110192292 ^ Nolan, Peter (2007), Capitalism and Freedom: The Contradictory Character of Globalisation , Anthem Press, p. 277, ISBN 978-1843312802 ^ Maya Shatzmiller, pp. 402–3.

^ Judith Tucker (1975), " Islam and Capitalism by Maxime Rodinson", MERIP Reports 34 , pp. 31–2 [31].

^ Subhi Y. Labib (1969), "Capitalism in Medieval Islam", The Journal of Economic History 29 (1), pp. 79–96 [81–2].

^ The Cambridge economic history of Europe , pp. 438–40.

Cambridge University Press , ISBN 0521087090 .

^ Subhi Y. Labib (1969), "Capitalism in Medieval Islam", The Journal of Economic History 29 (1), pp. 79–96 [81–4].

^ Shadi Hamid (August 2003), "An Islamic Alternative? Equality, Redistributive Justice, and the Welfare State in the Caliphate of Umar", Renaissance: Monthly Islamic Journal , 13 (8) (see online Archived 2011-08-25 at the Wayback Machine ) ^ "Is Islam a socialist religion?" .

Hürriyet Daily News . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

^ "ILN | Economic freedoms in Islamic countries – Admir Čavalić - ILN" .

islamandlibertynetwork.org . Archived from the original on 2020-06-26 . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

Further reading [ edit ] Peter Nolan (2009) Crossroads: The end of wild capitalism . Marshall Cavendish, ISBN 9780462099682 v t e Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Gardens Geometric pattern Literature Music Poetry Pottery Influences on Western art Economics History Agency Banking Capitalism Poverty Socialism Trust Usury Welfare History Timeline Historiography Early social change Early conquests Golden Age Contributions to Medieval Europe Reception in early modern Europe Law and politics Democracy consensus consultation Feminism Jurisprudence use of analogy decision-making schools Peace Quietism Secularism Early social change State Philosophy Early Contemporary Theology dialectic Ethics Logic Astrology Early sociology solidarity Medieval science Timeline Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy cosmology Geography and cartography Inventions Mathematics Medicine ophthalmology Physics Psychology Other fields Arab Agricultural Revolution Education Ijazah elementary school Sufi studies mysticism cosmology philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Capitalism_and_Islam&oldid=1306496209 " Categories : Islamic economics History of capitalism Capitalist systems Political economy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from February 2010 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 01:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Capitalism and Islam 2 languages Add topic

