Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Computing 2 Classical logic 3 Intuitionistic and constructive logic 4 Multi-valued logic 5 Algebraic semantics 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Truth value 33 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Ido Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Value indicating the relation of a proposition to truth "True and false" redirects here. For other uses, see True and false (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Truth value" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In logic and mathematics , a truth value , sometimes called a logical value , is a value indicating the relation of a proposition to truth , which in classical logic has only two possible values ( true or false ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Truth values are used in computing as well as various types of logic .

Computing [ edit ] See also: Implicit type conversion In some programming languages, any expression can be evaluated in a context that expects a Boolean data type . Typically (though this varies by programming language) expressions like the number zero , the empty string , empty lists, and null are treated as false, and strings with content (like "abc"), other numbers, and objects evaluate to true. Sometimes these classes of expressions are called falsy and truthy . For example, in Lisp , nil , the empty list, is treated as false, and all other values are treated as true. In C , the number 0 or 0.0 is false, and all other values are treated as true.

In JavaScript , the empty string ( "" ), null , undefined , NaN , +0, −0 and false [ 3 ] are sometimes called falsy (of which the complement is truthy ) to distinguish between strictly type-checked and coerced Booleans (see also: JavaScript syntax#Type conversion ).

[ 4 ] As opposed to Python, empty containers (Arrays, Maps, Sets) are considered truthy. Languages such as PHP also use this approach.

Classical logic [ edit ] ⊤ · ∧ · true conjunction ¬ ↕ ↕ ⊥ · ∨ · false disjunction Negation interchanges true with false and conjunction with disjunction.

In classical logic , with its intended semantics, the truth values are true (denoted by 1 or the verum ⊤), and untrue or false (denoted by 0 or the falsum ⊥); that is, classical logic is a two-valued logic . This set of two values is also called the Boolean domain . Corresponding semantics of logical connectives are truth functions , whose values are expressed in the form of truth tables .

Logical biconditional becomes the equality binary relation, and negation becomes a bijection which permutes true and false. Conjunction and disjunction are dual with respect to negation, which is expressed by De Morgan's laws : ¬( p ∧ q ) ⇔ ¬ p ∨ ¬ q ¬( p ∨ q ) ⇔ ¬ p ∧ ¬ q Propositional variables become variables in the Boolean domain. Assigning values for propositional variables is referred to as valuation .

Intuitionistic and constructive logic [ edit ] Main article: Constructivism (mathematics) Whereas in classical logic truth values form a Boolean algebra , in intuitionistic logic , and more generally, constructive mathematics , the truth values form a Heyting algebra . Such truth values may express various aspects of validity, including locality, temporality, or computational content.

For example, one may use the open sets of a topological space as intuitionistic truth values, in which case the truth value of a formula expresses where the formula holds, not whether it holds.

In realizability truth values are sets of programs, which can be understood as computational evidence of validity of a formula. For example, the truth value of the statement "for every number there is a prime larger than it" is the set of all programs that take as input a number n {\displaystyle n} , and output a prime larger than n {\displaystyle n} .

In category theory , truth values appear as the elements of the subobject classifier . In particular, in a topos every formula of higher-order logic may be assigned a truth value in the subobject classifier.

Even though a Heyting algebra may have many elements, this should not be understood as there being truth values that are neither true nor false, because intuitionistic logic proves ¬ ¬ ( p ≠ ≠ ⊤ ⊤ ∧ ∧ p ≠ ≠ ⊥ ⊥ ) {\displaystyle \neg (p\neq \top \land p\neq \bot )} ("it is not the case that p {\displaystyle p} is neither true nor false").

[ 5 ] In intuitionistic type theory , the Curry-Howard correspondence exhibits an equivalence of propositions and types, according to which validity is equivalent to inhabitation of a type.

For other notions of intuitionistic truth values, see the Brouwer–Heyting–Kolmogorov interpretation and Intuitionistic logic § Semantics .

Multi-valued logic [ edit ] Multi-valued logics (such as fuzzy logic and relevance logic ) allow for more than two truth values, possibly containing some internal structure. For example, on the unit interval [0,1] such structure is a total order ; this may be expressed as the existence of various degrees of truth .

Algebraic semantics [ edit ] Main article: Algebraic logic Not all logical systems are truth-valuational in the sense that logical connectives may be interpreted as truth functions. For example, intuitionistic logic lacks a complete set of truth values because its semantics, the Brouwer–Heyting–Kolmogorov interpretation , is specified in terms of provability conditions, and not directly in terms of the necessary truth of formulae.

But even non-truth-valuational logics can associate values with logical formulae, as is done in algebraic semantics . The algebraic semantics of intuitionistic logic is given in terms of Heyting algebras , compared to Boolean algebra semantics of classical propositional calculus.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Psychology portal Bayesian probability Circular reasoning Degree of truth False dilemma History of logic § Algebraic period Paradox Semantic theory of truth Slingshot argument Supervaluationism Truth-value semantics Verisimilitude References [ edit ] ^ Shramko, Yaroslav; Wansing, Heinrich.

"Truth Values" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ "Truth value" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . n.d.

^ "ECMAScript Language Specification" (PDF) . p. 43. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-04-12 . Retrieved 2011-03-12 .

^ "The Elements of JavaScript Style" . Douglas Crockford.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2011 . Retrieved 5 March 2011 .

^ Proof that intuitionistic logic has no third truth value, Glivenko 1928 External links [ edit ] Shramko, Yaroslav; Wansing, Heinrich.

"Truth Values" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal v t e ‌ Logical truth ⊤ Functional: Truth value Truth function ⊨ Tautology Formal: Theory Formal proof Theorem Negation ⊥ False Contradiction Inconsistency NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐5z9s6
Cached time: 20250812020055
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.351 seconds
Real time usage: 0.491 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1531/1000000
Revision size: 8895/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 91581/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2077/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37646/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.209/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6405967/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  361.708      1 -total
 30.04%  108.644      5 Template:Navbox
 26.42%   95.579      1 Template:Reflist
 26.11%   94.435      1 Template:Mathematical_logic
 20.58%   74.431      2 Template:Cite_SEP
 20.03%   72.439      2 Template:Cite_encyclopaedia
 14.27%   51.609      1 Template:Short_description
 13.34%   48.247      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 12.27%   44.389      1 Template:Ambox
  8.59%   31.060      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:161711:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020055 and revision id 1298494144. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Truth_value&oldid=1298494144 " Categories : Concepts in logic Propositions Logical truth Concepts in epistemology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2012 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 21:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Truth value 33 languages Add topic

