Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work Toggle Life and work subsection 1.1 Family 2 Publications 3 References Toggle the table of contents John B. Peddle Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American mechanical engineer John Bailey Peddle Self Portrait, 1909 Born February 27, 1868 Terre Haute, Indiana Died April 6, 1933 Terre Haute, Indiana Nationality American Education Rose Rose Polytechnic Institute Occupation(s) Engineer, professor, author Employer Rose Rose Polytechnic Institute Known for Construction of Graphical Charts , 1910 John Bailey Peddle (Terre Haute, Indiana, February 27, 1868 – idem, April 6, 1933) was an American mechanical engineer, Professor of Machine Design at the Rose Polytechnic Institute and author, [ 1 ] known for his seminal work Construction of Graphical Charts , 1910.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Life and work [ edit ] Peddle was the son of Charles R. and Mary Elizabeth Ball Peddle.

[ 1 ] He graduated at the Rose Rose Polytechnic Institute in 1888, and after six years in business joint the faculty in 1894 as instructor in machine design. From 1897 until 1933 he was Professor of Machine Design back at the Rose Polytechnic Institute.

[ 5 ] In 1910 Peddle published the Construction of Graphical Charts, which was the first book in the English language treating of the art of graphical representation.

[ 6 ] The work was written from a mathematical point of view, [ 7 ] and required some engineering training. In 1914 Willard C. Brinton published a similar work for the general audience with no mathematics, called Graphic Methods for Presenting Facts.

[ 6 ] Peddle has been member of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers , [ 8 ] and the Indiana Academy of Science .

[ 9 ] Peddle was also an amateur photographer, who published some of his work and articles in The Photographic times magazine including a self-portrait.

[ 10 ] Family [ edit ] Peddle's younger sister was the sculptor Caroline Peddle Ball (1869–1938).

[ 11 ] Peddle married Alice O Peddle, and they had 2 children: Juliet Peddle (1899–1979), an modernist architect, and one other child.

Publications [ edit ] The construction of graphical charts, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1910.

Article's, a selection "Alinement Diagram in the Graphical Solution of Equations," By John B Peddle, 1905.

"The construction of graphical charts," in: American Machinist, May 30, 1908.

"Color Photography," in: Proceedings of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers.

1915.

"Carl Leo Mees," in: Science.

September 2, 1932. Vol 76, Issue 1966. pp. 206–207 References [ edit ] ^ a b Indiana Authors and Their Books, 1917–1966, 1974. p. 474 ^ Karsten, Karl G.

, Charts and graphs: An introduction to graphic methods in the control and analysis of statistics.

Prentice-Hall, Incorporated, 1923.

^ Funkhouser, H. Gray . "Historical development of the graphical representation of statistical data." Osiris 3 (1937): 269–404.

^ FitzPatrick, Paul J. "The Development of Graphic Presentation of Statistical Data in the United States." International Social Science Review 37.4 (1962): 203.

^ Harriet McNeal Caplow, Joyce Lakey Shanks, Edward K. Spann.

Juliet Peddle of Terre Haute: The Architect, the Historian, ...

1989.

^ a b William Crosby Marshall , Graphical methods for schools, colleges, statisticians, engineers and executives.

New York, McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc. 1921. p. V ^ Beniger, James R.

, and Dorothy L. Robyn. "Quantitative graphics in statistics: A brief history." The American Statistician 32.1 (1978): 1–11.

^ Journal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.

1910. p. 1420.

^ Proceedings of the Indiana Academy of Science, 1911. p. 28. In the May 1911 meeting he presented an Illustrated lecture, "The  Autochrome  Process  in  Color  Photography." ^ The Photographic times , v.39, no.7 (1907); v.41, no.2 (1909) ^ Caroline Peddle Ball Collection; Dates: 1887–1998 Archived January 12, 2021, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved December 2, 2021.

v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_B._Peddle&oldid=1291496368 " Categories : American mechanical engineers Rose–Hulman Institute of Technology alumni Rose–Hulman Institute of Technology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2022 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 16:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John B. Peddle Add languages Add topic

