Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Birth of the Navy SSG 1.2 Deployments, covert actions and current history 2 Command structure Toggle Command structure subsection 2.1 SEALs Teams in the Special Services Group (SSGN) 3 Selection process and training Toggle Selection process and training subsection 3.1 Qualification and military physicals 3.2 Selection and training 4 Notable members 5 Influence on foreign units 6 Appearance and equipment Toggle Appearance and equipment subsection 6.1 Weaponry 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Special Service Group (Navy) 1 language 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Special operations force of the Pakistan Navy This article is about the Pakistan Navy 's special forces. For the Pakistan Army , see Special Service Group . For other uses, see special service (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Pakistan Marines .

Special Service Group (Navy) The Special Warfare Badge of Pakistan Navy Active Since 1966 ; 59 years ago ( 1966 ) Country Pakistan Allegiance Pakistan Armed Forces Branch Pakistan Navy Type SOF Role Spec ops Part of COMCOAST Garrison/HQ PNS Iqbal PNS Nathiagali Nickname(s) SSGN Motto(s) Let it not be said that we did not prove equal to the task.

Engagements See list Indo-Pakistani wars and conflicts Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 Bangladesh Liberation War Operation Barisal Operation Jackpot Munity of PNS Magro in Toulon in 1971 Siachen conflict Conflict in Arab world Pakistan Military Command–Saudi Arabia War in Afghanistan Soviet war in Afghanistan Bosnian War UN Protection Force–Pakistan Forces Sri Lankan Civil War Military assistance to Sri Lanka War on Terror War in Afghanistan (2001–present) War in North-West Pakistan Operation Black Thunderstorm Operation Rah-e-Nijat Operation Umeed-e-Nuh Operation Mehran Operation Zarb-e-Azb Mutiny on the PNS Zulfiquar Balochistan insurgency Website SSG(N) Commanders Current commander Rear Admiral Faisal Amin Military unit The Pakistan Navy Special Service Group ( reporting name: Navy SSG or simply Pakistan Navy SEALs , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] ) is the special operations force tasked with the conducting the small-unit based military operations in all environmental formats of the sea, air, and land by adopting to the tactics of the unconventional warfare .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The command and control of the Special Service Group (Navy) falls under the responsibility of the Naval Strategic Forces Command and its personnel are sometimes directly recruited into ISI 's Covert Action Division (CAD) upon their retirements from their military service.

[ 4 ] There is no official report on the actual strength or their military missions since their operational works are subjected to the secrecy by the federal government of Pakistan ; knowledge of their works and tactics known in public through the only authorized media works and nonfiction works by the navy veteran.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Birth of the Navy SSG [ edit ] Main article: United States-Pakistan military relations After the second war with India in 1965, the Pakistan Navy recognized the need for establishing the armed forces diving unit to conduct the covert reconnaissance of landing beaches and coastal defenses from the attacks by the approaching enemy.

[ 6 ] Despite its vision and efforts, the Navy had little experience in combat diving and had little educational understanding about the nature of the seaborne special operations.

: contents [ 7 ] In 1966, Vice-Admiral S. M. Ahsan took personal initiatives establishing the special operations force within the Navy by organizing the underwater demolition teams (UDTs) tasked with gathering intelligence while operating the midget submarines .

[ 8 ] The establishment of the Special Service Group (Navy) lies from the contribution by the Pakistan Army's Special Service Group whose frogmen team— the Musa Company — first initially trained the Navy personnel on the military combat diving in 1966.

: contents [ 7 ] Initially training of the personnel volunteered for the Special Service Group (Navy) took place in Cherat in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa , first initially getting trained for the coastal defenses .

: contents [ 9 ] Crucial training on getting trained on the sea, air, and land environmental formats came from the United States Navy when the first unit of the U.S. Navy SEALs was detached to the Pakistan Navy in Karachi, also in 1966.

: 71 The teams in the Navy Special Service Group were given training on the armed forces diving , high-altitude parachuting , demolitions , foreign languages, and the intelligence management for the intelligence services.

[ 10 ] In 1970, the joint training of the Navy SSG and the U.S. Navy SEALs took place in Naval Base Iqbal in Karachi coast, receiving training and getting the expertise in the sea, air, and land environmental formats.

: 71 Since the 1970s, the Navy SSG teams are occasionally sent to the United States for specialized courses and training conducted with the United States Navy SEALs.

[ 11 ] Deployments, covert actions and current history [ edit ] Main articles: Operation Barisal , Bangladesh Liberation War , Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 , and War in Afghanistan (2001–2021) Further information: War in North-West Pakistan and Insurgency in Balochistan The Navy SSG and the U.S. Navy SEALs conducting the force-protection and under-water special forces training in 2011.

In March 1971, the Navy SSG were deployed in the East-Pakistan to support the Army Special Service Group (SSG) instead of the Army's frogmen team— the Musa Company that remained in Pakistan to conduct the inland waterways operations.

: contents [ 9 ] Their first direct action based military mission took place in a counterinsurgency operation in Barisal in East-Pakistan , which turned out be a successful in maintaining the control of the city.

[ 12 ] In April 1971, the Navy SSG teams were involved in taking another direct actions in Toulon in France when the thirteen East-Pakistani enlists decided to takeover the submarine to try defecting to India but their plans were foiled due to advance knowledge that the Naval Intelligence had gathered on their plans.

: 43–44 [ 13 ] The Navy SSG teams engagement with the Bengali insurgents , taking military counter actions at the ports of Chittagong and the Cox's Bazar .

[ 14 ] The Navy SSG teams operated from Dacca under the command of the Captain Ahmad Zamir but the teams returned to Pakistan in September 1971 to be trained in operating the X-Craft midget submarines.

: 108 [ 15 ] After the third war with India in 1971, the Army–Navy interaction continues with the Navy's taking forefront responsibility of setting the important role in the overall architecture of the special operations forces.

: 100 [ 1 ] In the 1980s, the Navy Special Service Group was deployed in providing military assistance to Sri Lankan military during the civil war in Sri Lanka , playing crucial role to curb the insurgency in the country.

: 70–73 [ 16 ] Pakistan Navy Special Forces (SSG-N) operatives The Navy SSG's focused moves towards the special military operations to combating terrorism from the seaborne platform after the terrorist attacks in the United States in 2011.

[ 6 ] The Navy Special Service Group became involved in the Afghan war and the extended military operations in Western Pakistan in a joint coordination with the Army Special Service Group in a conflict with the foreign fighters , Talibans , and the al-Qaeda .

: 76 [ 17 ] The Navy SSG's SEAL Team was involved in taking a crucial direct action against Taliban fighters in dislodging their attack on the Mehran Naval Air Station in May 2011.

: 76 [ 17 ] In 2014, the Navy SEAL Teams successfully engaged the al-Qaeda fighters after they attempted to maneuver the guided missile frigate , the PNS Zulfiquar (251) , and successfully neutralize the attack without the damage done to the guided missile frigate as well as apprehending the attackers alive.

[ 18 ] Command structure [ edit ] Main articles: List of military special forces units and PNS Iqbal The Navy SSG SEAL Team working towards the underwater demolition charges with the US Navy SEALs during the military exercise in Alexandria in Egypt in 2009.

Due to their selective competitiveness, the demanding military physicals , and the commitment required by the Navy's special operations, the Navy Special Service Group is much more tighter contingent compared to the Army Special Service Group , though the selection for the Navy's Special Service Group is open to all naval personnel serving in the different combat branches of the Navy.

[ 4 ] The Navy SSG is much more discreet than the Army SSG since their operations and works are subjected to the secrecy marked by the Navy though it is known that it is an all-male special operation force.

[ 4 ] The control and command structure of the Navy Special Service Group is based in the PNS Iqbal — the naval base in Karachi , Sindh in Pakistan — and their operations are controlled through the Naval Special Operations Training Center (NSOTC).

[ 19 ] Their armed forces diving training establishment and structure was initially based in the PNS Himalaya but later consolidated their entire structure with the commissioning of the Iqbal Naval Base on 19 March 1967.

[ 20 ] The organizational structure of the Navy Special Service Group follows their Army Special Service Group counterparts, and its organizational structure is based on the command formation reporting directly the Commander of the Coastal Areas (COMCOAST).

[ 20 ] The Navy Special Service Group has three sub command formations that specialized in their own set of war course of actions–each command is specialized in their criterion of war and are considered specialists in their fields.

[ 20 ] The Navy Special Service Group's operational responsibility of conducing the special operations, nonetheless, falls under the command of the Naval Strategic Forces Command (ASFC) operating from the Navy NHQ in Islamabad.

: 44 [ 21 ] According to the Navy's official website, the Navy Special Service Group is organized with the Iqbal Naval Base that is having responsible to control the each command.

[ 20 ] Navy SSG Command and Control Headquarters Commanding Officer PNS Iqbal (CO PNS Iqbal) Underwater Demolition / SEAL Group Logistics VBSS Group Logistics (Source: Sub-command PNS Iqbal) Commanding Officer SEAL Group (CO SEAL) CO SEAL Team (SEAL) CO Airborne Team (ABT) CO Anti-Terrorist Team (ATT) CO Underwater Demolition Team (UDT) (Source: Sub-command SEAL Group) Commanding Officer VBSS Group (CO VBSS) CO Close Quarters Battle Team (CQB Team) CO VBSS Team (VBSS Team) CO Naval Interdiction Operation Team (NIO Team) (Source: Sub-command VBSS Group) (Source: official website) Source: PNS Iqbal and Navy Special Service Group organizational structure In 1968, the Navy Special Service Group was operating at least six Italian-built SX-404 class midget submarine to function as a SEAL delivery vehicle and had priority over the Hangor program at some time in 1970.

: 154–155 [ 22 ] As of 2019 [update] , the Navy Special Service Group currently operates at least three Cosmos -class midget submarines that are designed to be inducted for the SEAL Group, and locally known as the " X-Craft ." : 73 [ 23 ] The Cosmos -class are currently known to be stationed in PNS Iqbal with the SX-404 class .

: 154–155 [ 22 ] The military administration at the PNS Iqbal also facilitates the advance training of the selected personnel of the Navy special Service Group to be trained with the U.S. Navy SEALs in California and Virginia .

[ 11 ] SEALs Teams in the Special Services Group (SSGN) [ edit ] The Navy Special Service Group is composed of the three sub-commands: CO PNS Iqbal, CO SEAL Group, and CO VBSS Group— all are trained in their specialized tasks and considered specialists in the specific type of war operations.

[ 11 ] The maritime authors and historians of the Pakistan Navy have provided the rough and the guessed estimation of personnel which was neared around 1,000 SSGN operatives but the department of navy has never issued an actual strength number of its personnel serving in the Navy Special Service Group.

: 73 [ 17 ] [ 4 ] The official strength and the identities of its personnel serving in each sub-commands are subjected to the secrecy by the department of navy and the Defense ministry has never commented or the Navy itself has never issued the official number of strength of its personnel, including the officers commanding, citing security.

[ 4 ] In the Navy, the commands of the teams varies by the officer ranking from OF-2 rank ( lieutenant ) to OF-5 rank ( commander ), depending on the availability and the difficulty posed by the missions.

[ 4 ] Groups Of  Pak Navy Special Services Group (SSGN) PNS Iqbal Group Call Name Details PNS Iqbal Group CO PNS Iqbal The Logistical HQ of the Navy SSG.

CO Iqbal oversees training, logistics, and support measures for SEAL and VBBS Group.

Navy SEAL Group Call Name ' Details SEAL Team SEAL Oriented towards the Four-dimensionalism —conducts clandestine operations behind the lines without detection on all sea, air, and land formats.

[ 24 ] Airborne Team ABT Oriented towards HAHO/HALO methods in oceans.

[ 6 ] [ 24 ] Navy Anti-Terrorist Team NATT Team Acted as the quick response team to the seaborne-based terrorist attacks .

[ 20 ] Underwater Demolition Team UDT Team Acted as the specialists on the methods of underwater demolition behind enemy lines.

[ 20 ] Navy VBSS Group Call name Details Visit Board Search Seizure Team VBSS Oriented towards the enemy VBSS methods.

[ 20 ] Close Quarters Battle Team CQB Team Oriented towards the hand-to-hand and close-fire range conflict.

[ 20 ] Naval Interdiction Operation Team NIO Team Oriented the interdiction and the maritime security operations .

[ 20 ] Sources: Pakistan Navy official website and GlobalSecurity.org by John Pike.

[ 24 ] Selection process and training [ edit ] Qualification and military physicals [ edit ] Main articles: Qualifications and physicals for the Special Forces of Pakistan and For examples and information for Navy SEALs criteria for selection and training, see United States Navy SEAL selection and training The Navy Special Service Group's VBSS Team boarded on the CRRC boat under the command of Lt.

Uzair Khalid preparing to board on the rigid-hulled boat during the drill took place in Sea of Oman in 2005.

According to the Pakistan Navy's Medical Corps reports and the media documentaries, the selection is extremely competitive and demands the strong physical conditioning from their prospective candidates prior admitting into the Navy Special Service Group.

[ 5 ] The Navy Special Service Group's qualification and military physical standards are akin and reflects the selection criteria of the United States Navy SEALs selection and training , according to Commander Kashif—the senior trainer in the Navy SEAL Team's interview given to Takrar (lit. Confrontation) host Imran R. Khan.

[ 25 ] Those prospective candidates who have very high regards of their self respect and their selfless commitment to serve the country only, anytime their services are needed by the Navy for the area deployment, are the only intakes in the Navy Special Service Group, commented by V-Adm.

(retd.) S. Tauquir Naqvi —the retired SEAL Team member and the former commander of the Navy SSG.

[ 6 ] Drop out attrition rates from the physical standards of the Navy is average between the 80-to-90%, matching the Army Special Service Group 's drop rate in Cherat [ 5 ] Those who have failed the mental and physical requirements are then sent to their regular jobs in the Navy.

[ 5 ] The military physical standards, examinations, and criteria are same for the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines' special forces selections and training, often training in close coordination.

[ 26 ] There are three special operations schools in the Pakistan, the Navy's sniper and frogmen school criteria follows the military physical requirement: Naval Special Operations Training Center (Naval SOTC) Must meet army qualifications with swimming standards .

[ 27 ] Sniper School Must have 20/20 or corrected to 20/20 in both near and distant vision in both eyes.

[ 28 ] Medical Category "A".

[ 26 ] Frogman School Medical Category "A".

[ 26 ] Must have qualification in Chamber test up to 180 feet sea water .

[ 26 ] Swimming Standards Should be able to swim 200 meters in 7 minutes (breast stroke).

[ 26 ] Should be able to swim 25 meters Underwater.

[ 26 ] Selection and training [ edit ] Pakistan Navy SEAL Team members receiving instructions on the compression diving from the US Navy SEALs in 2011.

The military physicals for the getting accepted in the Navy is maintained to be very high standard and requires the prospective individual has to spend nearly five years in the Navy that validates their commitment to their profession and the Navy— this is the same requirement for the Army Special Service Group .

[ 26 ] Training for the Navy Special Service Group is extremely rigorous that included being able to earn the swimming badge after completing the 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) in 10 hours in an open sea, [ 25 ] the HALO/HAHO airborne qualification badge, [ 25 ] and special weapons qualification badge.

[ 25 ] The Navy Special Service Group's training courses : 18-week Clearance Diving Course.

[ 20 ] 10-week Advance Frogman Course .

[ 20 ] 4-week Re-Compression Chamber Course.

[ 20 ] Training of the Navy Special Service Group also included the training on the Judo / Karateka , Frogman maneuver , and the drownproofing (ability to stay afloat while tide up in the water).

[ 5 ] The Navy maintains its own Parachute Training School in Oramar based on the Army's Parachute Training School in Cherat, where the prospective individual excelled on its HALO/HAHO and static line skills after performing the combat jump from 15,000 feet (4,600 m)– this course usually held for 4-weeks.

[ 25 ] The training courses on the Navy Special Service Group emphasis on the strong mental and physical conditioning that includes the 36-36 miles (58 km) march, a requirement that was first institutionalized by the Army Special Service Group in 1956.

[ 25 ] Once the 8-month course is complete, the navy sailors who are volunteering to join the SSGN are then given specialized training in maritime and amphibious warfare at the specialized training school located in Karachi .

[ 25 ] The Combat Diver badge is awarded for the course held by the Navy Special Service Group— there are three classes of combat swimmers are recognized: 1st class to complete an 18-mile or more swim in the designated time period; 2nd class to those finishing a 12-mile swim; and 3rd class for a 6-mile swim.

[ 25 ] Navy's sniper training and air assault courses are held at the Naval Special Operations Training Center (Naval SOTC) in Nathiagali in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa .

[ 27 ] The Navy has its own airborne school in Oramara, frogmen school in Karachi, and the special operations school in Nathiagali.

[ 27 ] [ 29 ] The advance training on the special warfare environments jointly takes place with the Army Special Service Group where the SEAL Teams are trained in long distance marksmanship sniper warfare at the Army Sniper School, arctic warfare at the Army School of High Altitude, mountain warfare at the Army School of Mountain Warfare in Cherat , desert warfare in Chor , and often popular in the country for taking participation with the army's snipers in various competition.

[ 30 ] Notable members [ edit ] Name and Members Portrait Notes Rank Notes on Credentials Fasih Bokhari — Admiral The Chairman of NAB (2011–13), and the Chief of NavalStaff (1997–1999).

Abdul Aziz Mirza — Admiral The Chief of Naval Staff (1999–02).

S.T.H Naqvi Vice-Admiral Commander of Navy Special Service Group, and former Chair of the National Shipping Corporation (2002–05) Javed Iqbal — Vice-Admiral Diplomat, analyst, and the naval intelligence officer Shamoon Allam — Vice-Admiral Diplomat Maqsood Ahmed Lieutenant The retired Navy SEAL, and currently heading the taskforce — Special Security Unit in Karachi Influence on foreign units [ edit ] Since its establishment in 1966, the Navy Special Service Group provided military training to the Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Qatar, Iran and Sri Lanka, also conducts training exercise with Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Bahrain.

[ 20 ] Appearance and equipment [ edit ] Main article: U.S. Woodland The U.S. M81 is the standard uniform for the Navy Special Service Group's Battle Dress Uniform as seen wore by the VBSS Team operating in the Indian Ocean The Special Forces in Pakistani military adopted their Battle Dress Uniform in favor of the U.S. woodland (or M81) with a maroon berets in 1990.

: 100 [ 1 ] The Special Forces in Pakistan follows the combat gear of the Pakistan Army as the Army Special Service Group authorized the U.S. woodland (M81) as their battle dress uniform with a maroon berets , a common color for the airborne forces, with a silver metal tab on a light blue felt square with a dagger and lightning bolts , and a wing on the right side of the chest.

: 100 [ 1 ] The Navy Special Service Group closely follows the Army Special Service Group , adopting to wear the U.S. woodland (or M81) with a maroon berets , a common color for the airborne forces.

: 71 [ 16 ] The Navy Special Service Group is only distinguished by their officially issued berets— a dark blue beret with three versions of the "fouled anchor " badge for all of its personnel.

: 71 [ 16 ] A metal SSGN qualification badge featuring a vertical dagger superimposed over a midget submarine is worn over the left pocket on dress uniforms. Parachute wings are worn over the right pocket.

: 71 [ 16 ] Weaponry [ edit ] The U.S.

-made M4 carbine rifle: This is the standard issue for the Navy Special Service Group.

The Austrian -designed Steyr AUG : This is the standard assault rifle for the VBSS Teams only.

The standard issue for the Navy SSG snipers is the POF PSR-90M as seen in the photage.

Pistols Austria Glock pistol Italy Beretta 92FS Sub-machine guns Germany Heckler & Koch MP5 Belgium FN P90 Assault rifles USA M4A1 Carbine Austria Steyr AUG Switzerland SIG SG 550 Sniper rifles Pakistan POF PSR-90M USA Barrett M82 UK Accuracy International AW UK SC-76/86 Thunderbolt South Africa Truvelo CMS .308/.338 Light Machine guns Belgium FN Minimi USA M249 Air Defence & Rocket Launchers Soviet Union RPG7 USA SMAW Pakistan Anza MANPADS Helmets Pakistan POF Standard Helmet USA Light Weight Helmet Bullet Proof Jacket/Armor Pakistan POF Standard Body Armor See also [ edit ] 1st Marines Battalion (Pakistan) Special Service Group (Pakistan Army) Special Service Wing (Pakistan Air Force) List of military special forces units References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Oberoi, Vijay (2006).

Special Forces: Doctrine, Structures, and Employment Across Spectrum of Conflict in the Indian Context . Knowledge World. p. 458.

ISBN 9788187966395 . Retrieved 11 February 2019 .

^ The Special Services Group Navy was established by the United States Navy SEALs in 1966. The SSG(N) or SSG-N is known by other names. There are also known as "Pakistan Naval SEALs", "Naval Special Services Group", "Naval Commandos (Pakistan Navy)" ^ Baloch, Qaim Ali.

"Commandos from Beyond the Silence of the Sea" (.watch) .

www.youtube.com . Retrieved 10 February 2019 .

[ dead YouTube link ] ^ a b c d e f g Khan, Wajahat Saeed (12 April 2011).

"Special Service Group (Navy) - Pakistan - Documentary" (.watch) .

www.youtube.com . Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan: Navy ISPR . Retrieved 10 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e Khan, Wajahat Saeed.

"Mahaaz with Wajahat Saeed Khan - Pak Navy Ka Mahaaz - 29 October 2017 - Dunya News" . Dunya News.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved 10 February 2019 .

^ a b c d Naqvi, PN, V-Adm. Syed Tauqeer Hussain (7 January 2017).

"Pakistan Navy Seals" (.watch) .

www.youtube.com . Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan: ISPR Navy.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved 10 February 2019 .

^ a b Ryan, Mike; Mann, Chris; Stilwell, Alexander (2014). " (§Special Forces: Pakistan) ".

The Encyclopedia of the World's Special Forces: Tactics, History, Strategy, Weapons (google books) . Amber Books Ltd.

ISBN 9781907446894 . Retrieved 30 January 2019 .

^ Goldrick, James (1997).

No Easy Answers . New Delhi: Lancer's Publications and Distributors.

ISBN 1-897829-02-7 .

^ a b Conboy, Kenneth (2012). " (§Naval Special Forces) ". In Hannon, Paul (ed.).

Elite forces of India and Pakistan (google books) (1st ed.). Indiana, U.S.: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 64.

ISBN 9781780967677 . Retrieved 10 February 2019 .

^ Government of Pakistan, Navy Press Release.

"Special Service Group (Navy)" .

The Directorate-General for the Naval Inter-Services Public Relations (Navy ISPR) . Naval Inter-Services Public Relations (Navy ISPR). Archived from the original on 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 19 April 2012 .

^ a b c Pakistan Navy Special Forces Archived 2011-06-29 at the Wayback Machine Global Special Forces ^ Usman, Shabbir (1 June 2003).

"Riverine Operations of PN Gunboats in East Pakistan « PakDef Military Consortium" .

www.pakdef.org . Karachi. Pakistan: PakDef Military Consortium . Retrieved 11 February 2019 .

^ Jacob, Lt. Gen. J. F. R., Surrender at Dacca, Birth of A Nation, pp. 43-44 ^ Surrender at Dacca: Birth of A Nation, Jacob, Lt. Gen. J. F. R., p. 90 ^ Hiranandani, G. M. (2000). " (§Pakistan Navy's Underwater Forces Program) ".

Transition to Triumph: History of the Indian Navy, 1965-1975 (google books) . New Delhi, India: Lancer Publishers. p. 400.

ISBN 9781897829721 . Retrieved 11 February 2019 .

^ a b c d USA, IBP (2009).

Pakistan Intelligence, Security Activities and Operations Handbook . Lulu.com.

ISBN 9781438737218 .

^ a b c Waters, Conrad (2011).

Seaforth World Naval Review 2012 . New York, U.S.: Seaforth Publishing. p. 200.

ISBN 9781783466320 . Retrieved 11 February 2019 .

^ Zaman, Fahim; Ali, Naziha Syed (13 September 2014).

"Dockyard attackers planned to hijack Navy frigate" .

DAWN.COM . Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan: Dawn Newspaper. Dawn Newspaper . Retrieved 20 December 2018 .

^ "50 glorious years of Pakistan Navy's SSG" .

News International . 29 March 2017 . Retrieved 12 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "PNS Iqbal" .

www.paknavy.gov.pk . Retrieved 12 February 2019 .

^ Mukherjee, Anit; Mohan, C. Raja (2015).

India's Naval Strategy and Asian Security . Routledge. p. 260.

ISBN 9781317361343 . Retrieved 12 February 2019 .

^ a b Singh, Kunwar Rajendra; Analyses, Institute for Defence Studies and (2002).

Navies of South Asia . Rupa & Co. published under the auspices of Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses. p. 459.

ISBN 9788129100498 . Retrieved 12 February 2019 .

^ Waters, Conrad (2011).

Seaforth World Naval Review 2012 . USA: Seaforth Publishing. p. 191.

ISBN 9781783466320 . Retrieved 12 February 2019 .

^ a b c Pike, John.

"Special Service Group (Navy) SSG(N)" .

www.globalsecurity.org . Global Security . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g h Khan, Imran R. (6 September 2016).

"Express News: Defense Day Special: The Pakistan SSG Navy" (.watch/tv) .

www.youtube.com (in Urdu). Karach/Gwadar coast: Express News . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g "Special Operations School: Selection Criteria" .

www.pakistanarmy.gov.pk . Retrieved 26 January 2019 .

^ a b c "Counterterrorism training provided by the Pakistan Navy to be an Asset to effectively challenge the terrorists" . Press readers. 26 August 2017 . Retrieved 17 February 2019 – via PressReader.

^ Khiyal, Cdr. Roshan (21 February 2011).

"History of the Special Service Group (SSG) - Pakistan Army - Part 1" (.watch) .

/www.youtube.com (in Urdu). Islamabad: ISPR YouTube.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved 26 January 2019 .

^ "Special Service Group (Pakistan Navy)" .

www.facebook.com . Retrieved 17 February 2019 .

^ Newspaper, the (3 November 2015).

"Raheel praises army shooters' marksmanship" .

DAWN.COM . Retrieved 17 February 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ryan, Mike; Mann, Chris; Stilwell, Alexander (2014).

The Encyclopedia of the World's Special Forces: Tactics, History, Strategy, Weapons . Amber Books Ltd.

ISBN 9781907446894 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 .

Shah, Rear-Admiral Mian Zahir (2001).

Bubbles of water, or, Anecdotes of the Pakistan Navy (1st ed.). Karachi: PN Book Club Publication. p. 487.

ISBN 9698318038 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Khan, Wajahat Saeed (12 April 2011).

"VBSS Team Training by W.S. Khan— Dawn News Documentary" (watch.tv) .

www.youtube.com . Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan: Navy ISPR . Retrieved 10 February 2019 .

Khan, Imran R. (6 September 2016).

"Navy SEAL Team training by I.R. Khan— Express News Documentary" (.watch.tv) .

www.youtube.com (in Urdu). Karach/Gwadar coast: Express News . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

v t e Pakistan Navy Leadership Commander-in-Chief President of Pakistan Chief Executive Prime Minister of Pakistan Parliament Senate Committee on Defence National Assembly Committee on Defence Cabinet Committee on National Security Ministries Defence Secretary Defence Production Naval Headquarters Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee Chief of Naval Staff Vice Chief of the Naval Staff Commander of Fleet Commander Central Punjab Flag Officer Sea Training Assistant Chiefs of the Naval Staff Serving Admirals Commands Coastal Command Northern Command Western Command Navy Strategic Forces Surface Fleet Submarine Force Logistics Command Navy Special Service Group Marines Administrative arms Bases Karachi Jinnah Kalmat Zafar Ahsan Akram Hameed Iqbal Mehran Marines Manora Qasim Sir Creek Branches Air Arm Band Hydrography Judge Advocate General Naval Intelligence Naval Police Maritime Security Agency Nursing Service Ordnance Medical Darmaan Jah Rahat Shifa Hafeez Affiliated organisations Bahria Foundation Bahria Maritime Works Organization Bahria Schools and Colleges Defence Industry Martime Technologies Complex Karachi Shipyard & Engineering Works Sports Navy Cricket Navy F.C.

Ports Port Qasim Karachi Port Trust Gwadar Port Education and Training Service training Pakistan Naval Academy Bootcamp Himalaya Pakistan Marine Academy Bahria University Bahria College Islamabad National Defence University Naval War College National University of Sciences and Technology College of Electrical & Mechanical Engineering Military College of Engineering Military College of Signals Pakistan Navy Engineering College College of Aeronautical Engineering Training formations School of Infantry and Tactics School of Logistics and Management Naval Warfare School Technical School Preparatory colleges Cadet College Ormara Cadet College Petaro Literature and culture Books Military Inc.

A Case of Exploding Mangoes Crossed Swords In the Line of Fire Films Ghazi Shaheed Hangor S-131 Related Equipment Warships Aircraft Maritime Museum Awards and decorations Women in the Pakistan Armed Forces Criticism of the Pakistan Armed Forces The Establishment (Pakistan) Category:Pakistan Navy v t e Special Operation Forces of Pakistan Military Army Army Special Service Group (Army SSG) Light Commando Battalion (LCB) Navy Navy Special Service Group (Navy SSG) Air Force Special Services Wing (SSW) Intelligence ISI Covert Action Division (CAD) Special Services Directorate FIA Counter-Terrorism Wing Civil Rangers Rangers Anti-Terrorism Wing Frontier Corps 142 Special Operations Wing Special Operation Groups Bara Rifles Orakzai Scouts Gilgit-Baltistan Scouts Special Operation Group (SOG) Law Enforcement Punjab, Pakistan Dolphin Force Elite Police Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Special Combat Unit Sindh Special Security Unit Balochistan Counter Terrorism Force (CTF) Elite Police Force Islamabad Anti-Terrorist Squad (ATS) Eagle Squad Training Civilian Elite Police Training School Military Army Parachute Training School Army Special Operations School ( Cherat ) School of Mountain Warfare and Physical Training ( Kakul ) Ground Combat School ( Kallar Kahar ) School of Armed Forces Diving ( Karachi ) Naval Special Operations Training Centre, Nathiagali, Karachi Navy Parachute Training School Category v t e Naval special operations forces Current Tactical Divers Group Clearance Diving Branch 641st Naval Special Operations Brigade Special Warfare Diving and Salvage GRUMEC COMANF Canadian Armed Forces Divers 7th Marine Brigade Frogman Corps Commandos Marine Coastal Jaegers Kampfschwimmer Underwater Demolition Command MARCOS Denjaka KOPASKA Taifib Sepah Navy Special Force 1st Marine Brigade Shayetet 13 COMSUBIN Special Boarding Unit Marine Commandos PASKAL Fuerzas Especiales Netherlands Maritime Special Operations Forces Marinejegerkommandoen Special Service Group (Navy) Naval Special Operations Command JW Formoza Special Actions Detachment 101st Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion Amphibious Reconnaissance and Patrol Unit Russian commando frogmen Naval Diving Unit 4 Special Forces Regiment Republic of Korea Navy Special Warfare Flotilla Special Boat Squadron FGNE Kustjägarna Naval Special Warfare Command Reconnaissance Battalion Sualtı Taaruz Sualtı Savunma Special Boat Service Navy SEALs Special warfare combatant-craft crewmen Defunct Navy Beach Commandos Kampfschwimmer Decima Flottiglia MAS UOE Royal Naval Commandos Beach Jumpers Underwater Demolition Team v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7f67d69dcb‐w2k4h
Cached time: 20250817052621
Cache expiry: 1276426
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.074 seconds
Real time usage: 2.667 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 22012/1000000
Revision size: 45328/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 778106/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 35533/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 172291/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.849/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12221260/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1658.543      1 -total
 24.30%  402.991      1 Template:Reflist
 21.97%  364.421      7 Template:Military_navigation
 12.68%  210.264      1 Template:Naval_special_operations_forces
 12.56%  208.313     12 Template:Cite_book
 11.89%  197.172     46 Template:Flag_icon
  9.85%  163.330     22 Template:Rp
  9.77%  162.081      1 Template:Infobox_military_unit
  9.24%  153.220     22 Template:R/superscript
  9.13%  151.385     40 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12310651:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052621 and revision id 1305160222. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Special_Service_Group_(Navy)&oldid=1305160222 " Categories : Pakistan Navy Armed forces diving Military special forces of Pakistan Naval special forces units and formations Military units and formations established in 1966 Hidden categories: All articles with dead YouTube links Articles with dead YouTube links from February 2022 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Urdu-language sources (ur) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2019 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 11:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Special Service Group (Navy) 1 language Add topic

