Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 New Zealand 2 United States Toggle United States subsection 2.1 State government regulation 3 United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland 4 Australia 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 Footnotes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Deer hunting 7 languages অসমীয়া Español فارسی Français Italiano Norsk bokmål Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Practice/activity of hunting deer "Deer hunter" redirects here. For other uses, see Deer Hunter (disambiguation) .

See also: Deer stalking A Neolithic painting of deer hunting from Spain A Roman mosaic depicting the goddess Diana deer hunting Deer hunting is hunting deer for meat and sport, and, formerly, for producing buckskin hides, an activity which dates back tens of thousands of years.

Venison , the name for deer meat, is a nutritious and natural food source of animal protein that can be obtained through deer hunting. There are many different types of deer around the world that are hunted for their meat. For sport, often hunters try to kill deer with the largest and most antlers to score them using inches. There are two different categories of antlers. They are typical and nontypical. They measure tine length, beam length, and beam mass by each tine. They will add all these measurements up to get a score. This score is the score without deductions. Deductions occur when the opposite tine is not the same length as it is opposite. That score is the deducted score.

[ 1 ] Hunting deer is a regulated activity in many territories. In the United States , a state government agency such as a Department of Fish and Wildlife (DFW) or Department of Natural Resources (DNR) oversees the regulations. In the United Kingdom , it is illegal to use bows or rifles chambered in bores smaller than .243 caliber (6mm) for hunting.

[ 2 ] New Zealand [ edit ] See also: Hunting in New Zealand New Zealand has had 10 species of deer ( Cervidae ) introduced. From the 1850s, red deer were liberated, followed by fallow , sambar , wapiti , sika , rusa , and whitetail . The introduced herds of axis and moose failed to grow, and have become extinct. In the absence of predators to control populations, deer were thought to be a pest due to their effect on native vegetation. From the 1930s, the government employed professional hunters to cull the deer population. Market hunting for deer hides was a significant activity during the 1940's and 50's, and meat hunting from helicopters continues today, with the main market for wild venison being Europe. Deer hunting in New Zealand is a popular recreational activity, organised and advocated for at the national level by the New Zealand Deerstalkers' Association.

[ 3 ] United States [ edit ] A New Hampshire deer hunt circa 1910 See also: Hunting in the United States The two main species of deer found in the United States are mule deer and white-tailed deer . Mule deer are mostly found west of the Rocky Mountains, but can also be found as far east as parts of North and South Dakota, while whitetails generally occur only to the east of the Rockies.

[ 4 ] Mule deer have a black-tipped tail which is proportionally smaller than that of the white-tailed deer . The male deer or bucks grow antlers annually. The mule deer have taller skinnier tines on their antlers where white-tailed deer typically have shorter thicker tines. White-tailed bucks are slightly smaller than mule deer bucks. Whitetail deer excel in various habitats including forests as well as suburban territories, and are very much adaptable to multiple environments.

[ 5 ] Both of the species lose their antlers in January, and regrow the antlers during the following summer beginning in June. Although both species are found in the United States, where they are found is vastly different. Mule deer are found in the western United States in the foothills of the mountains.

As their antlers become fully developed, they will start to shed their velvet . Velvet is vascularised tissue that is a furry skin-like material that covers the growing antlers. If the antlers are damaged while they are in velvet they can cause nontypical features due to the soft nature of the antler tissue while growing.

[ 6 ] The velvet will fall off of the deer when their antlers start to harden in late summer to early fall to get ready for mating season in the winter. If the velvet doesn't fall off on its own they will make a "rub" on a small tree. This is when they rub their antlers to both mark territory and to take the remaining velvet off.

Mating season (referred to as the "rut") is, typically, a good time for hunting deer and which usually takes place at the end of October and leading into November.

[ 7 ] During this season, the bucks are often up on their feet more to try and "lockdown" does.

There are many different types of strategies employed when deer hunting. These strategies often depend on the time of year too. One of the most successful early and late season strategies is hunting over a food source. The hunter must know his state laws for baiting or feeding deer while hunting, as each state differs, and policies may also vary within a given state.

[ a ] This can be done multiple ways. One way that can be very successful if done correctly is by growing a food plot. Some of the popular food plots for deer are clover, alfalfa, turnips, and radishes.

[ 9 ] Another way as mentioned before is baiting deer. This is often done with corn or a mineral block, such as a salt-lick, and where the hunter sits perched in a higher elevation some distance away, awaiting the deer's visit.

[ 10 ] If this were done at night, a  miner's acetylene lamp , or an electric spotlight , was placed near the mineral block so as to see the animal when it approaches. Another strategy is hunting a "rub" or "scrape" line. This strategy is often used closer to the "rut" season.

[ 7 ] Bucks often travel in the same areas over and over again. This tactic would be used to try and catch a buck up on its feet going from bedding to food or vice versa. Placing a tree stand on the trail or using a ground blind is another tactic used by bow and firearm hunters to camouflage themselves while hunting deer.

[ citation needed ] Other ways of hunting deer include the stalking and still-hunting methods. This way is very difficult for a beginner, as well as an experienced hunter. This takes quite a bit of practice to become successful at. All conditions must be right for this method to work. A hunter must be quiet, the ground must be soft, there cannot be crunchy leaves on the ground, etc... . People often use tracking when trying to stalk deer. This works best with fresh snow as you can see the deer tracks that are recent. Another method used when hunting is simply sitting and waiting for a deer, whether in a tree stand or a ground blind. This method is very difficult for some people because of how long a hunter must sit still for hours at times. There is a combination of these hunting methods which has been used by most hunters. This method is called "driving". In "driving", there are people who try to move deer in a certain direction by walking through the woods in the direction they want the deer to move. While they are trying to move deer, people are sitting in a certain place that has been designated and expected for the deer to move through. The people shooting try to shoot the deer as they go through that area. This method is very successful in getting deer on their feet to move.

[ 9 ] The Chickasaw and Choctaw Indians of North America traditionally made use of the decoy method of hunting the white-tailed deer.

They hunt like all their neighbors with the skin and frontal bone of a deer's head, dried and stretched on elastic chips; the horns they scoup  [ sic ] out very curiously, employing so much patience on this, that such a head and antlers often do not exceed ten or twelve ounces; they fix this on the left hand, and imitating the motions of the deer in sight, they decoy them within sure shot.

— Bernard Romans , Natural History of East and West Florida [ 11 ] The motion of the deer that was imitated was the manner in which it feeds and looks around in a very natural way.

State government regulation [ edit ] Methods of pursuing game for wild meat and corresponding seasons are subject to regulation by state governments and therefore vary from state to state.  A state government agency such as a Department of Fish and Wildlife (DFW) or Department of Natural Resources (DNR) oversees the regulations.

Deer hunting seasons vary across the United States. In game zone 3 in the state of South Carolina, deer hunting season starts August 15 and runs through January 1. Some seasons in states such as Florida and Kentucky [ 12 ] start as early as September and can go all the way until February like in Texas.  The length of the season is often based on the health and population of the deer herd, in addition to the number of hunters expected to be participating in the deer hunt. The duration of deer hunting seasons can also vary by county within a state, as in Kentucky .

[ 12 ] In the case of South Carolina, the season varies by SCDNR region. Each region has multiple counties. The DFW will also create specific time frames within the season where the number of hunters able to hunt is limited, which is known as a controlled hunt.

The DFW may also break the deer-hunting season into different time periods where only certain weapons are permitted: bows only (compound, recurve, and crossbows), modern firearms (rifles and shotguns) or black-powder muzzleloaders . (Some states, such as Kentucky, [ 12 ] consider only compound and recurve bows as "bows" for hunting regulation purposes, and have special seasons for crossbows.) [ 13 ] For example, during a bows-only season, in many areas a hunter would be limited to the use of a bow and the use of any firearm would be prohibited until that specific season opens, and in some areas a crossbow can only be used during a dedicated season for that weapon. Similarly, during a muzzleloader season, use of modern firearms is almost always prohibited. However, in many states, the archery season (at least for compound and recurve bows) completely overlaps all firearms seasons; in those locations, bowhunters may take deer during a firearms season.

Some states also have restrictions on hunting of antlered or antlerless deer. For example, Kentucky allows the taking of antlerless deer during any deer season in most of the state, but in certain areas allows only antlered deer to be taken during parts of deer season.

[ 12 ] United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland [ edit ] See also: Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom A depiction of deer hunting with hounds from a 15th-century version of The Hunting Book of Gaston Phébus The term "deer hunting" is used in North America for the shooting of deer, but in the United Kingdom and Ireland, the term generally refers to the pursuit of deer with scent hounds , with unarmed followers typically on horseback.

[ citation needed ] There are six species of deer in the UK : red deer , roe deer , fallow deer , Sika deer , Reeves muntjac deer , and Chinese water deer , as well as hybrids of these deer. All are hunted to a degree reflecting their relative population either as sport or for culling . Closed seasons for deer vary by species.

[ 14 ] The practice of declaring a closed season in England dates back to medieval times, when it was called fence month and commonly lasted from June 9 to July 9, though the actual dates varied.

[ 15 ] It is illegal to use bows to hunt any wild animal in the UK under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 .

UK deer stalkers, if supplying venison (in fur) to game dealers, butchers and restaurants, need to hold a Lantra level 2 large game meat hygiene certificate. Courses are run by organisations such as the British Association for Shooting and Conservation and this qualification is also included within the Level 1 deer stalking certificate. If supplying venison for public consumption (meat), the provider must have a fully functioning and clean larder that meets FSA standards and must register as a food business with the local authority.

[ 16 ] Professional stalker standing next to a red deer stag shot on Ardnamurchan Estate in the Scottish Highlands The vast majority of deer hunted in the UK are stalked . The phrase deer hunting is used to refer (in England and Wales) to the traditional practice of chasing deer with packs of hounds , currently illegal under the Hunting Act 2004 .

In the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, there were several packs of staghounds hunting "carted deer" in England and Ireland. Carted deer were red deer kept in captivity for the sole purpose of being hunted and recaptured alive. More recently, there were three packs of staghounds hunting wild red deer of both sexes on or around Exmoor and the New Forest Buckhounds hunting fallow deer bucks in the New Forest , the latter disbanding in 1997.

The practice of hunting with hounds, other than using two hounds to flush deer to be shot by waiting marksmen, has been banned in the UK since 2005; to date, two people have been convicted of breaking the law.

[ 17 ] There is one pack of stag hounds in the Republic of Ireland and one in Northern Ireland, [ 18 ] the former operating under a licence to hunt carted deer.

[ 19 ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia, there are six species of deer that are available to hunt. These are fallow deer , sambar , red deer , rusa , chital , and hog deer .

[ 20 ] Gallery [ edit ] Alexander III of Scotland Rescued from the Fury of a Stag by Benjamin West , 1786 The Goguryeo tomb mural of hunting from Ji'an A painting of the goddess Diana deer hunting by Peter Rubens Theodore Roosevelt in 1885 with his highly decorated deer-skin hunting suit, and Tiffany -carved hunting knife and rifle See also [ edit ] Big Buck Hunter Deer Act 1980 (in the UK) Deer farm Deer horn Deer day Deer Hunter - video game Deer Avenger - video game Deerskin trade TheHunter - video game Hole in the Horn Buck James Jordan Buck Reindeer hunting in Greenland Venison Footnotes [ edit ] ^ For example, Kentucky bans any type of baiting, defined as "grain, feed, mineral blocks, salt blocks, and other baits used to attract deer" within the Jackson Purchase , the state's only region where chronic wasting disease has been detected. Baiting is legal elsewhere in the state. Food plots, as well as feed stations and mineral blocks for domestic livestock, are legal even in the Purchase, and hunters may use products that deer do not consume.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ SPENCER, ERIC (September 21, 2021).

"How to Score a Deer: The Antler Scoring System" .

Ambush Hunting Blinds . Retrieved February 20, 2022 .

^ " Deer Act 1963 Chapter 36 ".

The National Archives . Schedule 2: "Prohibited Firearms and Ammunition". 1963. Accessed March 2, 2021.

^ "Hunting today" .

Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand .

^ "Mule Deer vs Whitetail - A Full Rundown" . February 2, 2021.

^ Bajwa, Qasim (May 16, 2024).

"Types of Hunting in the USA" .

gunnersreview.com . Retrieved June 26, 2024 .

^ "What Causes Some Deer to Have non Typical Antlers?" .

Backcountry Junkie . December 13, 2020.

^ a b "White-Tailed Deer | National Geographic" .

Animals . March 12, 2010. Archived from the original on February 28, 2021 . Retrieved April 9, 2022 .

^ "CWD Surveillance Zone" . Kentucky Department of Fish & Wildlife Resources . Retrieved May 27, 2024 .

^ a b "Whitetail Deer Hunting Information" .

www.the-whitetail-deer.com . Retrieved April 9, 2022 .

^ Edward A. Freeman, How to Hunt Deer , chapter 1 ^ Romans, B.

(1775).

A Concise Natural History of East and West Florida . New York: Printed for the author. p.

66 .

OCLC 745317190 .

^ a b c d "Deer Hunting" . Kentucky Department of Fish & Wildlife Resources . Retrieved March 31, 2022 .

^ Wexel, Mike (January 14, 2017).

"Deer Hunting Season in the United States" .

Peak Wilderness . Retrieved April 25, 2017 .

^ Naturenet: Shooting, Hunting and Angling Seasons.

Naturenet - Countryside Management & Nature Conservation.

^ Forests and Chases of England and Wales: A Glossary.

St John's College, Oxford.

^ The Wild Game Guide - Food Standards Agency Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved June 24, 2017.

^ "Hunting duo appeal is turned down" .

BBC News . October 19, 2007 . Retrieved May 1, 2010 .

^ Cassidy, Martin (February 8, 2005).

"Frustrations of hunter and hunted" .

BBC News . Retrieved May 1, 2010 .

^ "Find a Debate – Houses of the Oireachtas" .

debates.oireachtas.ie . Archived from the original on November 23, 2007.

^ Game Council NSW Archived May 19, 2009, at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Media related to Deer hunting at Wikimedia Commons v t e Game animals and shooting in North America Game birds Bobwhite quail Chukar Hungarian partridge Greater prairie-chicken Mourning dove Ring-necked pheasant Ptarmigan Ruffed grouse Sharp-tailed grouse Snipe (common snipe) Spruce grouse Turkey Woodcock Waterfowl hunters Waterfowl Black duck Canada goose Canvasback Gadwall Greater scaup Lesser scaup Mallard Northern pintail Redhead Ross's goose Snow goose Wood duck Big game Bighorn sheep Black bear Razorback Brown bear Bison (buffalo) Caribou Cougar (mountain lion) Elk Moose White-tailed deer Wolf Mountain goat Mule deer Pronghorn Muskox Dall sheep Polar bear Whales Other quarry American alligator Badger Bobcat Coyote Fox squirrel Gray fox Gray squirrel Opossum Rabbit Raccoon Red fox Snowshoe hare See also Bear hunting Big-game hunting Bison hunting Deer hunting Fox hunting Waterfowl hunting Whaling Fishing Wolf hunting Upland hunting Authority control databases : National Latvia v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐t2l49
Cached time: 20250818033312
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.414 seconds
Real time usage: 0.550 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2100/1000000
Revision size: 20838/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68744/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3292/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 81119/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.235/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6397916/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  445.198      1 -total
 33.58%  149.488      2 Template:Reflist
 22.99%  102.363     10 Template:Cite_web
 16.54%   73.628      2 Template:Navbox
 16.09%   71.633      1 Template:North_American_Game
 13.10%   58.318      1 Template:Short_description
  7.35%   32.735      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.78%   30.171      2 Template:Fix
  6.46%   28.743      1 Template:Cn
  5.38%   23.956      1 Template:Redirect Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7810682:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818033312 and revision id 1306509751. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deer_hunting&oldid=1306509751 " Categories : Deer hunting Dog sports Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 03:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deer hunting 7 languages Add topic

