Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Activities 2 Controversies 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Association of American Publishers 1 language Ελληνικά Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American book-publishing trade association The Association of American Publishers ( AAP ) is the national trade association of the American book publishing industry. AAP lobbies for book, journal and education publishers in the United States . AAP members include most of the major commercial publishers in the United States, as well as smaller and nonprofit publishers, university presses, and scholarly societies.

[ not verified in body ] Patricia Schroeder , a former United States representative , served as the association's CEO from 1997 until 2009, taking over the role from Nicholas A. Veliotes . On May 1, 2009, another former United States representative, Tom Allen , took over as president and CEO. In January 2017, Maria Pallante , a former United States Register of Copyrights , became the president and CEO of the organization.

[ 1 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Activities [ edit ] The association's core programs deal primarily with advocacy related to: intellectual property ; new technology and digital issues of concern to publishers; the freedom to read, censorship and libel ; the freedom to publish; funding for education and libraries ; postal rates and regulations; tax and trade policy; and international copyright enforcement.

[ citation needed ] AAP tracks publisher revenue on a monthly and annual basis with its StatShot programs.

[ 2 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The association has also awarded books, journals, and electronic content through its annual PROSE Awards since 1976.

[ 3 ] [ non-primary source needed ] In August 2019, AAP sued Audible for its Captions feature, through which machine-generated text could be displayed alongside audio narration.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The lawsuit was settled in February 2020, with Audible agreeing not to implement the Captions feature without obtaining express permission.

[ 6 ] Controversies [ edit ] The AAP initially supported the arrest of Dmitry Sklyarov .

[ 7 ] AAP was criticized after it contracted Eric Dezenhall 's crisis management firm to promote its position regarding the open access movement.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Schroeder told The Washington Post “the association hired Dezenhall when members realized they needed help. ‘We thought we were angels for a long time and we didn't need PR firms.’” [ 10 ] In 2020, AAP released press statements to support four of its members in the case of Hachette v. Internet Archive (IA). President Maria Pallante said of the case, "As the complaint outlines, by illegally copying and distributing online a stunning number of literary works each day, IA displays an abandon shared only by the world’s most egregious pirate sites." [ 11 ] [ non-primary source needed ] This action was opposed by the Electronic Frontier Foundation , [ 12 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Public Knowledge , [ 13 ] [ non-primary source needed ] and the Association of Research Libraries .

[ 14 ] [ non-primary source needed ] See also [ edit ] American Publishers Association International Publishers Association Society for Scholarly Publishing Books in the United States References [ edit ] ^ "The Association of American Publishers (AAP) Names Maria A. Pallante as President and CEO" . January 12, 2017.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2017 . Retrieved February 17, 2021 .

^ "Industry Statistics: Overview" .

Association of American Publishers . Archived from the original on October 8, 2018 . Retrieved August 30, 2021 .

^ "Home - PROSE Awards" .

PROSE Awards . Retrieved October 8, 2018 .

^ "American Publishers Sue To Stop 'Audible Captions' " .

Publishing Perspectives . August 24, 2019 . Retrieved September 25, 2021 .

^ Lee, Timothy B. (August 24, 2019).

"Book publishers sue Audible to stop new speech-to-text feature" .

Ars Technica . Retrieved September 25, 2021 .

^ "Copyright: US Publishers Succeed in 'Audible Captions' Case" .

Publishing Perspectives . February 7, 2020 . Retrieved September 25, 2021 .

^ Ardito, Stephanie (November 2001).

"The Case of Dmitry Sklyarov: This is the first criminal lawsuit under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act" .

Information Today . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

Witness the July 19 statement from the Association of American Publishers (AAP) 'hailing' the actions of the Justice Department regarding the Sklyarov case.

^ Giles, Jim (January 25, 2007).

"PR's 'pit bull' takes on open access. Journal publishers lock horns with free-information movement" .

Nature .

445 (7126). Nature Publishing Group: 347.

doi : 10.1038/445347a .

PMID 17251943 .

^ David Biello (January 26, 2007).

"Open Access to Science Under Attack" .

Scientific American . Retrieved February 2, 2007 .

^ Rick Weiss, Publishing Group Hires 'Pit Bull of PR' , The Washington Post . January 25, 2007 ^ "Publishers File Suit Against Internet Archive for Systematic Mass Scanning and Distribution of Literary Works" . Association of American Publishers. June 1, 2020 . Retrieved March 19, 2023 .

^ "Hachette v. Internet Archive" . Electronic Frontier Foundation. October 9, 2020 . Retrieved March 19, 2023 .

^ Stella, Shiva (June 1, 2020).

"Public Knowledge Responds to Lawsuit Against Internet Archive: Policymakers, Publishers, and Libraries Should Make Print Books More Accessible During the Pandemic" . Public Knowledge . Retrieved March 19, 2023 .

^ @ARLnews (June 4, 2020).

"ARL is disappointed, especially this week, at this time, to see "preeminent publishing houses" go after controlled digital lending (CDL) so broadly in their complaint against the @InternetArchive. https://bit.ly/302LIp4 1/3" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

External links [ edit ] Official website Finding aid to Association of American Publishers records at Columbia University. Rare Book & Manuscript Library.

v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Association_of_American_Publishers&oldid=1288550336 " Categories : Publishing companies of the United States Publishing-related professional associations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from October 2024 This page was last edited on 3 May 2025, at 11:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Association of American Publishers 1 language Add topic

