Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of OER Project 2 Project team 3 Initial pilot program 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents OER Project 5 languages العربية Español 한국어 Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Project for global teaching of Big History This article is part of a series about Bill Gates Personal Awards and honors Philanthropy Political positions Public image Residence Family Companies Traf-O-Data Microsoft history timeline criticism BENlabs Cascade Investment TerraPower Gates Ventures Charitable organizations Gates Foundation Match for Africa The Giving Pledge OER Project Breakthrough Energy Mission Innovation Writings " An Open Letter to Hobbyists " The Road Ahead Business @ the Speed of Thought How to Avoid a Climate Disaster How to Prevent the Next Pandemic Source Code: My Beginnings Related Bill Gates' flower fly Codex Leicester Lost on the Grand Banks Paul Allen v t e OER Project is a non-profit open educational resources provider co-founded in 2011 by Bill Gates and David Christian . Originally known as Big History Project (BHP) , the titular course was intended to enable the global teaching of the subject of Big History , which has been described as "the attempt to understand, in a unified way, the history of Cosmos, Earth, Life and Humanity." [ 1 ] The company rebranded as OER Project in 2019 and now offers World History Project, Climate Project, and other courses in addition to the original BHP curriculum.

[ 2 ] History of OER Project [ edit ] Bill Gates became interested in the topic when he heard "Big History: The Big Bang, Life on Earth, and the Rise of Humanity," a 48-lecture course taught by David Christian and published by The Teaching Company . For Gates, "he [Christian] really blew me away. Here's a guy who's read across the sciences, humanities, and social sciences and brought it together in a single framework. It made me wish that I could have taken big history when I was young, because it would have given me a way to think about all of the school work and reading that followed. In particular, it really put the sciences in an interesting historical context and explained how they apply to a lot of contemporary concerns." [ 3 ] After Gates and Christian met to discuss the lectures, the genesis of the Big History Project occurred.

[ 4 ] They founded the project, and developed a team to achieve their stated goal, "to get Big History taught to as many students around the world as possible".

[ 5 ] Big History Project was launched at the 2011 TED conference at Long Beach, California on 2 March 2011.

[ 6 ] David Christian presented an 18-minute lecture outlining big history and the intention of creating a global online delivery of a classroom-tested course aimed at 9th grade students. His presentation was part of the Bill Gates-curated "Knowledge Revolution" section of the conference.

In 2019, BHP launched a second course, World History Project (WHP), and announced that the organization had rebranded as OER Project to reflect their expanded catalogue. OER Project has subsequently added a variety of history and climate education courses and announced in 2022 that over one million students had accessed its materials during its first decade in operation.

[ 7 ] Project team [ edit ] BHP's initial academic advisers were: [ 8 ] Bob Bain, Associate Professor at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor Marnie Hughes-Warrington (Pro-Vice Chancellor, Monash University , Melbourne) Tracy Sullivan (Director of the Australian History Museum at Macquarie University , Sydney) Sal Khan (founder and executive director of the Khan Academy ).

Bain and Trevor Getz ( San Francisco State University ) are OER Project's current academic leads, [ 9 ] and the advisory board now comprises more than 20 predominantly US-based academics and educators.

[ 10 ] Initial pilot program [ edit ] Prior to launch, seven schools were selected for the initial classroom pilot phase of the project. In the United States, San Diego High School of International Studies (California); The Rivers School (Massachusetts); Northville High School (Michigan); Greenhills High School (Michigan) and Lakeside School (Washington) taught Big History Project in the 2011/12 school year. In Australia, Narara Valley High School in New South Wales and Nossal High School in Victoria taught the course in their 2012 school year.

References [ edit ] ^ "International Big History Association - Home" .

www.ibhanet.org . Archived from the original on 2018-01-20 . Retrieved 2016-06-12 .

^ "Introducing the World History Project" .

OER Project Blog . November 14, 2019.

^ "Big History Project - Macquarie University" .

bighistoryinstitute.org . Archived from the original on August 21, 2013 . Retrieved 2016-06-12 .

^ Sorkin, Andrew Ross (2014-09-05).

"So Bill Gates Has This Idea for a History Class ..." The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2016-06-12 .

^ "Big History Project" .

www.bighistoryproject.com . Retrieved 2016-06-12 .

^ "TED2011: Program" .

conferences.ted.com . Archived from the original on 2011-07-16 . Retrieved 2016-06-12 .

^ "10 years. 1 million students. A brief history of OER Project. - OER Project Blog - OER Project Teacher Community - OER Project Community" .

community.oerproject.com . Retrieved 2022-10-18 .

^ "The Big History Project" .

^ Gilbert, Marc Jason (October 2021).

"An interview with a World Historian: Trevor R. Getz" (PDF) .

World History Connected .

18 (3): 1.

^ "OER Project Advisory Board" .

OER Project . Retrieved 2022-10-18 .

External links [ edit ] OER Project official website International Big History Association official website David Christian's TED Talk Archived 2014-02-16 at the Wayback Machine Timelines from David Christian's TED Talk So Bill Gates Has This Idea for a History Class ...

( New York Times) Free online textbooks really work (GatesNotes: The Blog of Bill Gates) v t e Big History Themes and subjects Chronology of the universe Cosmic evolution Deep time Time scales Goldilocks principle Modernity Eight thresholds 1: Creation - Big Bang and cosmogony 2: Stars - creation of stars 3: Elements - creation of chemical elements inside dying stars 4: Planets - formation of planets 5: Life - abiogenesis and evolution of life 6: Humans - development of Homo sapiens Stone Age 7: Agriculture - Agricultural Revolution 8: Modernity - modern era Web-based education Big History Project ChronoZoom Notable people Walter Alvarez Cynthia Stokes Brown Eric Chaisson David Christian Carl Sagan Graeme Snooks Related Big History (2013 series) v t e Bill Gates Career Microsoft history Paul Allen Gates Foundation ( CEPI ) Corbis (BEN) Cascade Investment United States v. Microsoft antitrust case TerraPower Gates Ventures OER Project Breakthrough Energy Writings " An Open Letter to Hobbyists " (1976) The Road Ahead (1995) Business @ the Speed of Thought (1999) How to Avoid a Climate Disaster (2021) How to Prevent the Next Pandemic (2022) Source Code (2025) Philanthropy Gates Foundation Match for Africa climate change donations and sporting events Films Triumph of the Nerds (1996) Pirates of Silicon Valley (1999) The Social Network (2010) Inside Bill's Brain: Decoding Bill Gates (2019) Family Melinda French Gates (ex-wife) Phoebe Gates (daughter) Bill Gates Sr.

(father) Mary Maxwell Gates (mother) Mimi Gardner Gates (stepmother) Possessions Codex Leicester Residence Lost on the Grand Banks Porsche 959 Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=OER_Project&oldid=1300931126 " Categories : Big History Bill Gates 2011 establishments in California Projects established in 2011 Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 05:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents OER Project 5 languages Add topic

