Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Processes Toggle Processes subsection 2.1 Dandy roll process 2.2 Cylinder mould process 3 On postage stamps 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Watermark 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Identification on paper to prevent counterfeiting This article is about physical watermarks. For digital watermarks, see Digital watermarking . For other uses, see Watermark (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Watermark" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A watermark is an identifying image or pattern in paper that appears as various shades of lightness/darkness when viewed by transmitted light (or when viewed by reflected light, atop a dark background), caused by thickness or density variations in the paper.

[ 1 ] Watermarks have been used on postage stamps , currency , and other government documents to discourage counterfeiting . There are two main ways of producing watermarks in paper; the dandy roll process , and the more complex cylinder mould process .

Watermarks vary greatly in their visibility; while some are obvious on casual inspection, others require some study to pick out. Various aids have been developed, such as watermark fluid that wets the paper without damaging it.  A watermark is very useful in the examination of paper because it can be used for dating documents and artworks, identifying sizes, mill trademarks and locations, and determining the quality of a sheet of paper. The word is also used for digital practices that share similarities with physical watermarks. In one case, overprint on computer-printed output may be used to identify output from an unlicensed trial version of a program . In another instance, identifying codes can be encoded as a digital watermark for a music , video , picture , or other file . Or an artist adding their identifying digital Signature, graphic, logo in their digital artworks as an identifier or anti-counterfeit measure .

History [ edit ] Watermarks were first introduced in Fabriano , Italy, in 1282.

[ 2 ] At the time, watermarks were created by changing the thickness of paper during a stage in the manufacturing process when it was still wet.

Processes [ edit ] Dandy roll process [ edit ] A perspective view of a dandy roll in accordance with the invention of a conventional paper-making machine incorporating watermarks into the paper Traditionally, a watermark was made by impressing a water-coated metal stamp onto the paper during manufacturing. The invention of the dandy roll in 1826 by John Marshall revolutionised the watermark process and made it easier for producers to watermark their paper.

The dandy roll is a light roller covered by material similar to window screen that is embossed with a pattern. Faint lines are made by laid wires that run parallel to the axis of the dandy roll, and the bold lines are made by chain wires that run around the circumference to secure the laid wires to the roll from the outside. Because the chain wires are located on the outside of the laid wires, they have a greater influence on the impression in the pulp, hence their bolder appearance than the laid wire lines.

This embossing is transferred to the pulp fibres , compressing and reducing their thickness in that area. Because the patterned portion of the page is thinner, it transmits more light through and therefore has a lighter appearance than the surrounding paper. If these lines are distinct and parallel, and/or there is a watermark, then the paper is termed laid paper . If the lines appear as a mesh or are indiscernible, and/or there is no watermark, then it is called wove paper . This method is called line drawing watermarks.

Cylinder mould process [ edit ] Another type of watermark is called the cylinder mould watermark . It is a shaded watermark first used in 1848 that incorporates tonal depth and creates a greyscale image. Instead of using a wire covering for the dandy roll, the shaded watermark is created by areas of relief on the roll's own surface. Once dry, the paper may then be rolled again to produce a watermark of even thickness but with varying density. The resulting watermark is generally much clearer and more detailed than those made by the Dandy Roll process, and as such, Cylinder Mould Watermark Paper is the preferred type of watermarked paper for banknotes, passports, motor vehicle titles, and other documents where it is an important anti-counterfeiting measure.

On postage stamps [ edit ] See also: Postage stamp paper The Crown CA watermark found on many British Commonwealth stamps (seen from the reverse) A US postal stationery envelope from 1883 showing a clear watermark on laid paper In philately , the watermark is a key feature of a stamp, and often constitutes the difference between a common and a rare stamp.  Collectors who encounter two otherwise identical stamps with different watermarks consider each stamp to be a separate identifiable issue.

[ 3 ] The "classic" stamp watermark is a small crown or other national symbol, appearing either once on each stamp or a continuous pattern. Watermarks were nearly universal on stamps in the 19th and early 20th centuries, but generally fell out of use, but some countries continue to use them.

[ 4 ] Some types of embossing , such as that used to make the "cross on oval" design on early stamps of Switzerland , resemble a watermark in that the paper is thinner, but can be distinguished by having sharper edges than is usual for a normal watermark.  Stamp paper watermarks also show various designs, letters, numbers and pictorial elements.

The process of bringing out the stamp watermark is fairly simple.  Sometimes a watermark in stamp paper can be seen just by looking at the unprinted back side of a stamp.  More often, the collector must use a few basic items to get a good look at the watermark.  For example, watermark fluid may be applied to the back of a stamp to temporarily reveal the watermark.

[ 4 ] Even using the simple watermarking method described, it can be difficult to distinguish some watermarks.  Watermarks on stamps printed in yellow and orange can be particularly difficult to see.  A few mechanical devices are also used by collectors to detect watermarks on stamps such as the Morley-Bright watermark detector and the more expensive Safe Signoscope .

[ 5 ] Such devices can be very useful for they can be used without the application of watermark fluid and also allow the collector to look at the watermark for a longer period of time to more easily detect the watermark.

See also [ edit ] Allan H. Stevenson Chip art Digital watermarking Huaya Overprinting Overprint Seals in the Sinosphere Thomas Harry Saunders References [ edit ] ^ Biermann, Christopher J. (1996). "7".

Handbook of Pulping and Papermaking (2 ed.). San Diego, California, USA: Academic Press. p.

171 .

ISBN 0-12-097362-6 .

^ Meggs, Philip B.

(1998).

A History of Graphic Design (Third ed.). John Wiley & Sons, Inc. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-471-29198-5 .

^ "Miller, Rick; Stamp identification often lurks in watermark in Linns.com Refresher Course section" . Archived from the original on 2010-06-16 . Retrieved 2010-12-08 .

^ a b "Baadke, Michael; How to identify a stamp by its watermark in Linns.com Refresher Course section" .

^ "Signoscope Watermark Detector T3" .

SAFE Collecting Supplies . Retrieved 2024-09-30 .

Further reading [ edit ] Buxton, B.H.

The Buxton Encyclopedia of Watermarks . Tappan, N.Y.: Buxton Stamp Co., 1977 114p.

Felix, Ervin J.

The Stamp Collector's Guidebook of Worldwide Watermarks and Perforations, from 1840 to date . Racine, WI.: Whitman Publishing Co., 1966 256p.

Repeta, Louis E.

Watermarks In Postage Stamp Paper: a comprehensive look at a key stamp element . Reprinted in 1999 from The American Philatelist (February 1987). 27p.

External links [ edit ] Look up Watermark in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Watermarks .

WZMA - Watermarks of the Middle Ages Briquet online (in French) Piccard online (English) Watermark Database of the Dutch University Institute for Art History Bernstein - The Memory of Paper, Portal to 50 Watermark Databases Watermarks 1850-date Finding Watermarks on Stamps : Hobbizine article Thomas L. Gravell Watermark Archive Thomas Gravell watermark collection , Special Collections, University of Delaware Library, Newark, Delaware.

Archive of Papers and Watermarks in Greek Manuscripts v t e Paper Paper engineering / Papermaking History Battle of Talas Missal of Silos Originators Cai Lun Damjing Developers Matthias Koops Friedrich Gottlob Keller Charles Fenerty Scholars Timothy Barrett Thomas Francis Carter Dard Hunter Tsien Tsuen-hsuin Types Acid-free Air-laid Amate Asphalt Banana Bible Blotting Bond Bristol Carbon Cardboard Cardstock Cartridge Coated Construction Contact Copy Carbonless Correction Cotton (rag) Crêpe Display Dó Electrical insulation Filteration Genkō yōshi Glassine Graph Greaseproof Hemp India Inkjet Ingres Korean Kraft Butcher Laid Lokta Manila Mummy Newsprint Onionskin Origami Paperboard Parchment Photographic Plastic-coated Red rosin Rice Rolling Scritta Security Seed Stone Tar Thermal Tissue Tracing Transfer Tree-free Wallpaper Washi Wasli Waterproof Wax Wood-free Wove Writing Xuan Materials China clay Corrugated fiberboard Fiber crop Paper chemicals Papyrus Wood pulp Specifications Density Grammage Paper sizes Surface chemistry of paper Units of paper quantity Wet strength Manufacture and process Bleaching of wood pulp Calender Conical refiner Deinking Elemental chlorine free Environmental impact of paper Handmade paper Hollander beater Kraft process Organosolv Paper machine Paper recycling Papermaking Soda pulping Sulfite process Industry Paper industry Canada Europe India Indonesia Japan United States Paper mill List Uses Lined paper Paper towels Papier-mâché Cardboard Clothing Tissues Notebooks Watercolor paper Paper money Beverage cartons Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐bf767cfbc‐x2gdl
Cached time: 20250814180109
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.323 seconds
Real time usage: 0.440 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1120/1000000
Revision size: 10185/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 53324/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1252/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37454/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.216/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6502945/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  372.623      1 -total
 25.28%   94.181      1 Template:Reflist
 19.79%   73.731      4 Template:Navbox
 19.55%   72.856      1 Template:Paper
 18.46%   68.784      2 Template:Cite_book
 16.22%   60.421      1 Template:Short_description
 12.72%   47.398      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.70%   43.597      1 Template:Ambox
  9.58%   35.700      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.83%   32.907      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:32921:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814180109 and revision id 1249712501. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Watermark&oldid=1249712501 " Categories : Philatelic terminology Money forgery Papermaking Watermarking Stationery Banknotes Italian inventions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2013 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 October 2024, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Watermark 43 languages Add topic

