Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The "Lost Island" refutation 2 Criticisms 3 The remainder of Gaunilo's text 4 Notes 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gaunilo of Marmoutiers 8 languages Français Italiano Nederlands Polski Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Gaunilo ) French Benedictine monk and philosopher This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Gaunilo of Marmoutiers" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gaunilo or Gaunillon [ 1 ] ( fl.

11th century) was a Benedictine monk of Marmoutier Abbey in Tours , France . He is best known for his contemporary criticism of the ontological argument for the existence of God which appeared in St. Anselm 's Proslogion . In his work In Behalf of the Fool , [ a ] Gaunilo contends that St. Anselm's ontological argument fails because logic of the same kind would force one to conclude many things exist which certainly do not .

[ 2 ] An empiricist , Gaunilo thought that the human intellect is only able to comprehend information provided by the senses.

[ 3 ] Little beyond this essay is known of Gaunilo; no other extant writings bear his name. Anselm wrote a reply to it , essentially arguing that Gaunilo had definitely missed his point.

The "Lost Island" refutation [ edit ] Anselm claimed his ontological argument as proof of the existence of God, whom he described as that being for which no greater can be conceived. A god that does not exist cannot be that than which no greater can be conceived, as existence would make it greater. Thus, according to St. Anselm, the concept of God necessarily entails His existence. He denies Gaunilo a Godless epistemology .

[ 4 ] Gaunilo criticised Anselm's argument by employing the same reasoning, via reductio ad absurdum , to "prove" the existence of the mythical "Lost Island", the greatest or most perfect island: if the island of which we are thinking does not exist, it cannot be the greatest conceivable island, for, to be the greatest conceivable island, it would have to exist, as any existent island would be greater than an imaginary one. This, of course, is merely a direct application of Anselm's own premise that existence is a perfection. Since we can conceive of this greatest or most perfect island, it must, by Anselm's way of thinking, exist. While this argument is absurd, Gaunilo claims that it is no more so than Anselm's.

[ citation needed ] Philosophers often attempt to prove the ontological argument wrong by comparing Anselm's with Gaunilo's. The former runs: God is that being than which no greater can be conceived.

It is greater to exist in reality than merely as an idea.

If God does not exist, we can conceive of an even greater being, that is one that does exist.

Therefore, God must indeed exist in reality.

Gaunilo's parody runs along the same lines: The Lost Island is that island than which no greater can be conceived.

It is greater to exist in reality than merely as an idea.

If the Lost Island does not exist, one can conceive of an even greater island, that is one that does exist.

Therefore, the Lost Island exists in reality.

If one of these arguments is sound, it has been asserted, they must both be sound. By Gaunilo's reckoning, however, one (and, therefore, the other, too) is unsound. The Lost Island does not exist, so there is something wrong with the logic that proves that it does. Because the argument proves true in one case that which is patently false (the Lost Island), it is fair to ask whether it may fairly be regarded as proving true the other case.

Criticisms [ edit ] Gaunilo's objection to the ontological argument has been criticised on several grounds.

Anselm's own reply was essentially that Gaunilo had missed his point: any other being's existence is derived from God's, unnecessary in itself, and nonamenable to his ontological argument which can only ever properly apply to the single greatest being of all beings. Indeed, while we can try and conceive of a perfect island, that island is yet greater if it creates other beings, whereupon it would no longer be an island as we can understand it. Similarly, Alvin Plantinga tendered a reply to Gaunilo's remonstrance by arguing that the concept of "that than which nothing greater can be conceived" is not applicable to an island, or any other object, in the special way that it is applicable to God.

[ citation needed ] Plantinga defends Anselm's proof by averring that it applies exclusively to Him. A necessary being is both existent and the greatest conceivable and greatest possible being. Only God, as Anselm defines him, meets all of those criteria and can, therefore, be dubbed a necessary being.

Another criticism of Gaunilo's argument points out that, whereas God is that thing than which no greater can be conceived, Gaunilo's is that island than which no greater can be conceived.  Thus, while no island may exceed it in greatness, it is perfectly reasonable to suppose that some non-island could. "Consequently", wrote William L. Rowe in his summary of the polemic, "if we follow Anselm's reasoning exactly, it does not appear that we can derive an absurdity from the supposition that the island than which none greater is possible does not exist." [ 5 ] Gaunilo's refutation is also criticized on the grounds that it misinterprets the argument set forth by Anselm. Richard Campbell contends that the argument criticized by Gaunilo is incomplete because it represents only one of three stages of a larger argument, one that is not meant to be read as a proof for God but rather as the basis for the following chapter. He argues that since Anselm himself says in Reply I that if something than which a greater cannot be thought exists, it cannot be thought not to exist, a defender of Gaunilo must allow that this island cannot be thought not to exist. But in Proslogion III Anselm deduces that God exists from the premise that "Whatever is other than You can be thought not to exist". Thus, altering Anselm's formula but adopting his premises, entails that the Lost Island both can and cannot be thought not to exist. Since that is a contradiction, it follows that it is not legitimate to alter Anselm's formula.

[ 6 ] The remainder of Gaunilo's text [ edit ] Gaunilo's treatise is divided into eight sections. The first seven of these sections are criticisms of Anselm's argument from the point of view of a rational non-believer. The last section (8) is simply praise for the remaining chapters of the Proslogion . The full title of Gaunilo's treatise is What Someone in Behalf of the Fool Replies to these Arguments – this means Gaunilo does not write as a fellow Christian who believes; rather, he pretends to be a rational non-believer. The scholarly debate has focused on section 6 (the Lost Island Refutation). Very few scholars engage with the remaining sections of Gaunilo's text.

[ citation needed ] Notes [ edit ] ^ The title of Gaunilo's book repeats Anselm's use of the fool mentioned in the Psalms who doubts the existence of God (Psalm 14:1 and Psalm 53:1).

References [ edit ] ^ EB (1878) , p. 93.

^ An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion , Michael J. Murray and Michael Cannon Rea, Cambridge University Press , 2008, pg. 126.

^ The History of Theology: Middle Ages , Giulio D'Onofrio and Basil Studer, Liturgical Press, 2008, pg. 155.

^ Anselm of Canterbury: The beauty of Theology , David S. Hogg, Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2004, pg. 104.

^ William L. Rowe: "The Ontological Argument" in Feinberg; Shafer-Landau: Reason & Responsibility , p. 15.

^ Campbell, Richard (2018).

Rethinking Anselm's Arguments: A Vindication of his Proof of the Existence of God . Brill. pp.

300– 324.

Bibliography [ edit ] "Anselm" , Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. II (9th ed.), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1878, pp.

91– 93 .

Feinberg, Joel ; Shafer-Landau, Russ : Reason & Responsibility: Readings in Some Basic Problems of Philosophy: Thirteenth Edition.

(Thomson Wadsworth, 2008).

Imbrisevic, Miroslav : Gaunilo's Cogito Argument in The Saint Anselm Journal, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2007.

Losoncy, Thomas : Anselm's response to Gaunilo's Dilemma. An insight into the notion of 'Being' operative in the  Proslogion in The New Scholasticism, Vol. 56, No. 207, 1982, p. 207-216.

Losoncy, Thomas : The Anselm-Gaunilo Dispute about Man's Knowledge of God's Existence: An Examination in 25 Years of Anselm Studies (1969–1994): Review and Critique of Recent Scholarly Views, ed. Frederick van Fleteren and Joseph C. Schnaubelt, (Lampeter: The Edwin Mellen Press, 1996), pp. 161–181.

External links [ edit ] In Behalf of the Fool , Medieval Sourcebook , Fordham University.

v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Chile Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐pb56z
Cached time: 20250812020736
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.406 seconds
Real time usage: 0.526 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1682/1000000
Revision size: 9680/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 84082/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3360/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 24752/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.259/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6176493/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  425.958      1 -total
 23.46%   99.943      4 Template:Navbox
 22.11%   94.164      1 Template:Philosophy_of_religion
 21.01%   89.499      2 Template:Reflist
 17.70%   75.383      1 Template:Cite_book
 13.28%   56.579      1 Template:Short_description
 12.94%   55.124      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 12.04%   51.288      1 Template:Ambox
 10.24%   43.639      1 Template:Authority_control
  9.01%   38.370      3 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2443077:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020736 and revision id 1283084645. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaunilo_of_Marmoutiers&oldid=1283084645 " Categories : French Benedictines Scholastic philosophers 11th-century French writers French philosophers of religion French male writers Empiricists 11th-century writers in Latin 11th-century French philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 10:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaunilo of Marmoutiers 8 languages Add topic

