Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Journals 2 Sources 3 Scope 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents SPIN bibliographic database Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from SPIN (database) ) SPIN  (Searchable Physics Information Notices) Producer American Institute of Physics (AIP) (USA, Russia, Ukraine) Languages English, Russian , Ukrainian Access Providers Dialog , AIP website , SPIE Digital Library Coverage Disciplines Physics, Astronomy, Mathematics, Geophysics, Geosciences, Nuclear Science, Science & Technology Record depth Word, Phrase, Abstract, Author and Author affiliations, Descriptor, Errata (coden, or date, or volume) Identifier, Title, Astronomical objects, CODEN, Conference (location, or title, or year), Journal name, and more...

Format coverage Journal Articles, Book Reviews, Conferences, Meetings, Patents, Symposia Temporal coverage 1975 to the present Geospatial coverage International No.

of records over 1.5 million Update frequency Weekly Print edition Print title No print counterparts Links Website scitation .aip .org /jhtml /scitation /coverage .jsp SPIN (Searchable Physics Information Notices) bibliographic database is an indexing and abstracting service produced by the American Institute of Physics (AIP). The content focus of SPIN is described as the most significant areas of physics research . This type of literature coverage spans the major physical science journals and magazines. Major conference proceedings that are reported by the American Institute of Physics, member societies, as well as affiliated organizations are also included as part of this database. References, or citations, provide access to more than 1.5 million articles as of 2010.

SPIN has no print counterpart.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Journals [ edit ] Delivery of timely indexing and abstracting is for, what are deemed to be, the significant or important physics and astronomy journals from the United States , Russia , and Ukraine . Citations for journal articles are derived from original publications of the AIP , which includes published translated works. At the same time, citations are included from member societies, and selectively chosen American journals. Citations become typically available online on the same date as the corresponding journal article.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Sources [ edit ] Overall, the source citations are derived from material published by the AIP and member societies,  which are English-speaking, Russian, and Ukrainian journals and conference proceedings. Certain American physics-related articles are also sources of citations. About 60 journals have cover to cover indexing, and about 100 journals, overall, are indexed.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Scope [ edit ] Subject coverage encompasses the following: [ 1 ] Applied physics , Electromagnetic technology, Microelectronics Atomic physics and Molecular physics Biological physics and Medical physics Classical physics and Quantum physics Condensed matter physics Elementary particle physics General physics , Optics , Acoustics , and Fluid dynamics Geophysics , Astronomy , Astrophysics Materials science Nuclear physics Plasma physics Physical chemistry See also [ edit ] List of academic databases and search engines References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Indexes and Databases" .

SPIN: Searchable Physics Information Notices . Raymond H. Fogler Library, The University of Maine. October 2010 . Retrieved 2010-07-12 .

^ a b "What is the SPIN database?" .

Information about SPIN .

American Institute of Physics . July 2010. Archived from the original on 2013-03-18 . Retrieved 2010-07-12 .

^ "SPIN Publication Coverage" .

Complete list of publications covered and coverage years . American Institute of Physics. July 2010. Archived from the original on February 11, 2010 . Retrieved 2010-07-12 .

External links [ edit ] AIP'S SPIN Database Reaches One Million Records .  American Institute of Physics. March 1, 2002.

Can everything published in physics can be found in the arXiv ?. The Scholarly Kitchen.

Society for Scholarly Publishing . June, 2010.

AIP partnerships (society publishing). July 2010.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SPIN_bibliographic_database&oldid=1250766626 " Categories : Bibliographic databases and indexes Citation indices Scientific databases This page was last edited on 12 October 2024, at 11:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents SPIN bibliographic database Add languages Add topic

