Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 Philosophy 4 Editions 5 Notes 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Syrianus 22 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th-century Greek Neoplatonist philosopher For the 11th-century Byzantine commander, see Sirianus .

Syrianus Born Alexandria Died c.

437 A.D.

Athens Philosophical work School Neoplatonism Syrianus ( Ancient Greek : Συριανός , Syrianos ; died c. 437 A.D.) was a Greek Neoplatonist philosopher , and head of Plato 's Academy in Athens , succeeding his teacher Plutarch of Athens in 431/432 A.D. He is important as the teacher of Proclus , and, like Plutarch and Proclus, as a commentator on Plato and Aristotle . His best-known extant work is a commentary on the Metaphysics of Aristotle. He is said to have written also on the De Caelo and the De Interpretatione of Aristotle and on Plato's Timaeus .

Life [ edit ] He was a native of Alexandria , Egypt and the son of Philoxenus. We know little of his personal history, but that he came to Athens , and studied with great zeal under Plutarch of Athens , the head of the Neoplatonist school, who regarded him with great admiration and affection, and appointed him as his successor. He is important as the teacher of Proclus and Hermias . Proclus regarded him with the greatest veneration, and gave directions that at his death he should be buried in the same tomb with Themistius .

Writings [ edit ] Only a little remains of the writings of Syrianus, the surviving works are: A Commentary on Aristotle's Metaphysics .

Commentaries on two rhetorical works by Hermogenes .

Lectures on Plato's Phaedrus , preserved by Hermias .

Among the lost works, Syrianus wrote commentaries on Aristotle 's De Caelo and De Interpretatione . We learn from the commentary of Proclus on the Timaeus of Plato that Syrianus also wrote a commentary on the same book. Syrianus also wrote works on The Theology of Orpheus , and On the Harmony of Orpheus, Pythagoras and Plato with the Oracles .

Theodorus Meliteniota , in his Prooemium in Astronomiam , mentions commentaries on the Magna Syntaxis of Ptolemy by the philosopher Syrianus. The Suda attributes several works to Syrianus, but which are in fact the works of Proclus.

[ 1 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e Syrianus' philosophical significance lies in the field of metaphysics and the exegesis of Plato. He is important in expanding the details of the Neoplatonist metaphysical system begun by Iamblichus and
most completely delineated by Proclus.

[ 2 ] The most valuable remains that we possess are the commentaries on the Metaphysics of Aristotle . In explaining the propositions of Aristotle, he appends the views held by the Neoplatonist school on the subject in hand, and endeavours to establish the latter against the former. In his Metaphysics commentary Syrianus explains his view of the Monad and the Dyad in a number of places. The One is immediately followed by a supreme monad and dyad. Syrianus describes the monad as masculine and the dyad as feminine. He employs the doctrine of the two cosmic principles to explain the origin of evil. He denies that there are Platonic forms of things which are evil or base. The dyad is indirectly responsible for evil. Syrianus attributes the existence of evil to otherness and plurality, which he believes the dyad is directly responsible for creating.

[ 2 ] One of his fundamental principles is that it is a proposition of general applicability that the same cannot be both affirmed and denied at the same time of the same thing; but that in any sense involving the truth of either the affirmation or the denial of a proposition, it applies only to existing things, but not to that which transcends speech and knowledge, for this admits neither of affirmation nor of denial, since every assertion respecting it must be false.

[ 3 ] On the whole, the doctrines laid down in this work are those of the Neoplatonist school.

Editions [ edit ] J. Dillon, D. O'Meara, (2006), Syrianus: On Aristotle Metaphysics 13-14 . Duckworth.

D. O'Meara, J. Dillon, (2008), Syrianus: On Aristotle Metaphysics 3-4 . Duckworth.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Suda, Proklos .

^ a b Monad And Dyad As Cosmic Principles In Syrianus , Soul And The Structure Of Being In Late Neoplatonism , H.J. Blumenthal and A.C. Lloyd, Liverpool University Press , 1982, pp. 1–10.

^ Syrianus, In Met.

ii. fol. 13, b.

Sources [ edit ] Angela Longo (ed.), Syrianus et la métaphysique de l'antiquité tardive: actes du colloque international, Université de Gèneve, 29 septembre-1er octobre 2006.

(Napoli, Bibliopolis, 2009) (Elenchos, 51).

Sarah Klitenic Wear, The Teachings of Syrianus on Plato's Timaeus and Parmenides. Ancient Mediterranean and Medieval Texts and Contexts (Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2011) (Studies in Platonism, Neoplatonism and the Platonic tradition, 10).

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870).

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) External links [ edit ] Wildberg, Christian.

"Syrianus" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Raw Greek OCR of Rabe's Teubner edition of Syrianus' Commentaria in Hermogenem at the Lace project of Mount Allison University : vol. 1 v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Syrianus&oldid=1291032779 " Categories : 5th-century Greek philosophers Greek-language commentators on Aristotle Greek-language commentators on Plato Greek educators Neoplatonists in Athens 437 deaths 5th-century Byzantine writers Late-Roman-era pagans Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM with no wstitle or title parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 17:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Syrianus 22 languages Add topic

