Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Archaeological excavations 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Nikōnion 6 languages Ελληνικά Español Français Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 46°11′0″N 30°26′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 46.18333°N 30.43694°E ﻿ / 46.18333; 30.43694 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Nikonion ) Ancient Greek city This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Nikōnion" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Nikōnion / Nikōnia Νικώνιον / Νικωνία Coins from Nikōnion bearing the name of Scyles Shown within Ukraine Location Roksolany, Odesa Oblast , Ukraine Coordinates 46°11′0″N 30°26′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 46.18333°N 30.43694°E ﻿ / 46.18333; 30.43694 Type Settlement Area 7 ha (17 acres) History Builder Settlers from Miletus Founded Second half of the 6th century BC Abandoned Middle of the 3rd century AD Periods Archaic Greek to Roman Imperial Cultures Greek Site notes Condition Ruined and partially submerged Public access Yes Immovable Monument of National Significance of Ukraine Official name Городище Роксолани - стародавнє місто Ніконій ( Roksolany hillfort - the ancient city of Nikonion ) Type Archaeology Reference no.

150018-Н Nikōnion ( Ancient Greek : Νικώνιον ; Latin : Niconium ) and Nikōnia ( Ancient Greek : Νικωνία ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] was an ancient Greek city on the east bank of the Dniester estuary. Its ruins are located 300 meters to the northwest of the modern village Roksolany, in the Odesa Raion of the Odesa Oblast , Ukraine .

History [ edit ] The site of Nikōnion Nikōnion was founded in the second half of the 6th century BC by colonists from Miletus .

[ 4 ] On the opposite bank of the river other Milesian colonists had already founded Tyras . The city was founded at a time when many nomadic tribes were beginning to settle in the areas north of the Black Sea .

[ 5 ] The Greeks settled in this area because of the plentiful fishing and the opportunity to trade with these barbarian settlers.

[ 6 ] Stone construction in the city began in the 5th century. At the turn of the 3rd-2nd centuries BC, [ citation needed ] the city was destroyed, an event which was associated with the Macedonian commander Zopyrion , associate of Alexander the Great . In the 1st century BC, the size of the city increased from the previous period.

[ citation needed ] Nikōnion was abandoned permanently in the middle of the third century AD when the area was invaded by the Goths during the Great Migrations .

[ 4 ] Archaeological excavations [ edit ] The city was located on a plateau which now descends steeply into the Dniestr estuary, which has submerged the lower terrace of the city. The size of the city is estimated to be 7 hectares (17 acres).

[ 4 ] According to the findings of excavations in the area, it appears that in the 5th-4th centuries BC, the money in Nikōnion mostly consisted of Histrian coins.

[ 7 ] It is also possible that Nikōnion itself minted coins, because some of the coins discovered during excavation are unique in appearance and bear the name of the Scythian king Scyles , who had established a protectorate over Nikōnion and other settlements in the area and may have been buried in the city.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ Stephanus of Byzantium, Ethnica, §N476.1 ^ Suda Encyclopedia, §nu.411 ^ Strabo, Geography, §7.3.16 ^ a b c Sekerskaya, N. M. (2001). "Nikonion". In Tsetskhladze, Gocha R. (ed.).

North Pontic Archaeology: Recent Discoveries and Studies . Colloquia Pontica. Vol. 6. Leiden: Brill. pp.

67– 90.

ISBN 9789004120419 .

^ Sinor, Denis (1990).

The Cambridge history of early Inner Asia . Cambridge University Press. p. 104.

ISBN 978-0-521-24304-9 .

^ Long, George (1866).

The Decline of the Roman Republic . Bell & Daldy. p. 261 . Retrieved 21 January 2012 .

^ American Numismatic Society (1972).

Numismatic literature . American Numismatic Society . Retrieved 21 January 2012 .

^ Метелкин, Н. В. (2006).

Сокровища и ненайденые клады Украины (К) . Olma Media Group. p. 56.

ISBN 978-5-373-00246-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ochotnikov, Sergej B. (2006). "The Chorai of the Ancient Cities in the Lower Dniester Area (6th century BC–3rd century AD)". In Bilde, Pia Guldager; Stolba, Vladimir F. (eds.).

Surveying the Greek Chora. The Black Sea Region in a Comparative Perspective . Black Sea Studies. Vol. 4. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press. pp.

81– 98.

ISBN 978-87-7934-2385 .

Mielczarek, Mariusz (2005). Alfaro, Carmen; Marcos, Carmen; Otero, Paloma (eds.).

Coinage of Nikonion. Greek bronze cast coins between Istrus and Olbia (PDF) . Proceedings of the 13th International Numismatics Congress, Madrid, 2003. pp.

273– 276.

А.Г Загинайло П. О. Карышковский . Монеты cкифского царя Скила [ Coins of Scythian King Scylus ] // Нумизматические исследования по истории Юго-Восточной Европы: Сборник научых трудов. –  Кишинёв: Штиинца, 1990. – С. 3 – 15 Загинайло А.Г. Литые монеты царя Скила. // Древнее Причерноморье. – Одесса, 1990. – С. 64-71.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nikonion .

Description of excavations in Niconium by the Nicolaus Copernicus University in 2012, including pictures Одесский музей нумизматики. Никоний Odesa State Museum of Archaeology v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF Geographic Pleiades Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nikōnion&oldid=1266849839 " Categories : Milesian Pontic colonies Ancient history of Ukraine Former populated places in Eastern Europe Greek colonies on the Black Sea coast Archaeological sites in Ukraine Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2012 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Ukrainian-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 January 2025, at 14:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nikōnion 6 languages Add topic

