Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Description 3 Measurement procedure 4 Issues 5 Other snow gauges Toggle Other snow gauges subsection 5.1 Automated 5.2 Snow pillow 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Snow gauge 9 languages Čeština Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Kurdî 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Instrument for measuring snowfall This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Snow gauge" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A snow gauge A snow gauge is a type of instrument used by meteorologists and hydrologists to gather and measure the amount of solid precipitation (as opposed to liquid precipitation, which is measured by a rain gauge ) over a set period of time.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] The first use of snow gauges were precipitation gauges that was widely used in 1247 during the Southern Song dynasty to gather meteorological data. The Song Chinese mathematician and inventor Qin Jiushao records the use of gathering rain and snowfall measurements in the Song mathematical treatise Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections . The book discusses the use of large conical or barrel-shaped snow gauges made from bamboo situated in mountain passes and uplands, which are speculated to be first referenced to snow measurement.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Description [ edit ] The snow gauge consists of two parts: a copper catchment container; and the funnel-shaped gauge itself. The actual gauge is mounted on a pipe outdoors and is approximately 1.5 m (150 cm; 59 in; 4 ft 11 in) in height, while the container is 51.5 cm (20.3 in; 1 ft 8.3 in) in length.

[ citation needed ] Measurement procedure [ edit ] When snow is collected, the container is removed and replaced with a spare one. The snow is then melted while it is still in the container, and then poured into a glass measuring graduate. While the depth of snow is normally measured in centimetres , the measurement of melted snow ( water equivalent ) is in millimetres .

[ citation needed ] An estimate of the snow depth can be obtained by multiplying the water equivalent by a factor of 10. This multiplier can vary over a wide range, however, with many [ who?

] citing a range from 5 to 30, while the National Snow and Ice Data Center has quoted a range as wide as from 3 to 100. Any proposed factor depends on the water content of the snow (how "dry" it is), so this at best provides only a rough estimate of snow depth.

[ citation needed ] Issues [ edit ] The snow gauge suffers from the same problem as that of the rain gauge when conditions are windy. If the wind is strong enough, then the snow may be blown across the wind gauge, and the amount of snow fallen will be under-reported. However, due to the shape and size of the funnel, this is a minor problem.

If the wind is very strong and a blizzard occurs, then extra snow may be blown into the gauge, and the amount of snow fallen will be over-reported. In this case the observer must judge how much of the water is from snow blown into the container and how much is fallen snow.

Another problem occurs when both snow and rain fall before the observer has time to change the gauge. In all of these cases the observer must judge how much of the water is snow and how much is rain.

Other snow gauges [ edit ] Automated [ edit ] Remote reading gauges, such as used by weather stations, work similarly to rain gauges. They have a large catch area (such as a drum sawn in half, top to bottom) which collects snow until a given weight is collected. When this critical weight is reached, it tips and empties the snow catch. This dumping trips a switch, sending a signal. The collection then repeats. If the catch container has a heater in it, it measures the snow weight accurately. It is also possible to tip based on volume instead of weight, with appropriate fill sensing.

Snow pillow [ edit ] Another snow sensor called a snow pillow looks like a round bag lying on the ground. Inside the pillow is a liquid such as an environmentally safe [ citation needed ] antifreeze .  Usually the snow pillow will be connected to a manometer .  The manometer reading will vary based on how much snow is sitting on the pillow.  This type of sensor works well for many locations but is more difficult to use in areas of hard blowing snow.

References [ edit ] ^ Strangeways, Ian (2011).

Precipitation: Theory, Measurement and Distribution . Cambridge University Press (published April 14, 2011). p. 140.

ISBN 978-0521172929 .

^ Selin, Helaine (2008).

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures (2nd ed.). Springer (published April 16, 2008). p. 736.

ISBN 978-1402045592 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Snow gauge .

v t e Earth-based meteorological equipment and instrumentation Anemometer Atmometer Barograph Barometer Ceiling balloon Ceiling projector Ceilometer Dark adaptor goggles Dewcell Disdrometer Dropsonde Field mill Heat flux sensor Hygrometer Ice accretion indicator Lidar Lightning detector Nephelometer Nephoscope Pan evaporation Pyranometer Pyrheliometer Present weather sensor Radiosonde Rain gauge Snow gauge Snowboard Snow pillow SODAR Solarimeter Sounding rocket Stevenson screen Sunshine recorder Tethersonde Thermo-hygrograph Thermometer Tide gauge Transmissometer Weather balloon Weather buoy Weather radar Weather vane Whole sky camera Wind profiler Windsock Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Snow_gauge&oldid=1273816681 " Categories : Chinese inventions Meteorological instrumentation and equipment Snow Hydrology instrumentation 13th-century inventions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2022 Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 February 2025, at 04:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Snow gauge 9 languages Add topic

