Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Kenneth Frampton 2 William J. R. Curtis and Suha Ozkan 3 Alexander Tzonis and Liane Lefaivre 4 Critical regionalist architects 5 Criticism 6 In cultural studies 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Critical regionalism 18 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Italiano עברית ქართული 日本語 Piemontèis Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Approach to architecture Critical regionalism is an approach to architecture that strives to counter the placelessness and lack of identity of the International Style , but also rejects the whimsical individualism and ornamentation of Postmodern architecture . The stylings of critical regionalism seek to provide an architecture rooted in the modern tradition, but tied to geographical and cultural context. Critical regionalism is not simply regionalism in the sense of vernacular architecture . It is a progressive approach to design that seeks to mediate between the global and the local languages of architecture.

The phrase "critical regionalism" was first presented in 1981, in ‘The Grid and the Pathway,’ an essay published in Architecture in Greece, by the architectural theorists Alexander Tzonis and Liane Lefaivre and, with a slightly different meaning, by the historian-theorist Kenneth Frampton . Sri Lankan Architect Minnette De Silva was one of the pioneers in practicing this architecture style in the 1950s and termed it 'Regional Modernism'.

[ 1 ] Critical Regionalists thus hold that both modern and post-modern architecture are "deeply problematic".

[ 2 ] Kenneth Frampton [ edit ] In "Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six points for an architecture of resistance", Frampton recalls Paul Ricoeur 's "how to become modern and to return to sources; how to revive an old, dormant civilization and take part in universal civilization". According to Frampton's proposal, critical regionalism should adopt modern architecture, critically, for its universal progressive qualities but at the same time value should be placed on the geographical context of the building. Emphasis, Frampton says, should be on topography, climate, light; on tectonic form rather than on scenography (i.e. painting theatrical scenery) and should be on the sense of touch rather than visual sense. Frampton draws on phenomenology for his argument.

[ 3 ] Two examples Frampton briefly discusses are Jørn Utzon and Alvar Aalto . In Frampton's view, Utzon's Bagsværd Church (1973–6), near Copenhagen is a self-conscious synthesis between universal civilization and world culture. This is revealed by the rational, modular, neutral and economic, partly prefabricated concrete outer shell (i.e. universal civilization) versus the specially designed, 'uneconomic', organic, reinforced concrete shell of the interior, signifying with its manipulation of light sacred space and 'multiple cross-cultural references', which Frampton sees no precedent for in Western culture, but rather in the Chinese pagoda roof (i.e. world culture). In the case of Aalto, Frampton discusses the red brick Säynätsalo Town Hall (1952), where, he argues, there is a resistance to universal technology and vision, affected by using the tactile qualities of the building's materials.  He notes, for instance, feeling the contrast between the friction of the brick surface of the stairs and the springy wooden floor of the council chamber.

In addition to his own writings on the topic, Frampton has furthered the intellectual reach of these ideas through contributions, in the form of introductions, prefaces and forewords, written for publications on architects and architectural practices that conform with the ethics of critical regionalism.

[ 4 ] Bagsværd Church , Denmark, designed by Jørn Utzon in 1968 Säynätsalo Town Hall (1952), Finland William J. R. Curtis and Suha Ozkan [ edit ] There have been two different perceptions of Regionalism in architecture. One of which is of Western writers, like Curtis , whose definitions are not encompassing enough to analyse architectural styles especially in the last two centuries in the Islamic countries, like Iran. However, Ozkan's definition of Regionalism is more objective.

[ 5 ] Alexander Tzonis and Liane Lefaivre [ edit ] According to Alexander Tzonis and Liane Lefaivre , critical regionalism need not directly draw from the context; rather elements can be stripped of context but used in unfamiliar ways. Here the aim is to make evident a disruption and loss of place, that is already a fait accompli , through reflection and self-evaluation.

Critical regionalist architects [ edit ] Alexander Tzonis In addition to Aalto and Utzon, the following architects have used Critical Regionalism (in the Frampton sense) in their work: Álvaro Siza Vieira , Studio Granda , Mario Botta , Eduardo Souto de Moura , Mahesh Naik, Sahil Ahmed, Mazharul Islam , B. V. Doshi , Max Strang , Charles Correa , Christopher Benninger , Jorge Ferreira Chaves , Rafael Moneo , Geoffrey Bawa , Raj Rewal , Dharmesh Vadavala, Ashok "Bihari" Lall Neelkanth Chhaya (Kaka), P.K.Das, Soumitro Ghosh, Nisha Mathew Ghosh, Ngô Viết Thụ , Tadao Ando , Mack Scogin / Merrill Elam, Glenn Murcutt , Johnsen Schmaling Architects , Ken Yeang , Philippe Madec, William S.W. Lim , Tay Kheng Soon, WOHA Architects (Singapore), Juhani Pallasmaa , Wang Shu , Juha Leiviskä , Peter Zumthor , Carlo Scarpa , Miller | Hull, Tan Hock Beng. Peter Stutchbury, Lake Flato, Rick Joy , Tom Kundig , and Sverre Fehn . Suzana & Dimitris Antonakakis are the two Greek architects for whom the term was first used by Alexander Tzonis and Liane Lefaivre .

[ 6 ] Critical regionalism has developed into unique sub-styles across the world.

Glenn Murcutt 's simple vernacular architectural style is representative of an Australian variant to critical regionalism. In Singapore , WOHA has developed a unique architectural vocabulary based on an appreciation of the local climate and culture.

[ citation needed ] Criticism [ edit ] Although supportive of Critical Regionalism's attempt to adapt design to local climate, site conditions, and locally available materials, considering it an improvement in relation to the International Style of Modernism, architecture theorist Nikos Salingaros criticizes its anti-regional and anti-traditional tendencies derived from Critical Theory . Nikos Salingaros states that "In practice, critical regionalism willfully perpetuates the form languages of Modernism. Our understanding, however, is that regionalism has to protect and re-use traditional form languages. True regionalism has to free itself from any global form language imposed from above, and from any forces of uniformization and conformity." [ 7 ] In cultural studies [ edit ] Subsequently, the phrase "critical regionalism" has also been used in cultural studies, literary studies, and political theory, specifically in the work of Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak . In her 2007 work "Who Sings the Nation-State?", co-authored with Judith Butler , Spivak proposes a deconstructive alternative to nationalism that is predicated on the deconstruction of borders and rigid national identity.

[ 8 ] Douglas Reichert Powell's book Critical Regionalism: Connecting Politics and Culture in the American Landscape (2007) traces the trajectory of the term critical regionalism from its original use in architectural theory to its inclusion in literary, cultural, and political studies and proposes a methodology based on the intersection of those fields.

See also [ edit ] Contextual architecture Critical theory Neo-Historicism Notes [ edit ] ^ Pinto, Shiromi.

"Minnette de Silva (1918-1998)" .

Architectural Review . Retrieved 2019-12-23 .

^ Hal Foster, "Postmodernism: A Preface", in "Anti-Aesthetic. Essays on Postmodern Culture." Seattle: Bay Press, 1983.

ISBN 0-941920-01-1 ^ Kenneth Frampton, "Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six points for an architecture of resistance", in "Anti-Aesthetic. Essays on Postmodern Culture." Seattle: Bay Press, 1983.

ISBN 0-941920-01-1 ^ Leach, Andrew; Sully, Nicole (2019). "Frampton's forewords, etc.: an introduction".

Oase (103: Critical Regionalism Revisited): 105– 113.

^ "The Theoretical Inapplicability of Regionalism to Analysing Architectural Aspects of Islamic Shrines in Iran in the Last Two Centuries" .

The Collection of Articles of the International Congress of Imam's Descendants (Imamzadegan) .

4 . Esfahan, Iran: The Charity Organisation: 16– 32. 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 13, 2013.

^ Giamarelos, Stylianos (2022).

Resisting Postmodern Architecture: Critical Regionalism before Globalisation . London: UCL Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.14324/111.9781800081338 ^ "Unified Architectural Theory: Chapter 6" .

ArchDaily . 2014-07-26 . Retrieved 2021-01-12 .

^ "Spivak on Regionalism" . Archived from the original on 2009-02-21 . Retrieved 2009-11-19 .

References [ edit ] Vincent B. Canizaro," Architectural Regionalism: Collected Writings on Place, Identity, Modernity, and Tradition," (2007) Princeton Architectural Press.

Kenneth Frampton, "Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six Points for an Architecture of Resistance", in The Anti-Aesthetic. Essays on Postmodern Culture (1983) edited by Hal Foster, Bay Press, Seattle.

Stylianos Giamarelos (2022).

Resisting Postmodern Architecture: Critical Regionalism before Globalisation . London: UCL Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.14324/111.9781800081338 Alex Tzonis and Liliane Lefaivre, "The grid and the pathway. An introduction to the work of Dimitris and Suzana Antonakakis", Architecture in Greece (1981) 15, Athens.

Judith Butler and Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, "Who Sings the Nation-State?: Language, Politics, Belonging" (2007), Seagull Books.

Douglas Powell, Critical Regionalism: Connecting Politics and Culture in the American Landscape (2007), University of North Carolina Press.

Thorsten Botz-Bornstein , "Is Critical Regionalist Philosophy Possible? Some Meta-Philosophical Considerations" in Comparative and Continental Philosophy (2010) 2:1.

Thorsten Botz-Bornstein , Transcultural Architecture: Limits and Opportunities of Critical Regionalism (2015), Ashgate.

Tom Avermaete, Veronique Patteeuw, Hans Teerds, Lea-Catherine Szacka (eds), Oase #103: Critical Regionalism Revisited, (2019), ISBN 9789462084865 .

External links [ edit ] Critical Analysis of "Towards a Critical Regionalism" The Theoretical Inapplicability of Regionalism Alexander Tzonis Authorised website v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory v t e Genres of modern architecture Alphabetically Art Deco Art Nouveau Bauhaus Blobitecture Brutalism Bowellism Constructivism Contemporary Critical regionalism De Stijl Deconstructivism Expressionism Functionalism Futurism Googie High-tech International style Metabolism Mid-Century modern Modernisme Monumentalism Neo-Futurism Neomodern New Classical New Khmer New Objectivity Organicism Postconstructivism Postmodernism PWA Moderne Prairie School Rationalist-Fascist Rondocubism Stalinist Streamline Moderne Stripped Classicism Structuralism Sustainable Tropical By start year / decade Modernisme (1888–1911) Art Nouveau (1890–1910) Prairie School (1890s–1920s) Expressionism (1910–) Stripped Classicism (1913–) De Stijl (1917–1931) Bauhaus (1919–1933) Constructivism (1920–1932) Rondocubism (1921–1929) New Objectivity (1922–1933) Streamline Moderne (1925–1950) Rationalist-Fascist (1920s–1930s) International style (1920s–) Functionalism (1920s–1970s) Futurism (1920s–) Organicism (1920s–) Art Deco (1910–1939) Postconstructivism (1930s) PWA Moderne (1933–1944) Stalinist (1930s–1950s) Googie (1930s–1970) Mid-century modern (1933–1969) Brutalism (1940s–late 1970s) Tropical (1958–) New Khmer (1953–1970) Structuralism (1959–) Metabolism (1959–) Postmodernism (1960s–) Blobitecture (1960s–) Neo-futurism (1960s–) High-tech (1970s–) Critical regionalism (1980s–) Deconstructivism (1980s–) Neomodern (1990s–) New Classical (1990s–) Contemporary (2000s–) Architecture portal Related articles v t e Architecture by region Architecture of Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini (Swaziland) Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire) Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Mayotte Réunion St. Helena Western Sahara (SADR) Architecture of Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Burma Cambodia China Hong Kong Macau Cyprus East Timor Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel See also Palestinian territories Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Architecture of Europe Albania Andorra Austria Azerbaijan 1 Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia 1 Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia 1 San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey 1 Ukraine United Kingdom Dependencies , autonomies and other territories Abkhazia 1 Adjara 1 Åland Akrotiri and Dhekelia Crimea Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Nagorno-Karabakh 1 Nakhichevan 1 Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus 1 1 Has significant territory in Asia.

Architecture of North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Navassa Island Netherlands Antilles Puerto Rico Saint-Pierre and Miquelon Turks and Caicos Islands U.S. Virgin Islands Architecture of Oceania Australia Australia Norfolk Island Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Melanesia East Timor Fiji New Caledonia Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu Micronesia Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Northern Mariana Islands Federated States of Micronesia Nauru Palau Polynesia American Samoa Cook Islands French Polynesia New Zealand Niue Pitcairn Samoa Tokelau Tonga Tuvalu Wallis and Futuna Architecture of South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Territories Aruba Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands v t e Architecture of the United States Native and indigenous Mound Builders Pueblo Colonial and post-colonial Creole First Period Colonial Georgian Dutch Colonial French Colonial German Colonial Spanish Colonial Territorial Early Republic Adam Federal Jeffersonian Neoclassical Antebellum Mid-19th century Greek Revival Italianate Gothic Revival Victorian Richardsonian Romanesque Second Empire American Renaissance Folk Stick style Queen Anne Shingle Late-19th to mid-20th century Art Deco ( Streamline Moderne ) American Craftsman American Foursquare Beaux-Arts California bungalow Chicago School Colonial Revival Dutch Colonial Revival Georgian Revival Googie International style Mayan Revival Mediterranean Revival Mission Revival Pueblo Revival Deco Prairie School Pre-war PWA Moderne Sarasota School of Architecture Rustic Spanish Colonial Revival Territorial Revival Tudor Revival Post–World War II Blobitecture Brutalist Deconstructivism Dingbat Earthship High-tech Mid-century modern Modern Neo-eclectic Neo-futurism Neomodern New Classical architecture Postmodern Ranch Shed style Tiny-house Usonian Building types and vernacular Adirondack Adobe Barabara Cape Cod Central-passage house Chickee Corn crib Cowboy church Critical regionalism Dogtrot house Earth lodge Hogan Hall and parlor house I-house Igloo Jacal Kiva Log cabin Longhouses Moki steps Plank house Platform mound Qargi Quiggly hole Ramada Saltbox Shotgun house Sipapu Skyscraper Sod house Sweat lodge Temples Tipi Town square Tupiq Wigwam Cities Atlanta Boston Buffalo Chicago Columbus Detroit Houston Jacksonville Kansas City Las Vegas Los Angeles Miami New Orleans New York City Omaha Philadelphia Portland San Antonio San Francisco Seattle Spokane St. Louis Washington, D.C.

States California Hawaii Texas Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critical_regionalism&oldid=1305838614 " Categories : Architectural theory 20th-century architectural styles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 10:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Critical regionalism 18 languages Add topic

