Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 Editions 4 Notes 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Dio Chrysostom 33 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Latina Magyar مصرى Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Picard Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek orator, writer, philosopher and historian (c. 40 – c. 115) Orations of Dio Chrysostom edited by Johann Jakob Reiske , 1784. Oration 1, ΠΕΡΙ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΑΣ ( On Kingship ) Dio Chrysostom ( / ˈ d iː oʊ ˈ k r ɪ s ə s t ə m , k r ɪ ˈ s ɒ s t ə m / ; Ancient Greek : Δίων Χρυσόστομος Dion Chrysostomos ), Dio of Prusa or Cocceianus Dio (c. 40 – c. 115 AD), was a Greek orator, writer, philosopher and historian of the Roman Empire in the 1st century AD.  Eighty of his Discourses (or Orations ; Λόγοι ) are extant, as well as a few letters, a mock essay Encomium on Hair , and a few other fragments. His sobriquet Chrysostom comes from the Greek chrysostomos , which literally means "golden-mouthed".

Life [ edit ] He was born at Prusa (now Bursa ), in the Roman province of Bithynia (now part of northwestern Turkey ). His father, Pasicrates, seems to have bestowed great care on his son Dio's education. At first he lived in Prusa, where he held important offices, composed speeches and other rhetorical and sophistical essays, and studied philosophy . The Stoic and Platonist philosophies, however, appear to have had the greatest charms for him, particularly the stoicism of Musonius Rufus .

He went to Rome during Vespasian 's reign (69–79 AD), by which time he seems to have got married and had a child.

[ 1 ] He became a critic of the Emperor Domitian , [ 2 ] who banished him from Rome, Italy , and Bithynia in 82 for advising one of the Emperor's conspiring relatives.

[ 3 ] He claims that, on the advice of the Delphic oracle , [ 4 ] he put on the clothes of a beggar , [ 5 ] and with nothing in his pocket but a copy of Plato 's Phaedo and Demosthenes 's On the False Embassy , he lived the life of a Cynic philosopher, undertaking a journey to the countries in the north and east of the Roman empire . He thus visited Thrace , Mysia , Scythia , and the country of the Getae , [ 6 ] giving orations.

[ 7 ] He was a friend of Nerva , [ 8 ] and when Domitian was murdered in 96 AD, Dio used his influence with the army stationed on the frontier in favour of Nerva.

[ citation needed ] Under Emperor Nerva's reign, his exile was ended, and he was able to return home to Prusa. He adopted the surname Cocceianus, [ 9 ] reflecting Nerva's nomen , Cocceius. Dio addressed his four Orations on Kingship to Nerva's successor, Trajan , and appears to have known the Emperor personally, claiming "I am perhaps as well acquainted with your character as anyone." [ 10 ] He knew Apollonius of Tyana and Euphrates of Tyre . In his later life Dio had considerable status in Prusa, and Pliny the Younger reports that he was involved in a lawsuit about a civic building project around 111.

[ 9 ] He probably died a few years later.

Writings [ edit ] Dio Chrysostom was part of the Second Sophistic school of Greek philosophers, which reached its peak in the early 2nd century during the Antonine period. He was considered one of the most eminent of the Greek rhetoricians and sophists by the ancients who wrote about him, such as Philostratus , [ 11 ] Synesius , [ 12 ] and Photius .

[ 13 ] This is confirmed by the eighty orations of his which are still extant, and which were the only ones known in the time of Photius. These orations appear to be written versions of his oral teaching, and are like essays on political, moral, and philosophical subjects. They include four orations on Kingship addressed to Trajan on the virtues of a sovereign; four on the character of Diogenes of Sinope , on the troubles to which men expose themselves by deserting the path of Nature , and on the difficulties which a sovereign has to encounter; essays on slavery and freedom ; on the means of attaining eminence as an orator ; political discourses addressed to various towns which he sometimes praises and sometimes blames, but always with moderation and wisdom; on subjects of ethics and practical philosophy, which he treats in a popular and attractive manner; and lastly, orations on mythical subjects and show-speeches. He argued strongly against permitting prostitution .

[ 14 ] Two orations of his (37 and 64) are now assigned to Favorinus .

[ citation needed ] Besides the eighty orations we have fragments of fifteen others, and there are extant also five letters under Dio's name.

He wrote many other philosophical and historical works, none of which survives. One of these works, Getica , was on the Getae , [ 11 ] which the Suda incorrectly attributes to Dio Cassius .

[ 15 ] Editions [ edit ] Editions and translations of the full oeuvre Hans von Arnim , Dionis Prusaensis quem uocant Chrysostomum quae exstant omnia (Berlin, 1893–1896).

Trans. J. W. Cohoon, Dio Chrysostom, I, Discourses 1–11 , 1932. Harvard University Press, Loeb Classical Library: Trans. J. W. Cohoon, Dio Chrysostom, II, Discourses 12–30 , 1939.

Trans. J. W. Cohoon & H. Lamar Crosby, Dio Chrysostom, III, Discourses 31–36 , 1940.

Trans. H. Lamar Crosby, Dio Chrysostom, IV, Discourses 37–60 , 1946.

Trans. H. Lamar Crosby, Dio Chrysostom, V, Discourses 61–80. Fragments. Letters , 1951.

Winfried Elliger, Dion Chrysostomos, Sämtliche Reden. Eingeleitet, übersetzt und erläutert (Zürich, 1967).

Editions, translations and commentaries of single works C. Bost-Pouderon, Dion Chrysostome. Trois discours aux villes (Orr. 33–35) (Salerne, 2006).

C. Bost–Pouderon (ed.), Dion de Pruse dit Dion Chrysostome. Oeuvres (Or. XXXIII–XXXVI (Paris, CUF, 2011).

Gustav Adolf Lehmann et al., Armut – Arbeit – Menschenwürde. Die Euböische Rede des Dion von Prusa [Discourse 7], introduction, critical edition, commentary, translation, and essays (Tübingen 2012).

Heinz-Günther Nesselrath (ed), Dio von Prusa. Der Philosoph und sein Bild [Discourses 54–55, 70–72], introduction, critical edition, commentary, translation, and essays by E. Amato et al. (Tübingen, 2009).

Anna Nieschler, Der Borysthenitikos des Dion von Prusa. Einleitung und Kommentar [Discourse 36], introduction and commentary (Stuttgart, 2024), ISBN 978-3-515-13681-5 .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

46.13 ^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

3.13 ^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

13.1 ^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

13.9 ^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

13.11 ^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

12.16 ^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

36 ; comp.

Orat.

13.11 ff.

^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

45.2 ^ a b Pliny, Epistles, 10.81 ^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

3.2 ^ a b Philostratus, Vitae sophistorum i.7 ^ Synesius, Dion ^ Photius, Bibl.

Cod. 209 ^ Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

vii.133‑152 ^ Suda, Dion Further reading [ edit ] Eugenio Amato, Xenophontis imitator fidelissimus. Studi su tradizione e fortuna erudite di Dione Crisostomo tra XVI e XIX secolo (Alessandria:  Edizioni dell'Orso, 2011) (Hellenica, 40).

Eugenio Amato, Traiani Praeceptor. Studi su biografia, cronologia e fortuna di Dione Crisostomo (Besansçon: PUFC, 2014).

T. Bekker-Nielsen, Urban Life and Local Politics in Roman Bithynia: The Small World of Dion Chrysostomos (Aarhus, 2008).

Aldo Brancacci, Rhetorike philosophousa. Dione Crisostomo nella cultura antica e bizantina (Napoli: Bibliopolis, 1986) (Elenchos, 11).

P. Desideri, Dione di Prusa (Messina-Firenze, 1978).

A. Gangloff, Dion Chrysostome et les mythes. Hellénisme, communication et philosophie politique (Grenoble, 2006).

B.F. Harris, "Dio of Prusa", in Aufstieg und Niedergang der Römischen Welt 2.33.5 (Berlin, 1991), 3853–3881.

C.P. Jones, The Roman World of Dio Chrysostom (Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1978).

Sidebottom, Harry (1996).

"Dio of Prusa and the Flavian Dynasty" .

The Classical Quarterly .

46 (2): 447– 456.

doi : 10.1093/cq/46.2.447 .

ISSN 0009-8388 .

JSTOR 639801 .

Simon Swain, Hellenism and Empire. Language, Classicism, and Power in the Greek World, AD 50–250 (Oxford, 1996), 187–241.

Simon Swain.

Dio Chrysostom: Politics, Letters, and Philosophy (Oxford, 2000).

Ventrella, Gianluca (2009).

"Dione di Prusa fu realmente esiliato? L'orazione tredicesima tra idealizzazione letteraria e reconstruzione storico-giuridica (con un'appendice di E. Amato)" .

Emerita .

77 (1): 33– 56.

doi : 10.3989/emerita.2009.v77.i1.305 .

Volpe, Paola; Ferrari, Franco, eds. (2001). "L' Euboico di Dione di Prusa: coscienza della crisi ed etica della filantropia".

Ricerche su Dione di Prusa . Naples: Luciano Editore. pp.

99– 153.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Dio Chrysostom .

Texts of Dio Complete works at LacusCurtius (English translation complete; some items in Greek also) Secondary material Dio Chrysostom at Livius.Org Introduction to the Loeb translation at LacusCurtius v t e Works of Dio Chrysostom On Kingship I On Kingship II On Kingship III On Kingship IV A Libyan Myth Diogenes or On Tyranny Euboean Oration Diogenes or On Virtue Diogenes or the Isthmian Oration Diogenes or on Servants Trojan Oration Olympic Oration or On Man's First Conception of God In Athens, on his Banishment On Slavery and Freedom I On Slavery and Freedom II On Pain and Distress of Spirit On Covetousness On Training for Public Speaking On the Author's Fondness for Listening On Retirement On Beauty Concerning Peace and War The Wise Man is Happy On Happiness On the Guiding Spirit On Deliberation On Symposia Melancomas II Melancomas I Charidemus Rhodian Oration To the Alexandrians First Tarsian Oration Second Tarsian Oration Oration Delivered in Celaenae in Phrygia Borysthenitic Oration Corinthian Oration * On Concord with the Nicaeans On Concord in Nicaea On Concord with Apameia To the Apameians Lecture in his Native City Political Oration in his Native City Of Friendship for his Native Land In Defence of his Relations with Prusa Against Mistreatment by his Fellow Citizens His Efforts to Beautify Prusa Political Oration in the Assembly Declining Office as Archon In Defence of his Record In Reply to Diodorus An Appraisal of the Tragic Triad On Homer On Socrates On Homer and Socrates On Kingship V Homer’s Portrayal of Nestor A Dialogue Between Achilles and Cheiron Philoctetes, a Paraphrase On the Story of Deïaneira Chryseïs On Kingship and Tyranny On Fortune I On Fortune II On Fortune III On Reputation On Popular Opinion On Opinion On Virtue On Philosophy On the Philosopher On Personal Appearance On Trust On Distrust On Law On Custom On Envy On Wealth On Freedom Encomium on Hair v t e Cynic philosophers Greek era Antisthenes Diogenes Onesicritus Monimus Philiscus Hegesias of Sinope Anaximenes of Lampsacus Crates Hipparchia Metrocles Cleomenes Bion Menippus Menedemus Cercidas Teles Meleager Roman era Favonius Demetrius Dio Chrysostom Agathobulus Demonax Peregrinus Proteus Theagenes Oenomaus Pancrates Crescens Heraclius Asclepiades Maximus I of Constantinople Horus Sallustius Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dio_Chrysostom&oldid=1298502900 " Categories : Works of Dio Chrysostom 40s births 115 deaths 1st-century Romans 2nd-century Romans 1st-century Greek philosophers 2nd-century Greek philosophers 1st-century historians 2nd-century historians Greek-language historians from the Roman Empire Roman-era Cynic philosophers Roman-era Sophists People from Bithynia Ancient Greeks in Rome Historians from Roman Anatolia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 22:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dio Chrysostom 33 languages Add topic

