Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties Toggle Properties subsection 1.1 Atomic structure 2 List of elements 3 s-block elements Toggle s-block elements subsection 3.1 Potassium 3.2 Calcium 4 d-block elements Toggle d-block elements subsection 4.1 Scandium 4.2 Titanium 4.3 Vanadium 4.4 Chromium 4.5 Manganese 4.6 Iron 4.7 Cobalt 4.8 Nickel 4.9 Copper 4.10 Zinc 5 p-block elements Toggle p-block elements subsection 5.1 Gallium 5.2 Germanium 5.3 Arsenic 5.4 Selenium 5.5 Bromine 5.6 Krypton 6 Biological role 7 References Toggle the table of contents Period 4 element 49 languages Afrikaans अंगिका العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা भोजपुरी Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano Latina Lombard Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fourth row in the periodic table of chemical elements Period 4 in the periodic table Hydrogen Helium Lithium Beryllium Boron Carbon Nitrogen Oxygen Fluorine Neon Sodium Magnesium Aluminium Silicon Phosphorus Sulfur Chlorine Argon Potassium Calcium Scandium Titanium Vanadium Chromium Manganese Iron Cobalt Nickel Copper Zinc Gallium Germanium Arsenic Selenium Bromine Krypton Rubidium Strontium Yttrium Zirconium Niobium Molybdenum Technetium Ruthenium Rhodium Palladium Silver Cadmium Indium Tin Antimony Tellurium Iodine Xenon Caesium Barium Lanthanum Cerium Praseodymium Neodymium Promethium Samarium Europium Gadolinium Terbium Dysprosium Holmium Erbium Thulium Ytterbium Lutetium Hafnium Tantalum Tungsten Rhenium Osmium Iridium Platinum Gold Mercury (element) Thallium Lead Bismuth Polonium Astatine Radon Francium Radium Actinium Thorium Protactinium Uranium Neptunium Plutonium Americium Curium Berkelium Californium Einsteinium Fermium Mendelevium Nobelium Lawrencium Rutherfordium Dubnium Seaborgium Bohrium Hassium Meitnerium Darmstadtium Roentgenium Copernicium Nihonium Flerovium Moscovium Livermorium Tennessine Oganesson Part of a series on the Periodic table Periodic table forms 18-column 32-column Alternative and extended forms Periodic table history D. Mendeleev 1871 table 1869 predictions Discovery of elements Naming and etymology for people for places controversies ( in East Asia ) Systematic element names Sets of elements By periodic table structure Groups (1–18) 1 ( alkali metals ) 2 (alkaline earth metals) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 (pnictogens) 16 (chalcogens) 17 (halogens) 18 (noble gases) Periods (1–7, ...) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8+ Blocks (s, p, d, f, ...) Atomic orbitals Aufbau principle By metallic classification Metals alkali alkaline earth transition post-transition lanthanide actinide Metalloids dividing metals and nonmetals Nonmetals nonmetal halogen noble gas By other characteristics Coinage metals Platinum-group metals Precious metals Refractory metals Heavy metals Light metals Native metals Noble metals Main-group elements Rare-earth elements Transuranium elements Major , minor and trans- actinides Elements List of chemical elements by abundance ( in human body ) by atomic properties by isotope stability by symbol Properties of elements Relative atomic mass Crystal structure Electron affinity configuration Electronegativity ( Allen , Pauling ) Goldschmidt classification Nutrition Valence Data pages for elements Abundance Atomic radius Boiling point Critical point Density Elasticity Electrical resistivity Electron affinity / configuration Electronegativity Hardness Heat capacity / of fusion / of vaporization Ionization energy Melting point Oxidation state Speed of sound Thermal conductivity / expansion coefficient Vapor pressure Category Chemistry Portal v t e A period 4 element is one of the chemical elements in the fourth row (or period ) of the periodic table of the chemical elements . The periodic table is laid out in rows to illustrate recurring (periodic) trends in the chemical behaviour of the elements as their atomic number increases: a new row is begun when chemical behaviour begins to repeat, meaning that elements with similar behaviour fall into the same vertical columns. The fourth period contains 18 elements beginning with potassium and ending with krypton – one element for each of the eighteen groups . It sees the first appearance of d-block (which includes transition metals ) in the table.

Properties [ edit ] All 4th-period elements are stable , [ 1 ] and many are extremely common in the Earth's crust and/or core ; it is the last period with no unstable elements. Many transition metals in the period are very strong , and therefore common in industry , especially iron .

[ 2 ] Some are toxic , with all known vanadium compounds toxic, [ 3 ] arsenic one of the most well-known poisons , and bromine a toxic liquid. Conversely, many elements are essential to human survival, such as calcium , the main component in bones .

[ 2 ] Atomic structure [ edit ] Progressing towards increase of atomic number , the Aufbau principle causes elements of the period to put electrons onto 4s, 3d, and 4p subshells, in that order. However, there are exceptions, such as chromium . The first twelve elements— K , Ca , and transition metals —have from 1 to 12 valence electrons respectively, which are placed on 4s and 3d.

Twelve electrons over the electron configuration of argon reach the configuration of zinc , namely 3d 10 4s 2 . After this element, the filled 3d subshell effectively withdraws from chemistry and the subsequent trend looks much like trends in the periods 2 and 3 .

The p-block elements of period 4 have their valence shell composed of 4s and 4p subshells of the fourth ( n = 4 ) shell and obey the octet rule .

For quantum chemistry namely this period sees transition from the simplified electron shell paradigm to research of many differently-shaped subshells . The relative disposition of their energy levels is governed by the interplay of various physical effects. The period's s-block metals put their differentiating electrons onto 4s despite having vacancies among nominally lower n = 3 states – a phenomenon unseen in lighter elements. Contrariwise, the six elements from gallium to krypton are the heaviest where all electron shells below the valence shell are filled completely . This is no longer possible in further periods due to the existence of f-subshells starting from n = 4 .

List of elements [ edit ] Chemical element Block Electron configuration 19 K Potassium s-block [Ar] 4s 1 20 Ca Calcium s-block [Ar] 4s 2 21 Sc Scandium d-block [Ar] 3d 1 4s 2 22 Ti Titanium d-block [Ar] 3d 2 4s 2 23 V Vanadium d-block [Ar] 3d 3 4s 2 24 Cr Chromium d-block [Ar] 3d 5 4s 1 (*) 25 Mn Manganese d-block [Ar] 3d 5 4s 2 26 Fe Iron d-block [Ar] 3d 6 4s 2 27 Co Cobalt d-block [Ar] 3d 7 4s 2 28 Ni Nickel d-block [Ar] 3d 8 4s 2 29 Cu Copper d-block [Ar] 3d 10 4s 1 (*) 30 Zn Zinc d-block [Ar] 3d 10 4s 2 31 Ga Gallium p-block [Ar] 3d 10 4s 2 4p 1 32 Ge Germanium p-block [Ar] 3d 10 4s 2 4p 2 33 As Arsenic p-block [Ar] 3d 10 4s 2 4p 3 34 Se Selenium p-block [Ar] 3d 10 4s 2 4p 4 35 Br Bromine p-block [Ar] 3d 10 4s 2 4p 5 36 Kr Krypton p-block [Ar] 3d 10 4s 2 4p 6 (*) Exception to the Madelung rule s-block elements [ edit ] Potassium [ edit ] Potassium (K) is an alkali metal , underneath sodium and above rubidium , [ 4 ] and the first element of period 4.  One of the most reactive chemical elements, it is usually found only in compounds .  It is a silvery metal [ 5 ] that tarnishes rapidly when exposed to the oxygen in air, which oxidizes it. It is soft enough to be cut with a knife [ 6 ] and the second least- dense element.

[ citation needed ] Potassium has a relatively low melting point ; it will melt under a small open flame.

[ 5 ] It also is less dense than water, and can, in principle, float [ 7 ] (although it will react with any water it is exposed to).

[ 5 ] Calcium [ edit ] Calcium (Ca) is the second element in the period. An alkali earth metal , native calcium is almost never found in nature, [ citation needed ] because it reacts with water.

[ 8 ] It has one of the most widely-known biological roles in all animals and some plants, making up structural elements such as bones and teeth.

[ 9 ] It also has applications in cells , such as signals for cellular processeses . It is regarded as the most abundant mineral in the human body.

[ citation needed ] d-block elements [ edit ] Scandium [ edit ] Scandium (Sc) is the third element in the period, and is the first transition metal in the periodic table. Scandium is quite common in nature, but difficult to isolate because its chemistry mirrors that of the other rare earth compounds quite closely. Scandium has very few commercial applications, the major exception being aluminium alloys .

Titanium [ edit ] Titanium (Ti) is an element in group 4 . Titanium is both one of the least dense metals and one of the strongest and most corrosion-resistant.  As such, it has many applications, especially in alloys with other elements, such as iron. It is commonly used in airplanes , golf clubs , and other objects that must be strong, but lightweight.

Vanadium [ edit ] Vanadium (V) is an element in group 5 . Vanadium is never found in pure form in nature, but is commonly found in compounds. Vanadium is similar to titanium in many ways, such as being very corrosion-resistant, however, unlike titanium, it oxidizes in air even at room temperature. All vanadium compounds have at least some level of toxicity, with some of them being extremely toxic.

Chromium [ edit ] Chromium (Cr) is an element in group 6 . Chromium is, like titanium and vanadium before it, extremely resistant to corrosion, and is indeed one of the main components of stainless steel . Chromium also has many colorful compounds, and as such is very commonly used in pigments, such as chrome green .

Manganese [ edit ] Manganese (Mn) is an element in group 7 . Manganese is often found in combination with iron. Manganese, like chromium before it, is an important component in stainless steel , preventing the iron from rusting. Manganese is also often used in pigments, again like chromium. Manganese is also poisonous; if enough is inhaled, it can cause irreversible neurological damage.

Iron [ edit ] Iron (Fe) is an element in group 8 . Iron is the most common on Earth among elements of the period, and probably the most well-known of them. It is the principal component of steel .

Iron-56 has the lowest energy density of any isotope of any element, meaning that it is the most massive element that can be produced in supergiant stars . Iron also has some applications in the human body; hemoglobin is partly iron.

Cobalt [ edit ] Cobalt (Co) is an element in group 9 . Cobalt is commonly used in pigments, as many compounds of cobalt are blue in color. Cobalt is also a core component of many magnetic and high-strength alloys. The only stable isotope, cobalt-59 , is an important component of vitamin B-12 , while cobalt-60 is a component of nuclear fallout and can be dangerous in large enough quantities due to its radioactivity.

Nickel [ edit ] Nickel (Ni) is an element in group 10 . Nickel is rare in the Earth's crust, mainly due to the fact that it reacts with oxygen in the air, with most of the nickel on Earth coming from nickel iron meteorites . However, nickel is very abundant in the Earth's core ; along with iron it is one of the two main components. Nickel is an important component of stainless steel, and in many superalloys .

Copper [ edit ] Copper (Cu) is an element in group 11 . Copper is one of the few metals that is not white or gray in color, the only [ citation needed ] others being gold , osmium and caesium . Copper has been used by humans for thousands of years to provide a reddish tint [ clarification needed ] to many objects, and is even an essential nutrient to humans, although too much is poisonous. Copper is also commonly used as a wood preservative or fungicides .

Zinc [ edit ] Zinc (Zn) is an element in group 12 . Zinc is one of the main components of brass , being used since the 10th century BCE. Zinc is also incredibly important to humans; almost 2 billion people in the world suffer from zinc deficiency.  However, too much zinc can cause copper deficiency. Zinc is often used in batteries, aptly named carbon-zinc batteries , and is important in many platings, as zinc is very corrosion resistant.

p-block elements [ edit ] Gallium [ edit ] Gallium (Ga) is an element in group 13 , under aluminium . Gallium is noteworthy because it has a melting point at about 303 kelvins , right around room temperature. For example, it will be solid on a typical spring day, but will be liquid on a hot summer day. Gallium is an important component in the alloy galinstan , along with tin. Gallium can also be found in semiconductors.

Germanium [ edit ] Germanium (Ge) is an element in group 14 . Germanium, like silicon above it, is an important semiconductor and is commonly used in diodes and transistors, often in combination with arsenic. Germanium is fairly rare on Earth, leading to its comparatively late discovery. Germanium, in compounds, can sometimes irritate the eyes, skin, or lungs.

Arsenic [ edit ] Arsenic (As) is an element in group 15 , the pnictogens. Arsenic, as mentioned above, is often used in semiconductors in alloys with germanium. Arsenic, in pure form and some alloys, is incredibly poisonous to all multicellular life, and as such is a common component in pesticides. Arsenic was also used in some pigments before its toxicity was discovered.

Selenium [ edit ] Selenium (Se) is an element in group 16 , the chalcogens. Selenium is the first nonmetal in period 4, with properties similar to sulfur . Selenium is quite rare in pure form in nature, mostly being found in minerals such as pyrite , and even then it is quite rare. Selenium is necessary for humans in trace amounts, but is toxic in larger quantities. Selenium is red in monomolar structure but metallic gray in its crystalline structure.

Bromine [ edit ] Bromine (Br) is an element in group 17 (halogen) . It does not exist in elemental form in nature. Bromine is barely liquid at room temperature, boiling at about 330 kelvins. Bromine is also quite toxic and corrosive, but bromide ions, which are relatively inert, can be found in halite , or table salt. Bromine is often used as a fire retardant because many compounds can be made to release free bromine atoms.

Krypton [ edit ] Krypton (Kr) is a noble gas , placed under argon and over xenon . Being a noble gas, krypton rarely interacts with itself or other elements; although compounds have been detected, they are all unstable and decay rapidly, and as such, krypton is often used in fluorescent lights. Krypton, like most noble gases, is also used in lighting because of its many spectral lines and the aforementioned reasons.

Biological role [ edit ] Many period 4 elements find roles in controlling protein function as secondary messengers , structural components, or enzyme cofactors . A gradient of potassium is used by cells to maintain a membrane potential which enables neurotransmitter firing and facilitated diffusion among other processes. Calcium is a common signaling molecule for proteins such as calmodulin and plays a critical role in triggering skeletal muscle contraction in vertebrates. Selenium is a component of the noncanonical amino acid , selenocysteine ; proteins which contain selenocysteine are known as selenoproteins .

Manganese enzymes are utilized by both eukaryotes and prokaryotes , and may play a role in the virulence of some pathogenic bacteria.

[ 10 ] Vanabins , also known as vanadium-associated proteins, are found in the blood cells of some species of sea squirts . The role of these proteins is disputed, although there is some speculation that they function as oxygen carriers. Zinc ions are used to stabilize the zinc finger milieu of many DNA-binding proteins .

Period 4 elements can also be found complexed with organic small molecules to form cofactors. The most famous example of this is heme : an iron-containing porphyrin compound responsible for the oxygen-carrying function of myoglobin and hemoglobin as well as the catalytic activity of cytochrome enzymes .

[ 11 ] Hemocyanin replaces hemoglobin as the oxygen carrier of choice in the blood of certain invertebrates, including horseshoe crabs , tarantulas , and octopuses .

Vitamin B 12 represents one of the few biochemical applications for cobalt.

References [ edit ] ^ "List of Elements of the Periodic Table – Sorted by Abundance in Earth's crust" . Science.co.il . Retrieved 2012-08-14 .

^ a b Gray, Theodore (2009).

The Elements: A Visual Exploration of Every Known Atom in the Universe . New York: Black Dog & Leventhal Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-57912-814-2 .

^ Srivastava, A. K. (2000). "Anti-diabetic and toxic effects of vanadium compounds".

Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry .

206 (206): 177– 182.

doi : 10.1023/A:1007075204494 .

PMID 10839208 .

S2CID 8871862 .

^ "Elements in the Modern Periodic Table, Periodic Classification of Elements" . Tutorvista.com. Archived from the original on 26 January 2018 . Retrieved 2012-08-14 .

^ a b c "Potassium" .

Chemistry Explained: Foundations and Applications .

Hinsdale, IL : Advameg . 2023 . Retrieved 2012-08-14 .

^ Office of Science Education.

"The Element Potassium" .

It's Elemental .

Newport News : Jefferson Science Associates . Retrieved 2012-08-14 .

^ "Potassium - K" . Lenntech. 1998 . Retrieved 2012-08-14 .

^ Clark, Jim (December 2021).

"Reactions of the Group 2 elements with water" . Retrieved 2012-08-14 .

^ "Calcium" . Human Vitamin and Mineral Requirements (Report). Rome, Italy: FAO Information Division Publishing and Multimedia Service. 2002 . Retrieved 2012-08-14 .

^ Makhlynets, Olga; Boal, Amie K.; Rhodes, Delacy V.; Kitten, Todd; Rosenzweig, Amy C.; Stubbe, JoAnne (2014-02-28).

"Streptococcus sanguinis class Ib ribonucleotide reductase: high activity with both iron and manganese cofactors and structural insights" .

The Journal of Biological Chemistry .

289 (9): 6259– 6272.

doi : 10.1074/jbc.M113.533554 .

ISSN 1083-351X .

PMC 3937692 .

PMID 24381172 .

^ Caputo, Gregory A.; Vaden, Timothy D.; Calabro, Anthony; Lee, Joshua Y.; Kohn, Eric M. (December 2018).

"Heme Dissociation from Myoglobin in the Presence of the Zwitterionic Detergent N,N-Dimethyl-N-Dodecylglycine Betaine: Effects of Ionic Liquids" .

Biomolecules .

8 (4): 126.

doi : 10.3390/biom8040126 .

PMC 6315634 .

PMID 30380655 .

v t e Periodic table Periodic table forms Alternatives Extended periodic table Sets of elements By periodic table structure Groups 1 ( Hydrogen and alkali metals ) 2 (Alkaline earth metals) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 (Triels) 14 (Tetrels) 15 (Pnictogens) 16 (Chalcogens) 17 (Halogens) 18 (Noble gases) Periods 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8+ Aufbau Fricke Pyykkö Blocks Aufbau principle By metallicity Metals Lanthanides Actinides Transition metals Post-transition metals Metalloids Lists of metalloids by source Dividing line Nonmetals Noble gases Other sets Platinum-group metals (PGM) Rare-earth elements Refractory metals Precious metals Coinage metals Noble metals Heavy metals Native metals Transuranium elements Superheavy elements Major actinides Minor actinides Elements Lists By: Abundance ( in humans ) Atomic properties Nuclear stability Symbol Properties Aqueous chemistry Crystal structure Electron configuration Electronegativity Goldschmidt classification Term symbol Data pages Abundance Atomic radius Boiling point Critical point Density Elasticity Electrical resistivity Electron affinity Electron configuration Electronegativity Hardness Heat capacity Heat of fusion Heat of vaporization Ionization energy Melting point Oxidation state Speed of sound Thermal conductivity Thermal expansion coefficient Vapor pressure History Element discoveries Dmitri Mendeleev 1871 table 1869 predictions Naming etymology controversies for places for people in East Asian languages See also IUPAC nomenclature systematic element name Trivial name Dmitri Mendeleev Category WikiProject v t e Periodic table 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1 H He 2 Li Be B C N O F Ne 3 Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar 4 K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr 5 Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I Xe 6 Cs Ba La Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn 7 Fr Ra Ac Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No Lr Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt Ds Rg Cn Nh Fl Mc Lv Ts Og s-block f-block d-block p-block Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Period_4_element&oldid=1242535260 " Category : Periods (periodic table) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2019 Pages containing element color directly This page was last edited on 27 August 2024, at 09:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Period 4 element 49 languages Add topic

