Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Invention 2 Use in nuclear weapons 3 Other uses 4 See also 5 Notes Toggle the table of contents Explosive lens 11 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Shaped charge used in nuclear weapons This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Explosive lens" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In an implosion-type nuclear weapon, polygonal lenses are arranged around the spherical core of the bomb. Thirty-two "points" are shown. Other designs use as many as 96 or as few as two such points.

An explosive lens —as used, for example, in nuclear weapons —is a highly specialized shaped charge . In general, it is a device composed of several explosive charges . These charges are arranged and formed with the intent to control the shape of the detonation wave passing through them. The explosive lens is conceptually similar to an optical lens , which focuses light waves.  The charges that make up the explosive lens are chosen to have different rates of detonation. In order to convert a spherically expanding wavefront into a spherically converging one using only a single boundary between the constituent explosives, the boundary shape must be a paraboloid ; similarly, to convert a spherically diverging front into a flat one, the boundary shape must be a hyperboloid , and so on. Several boundaries can be used to reduce aberrations (deviations from intended shape) of the final wavefront.

Invention [ edit ] During the Manhattan Project , James L. Tuck suggested using explosive lenses to achieve a more uniform implosion for the atomic bomb. Tuck, Seth Neddermeyer , and John von Neumann are credited with inventing the explosive lens method used in the first implosion-type nuclear weapons.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Use in nuclear weapons [ edit ] A type of modern high explosive lenses without wave shaper. The colored areas are the fast explosive, while the white areas are the slow explosives.

In a nuclear weapon, an array of explosive lenses is used to change the several approximately spherical diverging detonation waves into a single spherical converging one. The converging wave is then used to collapse the various shells (tamper, reflector, pusher, etc.) and finally compresses the core ( pit ) of fissionable material to a prompt critical state. They are usually machined from a plastic bonded explosive and an inert insert, called a wave-shaper, which is often a dense foam or plastic , though many other materials can be used. Other, mainly older explosive lenses do not include a wave shaper, but employ two explosive types that have significantly different velocities of detonation (VoD), which are in the range from 5 to 9 km/s. The use of the low- and high-speed explosives again results in a spherical converging detonation wave to compress the physics package. The original Gadget device used in the Trinity test and Fat Man dropped on Nagasaki used Baratol as the low-VoD explosive and Composition B as the fast, but other combinations can be used.

[ 3 ] Cross-section of the "Trinity" gadget . The red dot to the left is the detonator, the alternating high (in light purple) and slow explosives (dark purple) are the explosive lens which forces the spherical core to compress into prompt criticality .

The illustration to the left represents a cross section through a segment of a polygonal wedge. The wedges are fitted together to form a spherical device. The exploding-bridgewire detonator at the far left triggers a semi-spherical detonation wave through the high-speed outer explosive. (It is semi-spherical because the exploding-bridgewire acts as a point-detonator.)  As the wave is transferred to the precisely shaped inner explosive, a new spherical wave—centered on the object—is formed. The successful functioning of this device hinges on the simultaneous initiation of the wave in each segment, uniformity and precision in the speed of the wave, and correctness and accuracy in the shape of the interface between the two explosives.

A series of experiments were performed in 1944 and 1945 during the Manhattan Project to develop the lenses for a satisfactory implosion. One of the most important tests was the series of RaLa Experiments .

Initially, a 32 "point" assembly was used (each of which had a pair of exploding-bridgewire detonators).

Later, a 92 "point" assembly was tried, with the objective of obtaining a smaller assembly with improved performance.

Finally, with the success of the Swan test nuclear explosive device, a two "point" assembly became feasible. Swan used an "air lens" system in addition to shaped charges and became the basis of all U.S.

successor designs, nuclear and thermonuclear alike, and featured small size, light weight, and exceptional reliability and safety, as well as using the least amount of strategic material of any design.

Other uses [ edit ] Lenses using alternate design techniques and producing flat " plane wave " outputs are used for high transient pressure physics and materials science experiments.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Impact depth Nuclear weapon design Notes [ edit ] ^ Moore, Richard; and Brown, Eric N. (2021-12-03).

"Woolwich, Bruceton, Los Alamos: Munroe Jets and the Trinity Gadget" .

Nuclear Technology .

207 (sup1): S222 – S230 .

doi : 10.1080/00295450.2021.1905463 .

ISSN 0029-5450 .

^ "JAMES L. TUCK 1974" (PDF) .

Atomic Heritage Foundation . 1974.

^ Coster-Mullen, John (2012).

Atom Bombs: The Top Secret Inside Story of Little Boy and Fat Man . Waukesha, Wisconsin.

ASIN B0006S2AJ0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Pimbley; Mader; Bowen (October 1982).

Plane Wave Generator Calculations (Technical report). Los Alamos National Labs.

OSTI 5217711 . LA-9119.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Explosive_lens&oldid=1298674733 " Categories : Explosives engineering Nuclear weapon design Nuclear weapon implosion Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 23:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Explosive lens 11 languages Add topic

