Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Minority rights at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 1.2 International law 2 National minorities in the law of the EC/EU 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.1 Links 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Minority rights 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Latina മലയാളം 日本語 Português Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rights of members of minority groups Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Minority rights are the normal individual rights as applied to members of racial, ethnic , class , religious , linguistic or gender and sexual minorities , and also the collective rights accorded to any minority group . In modern liberal democracy , the protection of minority rights is the main principle.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Civil-rights movements often seek to ensure that individual rights are not denied on the basis of membership in a minority group. Such civil-rights advocates include the global women's-rights and global LGBT-rights movements, and various racial-minority rights movements around the world (such as the Civil Rights Movement in the United States ).

Issues of minority rights intersect with debates over historical redress [ 5 ] or over positive discrimination .

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Prior to the Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920) , the term "minority" primarily referred to political parties in national legislatures, not ethnic, national, linguistic or religious groups.

[ 7 ] The Paris Conference has been attributed with coining the concept of minority rights and bringing prominence to it.

[ 7 ] The issue of minority rights was first raised in 1814, at the Congress of Vienna , which discussed the fate of German Jews and especially of the Poles who were once again partitioned up.  The Congress expressed hope that Prussia , Russia , and Austria would grant tolerance and protection to their minorities, which ultimately they disregarded, engaging in organized discrimination.

The 1856 Congress of Paris paid special attention to the status of Jews and Christians in the Ottoman Empire . In Britain, William Gladstone made the massacres of Bulgarians by the Ottoman Empire a major campaign issue and demanded international attention. The Congress of Berlin in 1878 dealt with the status of Jews in Romania , especially, and also Serbia , and Bulgaria . On the whole, the 19th-century congresses failed to impose significant reforms.

The first minority rights were proclaimed and enacted by the revolutionary Parliament of Hungary in July 1849.

[ 8 ] Minority rights were codified in Austrian law in 1867.

[ 9 ] Russia was especially active in protecting Orthodox Christians and Slavic peoples under the control of the Ottoman Empire.

[ 10 ] However the Russian government tolerated vicious pogroms against Jews in its villages.  Russia was widely attacked for this policy.

[ 11 ] By contrast there was little or no international outrage regarding the treatment of other minorities, such as black people in the southern United States before the 1950s when African colonies became independent.

[ 12 ] Before the World War I , only three European countries declared ethnic minority rights, and enacted minority-protecting laws: the first was Hungary (1849 and 1868), the second was Austria (1867), and the third was Belgium (1898). In the pre-WW1 era, the legal systems of other European countries did not allow the use of European minority languages in primary schools, in cultural institutions , in offices of public administration and at the legal courts.

[ 13 ] Minority rights at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 [ edit ] For information about Minority rights at the Paris conference, see Minority Treaties .

At the Versailles Peace Conference the Supreme Council established 'The Committee on New States and for The Protection of Minorities'. All the new successor states were compelled to sign minority rights treaties as a precondition of diplomatic recognition. It was agreed that although the new states had been recognized, they had not been 'created' before the signatures of the final peace treaties. The issue of German and Polish rights was a point of dispute as Polish rights in Germany remained unprotected, unlike the German minority in Poland . Like other principles adopted by the League, the Minorities Treaties were a part of the Wilsonian idealist approach to international relations; like the League itself, the Minority Treaties were increasingly ignored by the respective governments, with the entire system mostly collapsing in the late 1930s. Despite the political failure, they remained the basis of international law. After World War II , the legal principles were incorporated in the UN Charter and a host of international human rights treaties.

[ 14 ] International law [ edit ] Part of a series on LGBTQ rights Lesbian ∙ Gay ∙ Bisexual ∙ Transgender ∙ Queer Overview Rights Movements Student Germany (pre-1933) United States Intersex rights Social attitudes Transgender rights Legal status Movement Aspects Decriminalization Gender self-identification Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Legal status Timeline Migration Military service Organizations List Parenting Adoption Pinkwashing Relationship Recognition Right to sexuality Union Opposition Censorship Conversion therapy Corrective rape Discrimination Criminalization of homosexuality Execution Opposition Propaganda Rhetoric Violence Organizations LGBTQ Bisexual Intersex Community centre Medical Military and Veteran Rights Transgender United States Religious Christian Jewish Muslim Politics Anarchism Bisexual politics Communism Conservatism Ecology Homonationalism Liberation Libertarianism Nationalism Radicalism Sexual revolution Socialism Transfeminism Political parties affiliates Political ideologies regarding LGBTQ Timeline Years List Category Related Discrimination Freedom Index Human rights Minority rights Legality of conversion therapy LGBTQ people in prison Right to privacy LGBTQ portal v t e Minority rights, as applying to ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities and indigenous peoples, are an integral part of international human rights law . Like children's rights , women's rights and refugee rights, minority rights are a legal framework designed to ensure that a specific group which is in a vulnerable , disadvantaged or marginalized position in society, is able to achieve equality and is protected from persecution. The first postwar international treaty to protect minorities, designed to protect them from the greatest threat to their existence, was the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide .

Subsequent human rights standards that codify minority rights include the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 27), the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities , two Council of Europe treaties (the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages ), and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Copenhagen Document of 1990.

Minority rights cover protection of existence, protection from discrimination and persecution, protection and promotion of identity, and participation in political life. For the rights of LGBT people, the Yogyakarta Principles have been approved by the United Nations Human Rights Council . For the rights of persons with disabilities , the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has been adopted by United Nations General Assembly .

To protect minority rights, many countries have specific laws and/or commissions or ombudsman institutions (for example the Hungarian Parliamentary Commissioner for National and Ethnic Minorities Rights).

[ 15 ] While initially, the United Nations treated indigenous peoples as a sub-category of minorities, there is an expanding body of international law specifically devoted to them, in particular Convention 169 of the International Labour Organization and the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (adopted 14 September 2007).

In 2008, a declaration on LGBT rights was presented in the UN General Assembly , and in 2011, an LGBT rights resolution was passed in the United Nations Human Rights Council ( See LGBT rights at the United Nations ).

There are many political bodies which also feature minority group rights, which might be seen in affirmative action quotas or in guaranteed minority representation in a consociational state .

National minorities in the law of the EC/EU [ edit ] The direct role of the European Union (and also the law of the EU/EC) in the area of protection of national minorities is still very limited (likewise the general protection of human rights). The EU has relied on general international law and a European regional system of international law (based on the Council of Europe , Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe , etc.) and in a case of necessity accepted their norms. But the "de-economisation of European integration", which started in the 1990s, is changing this situation. The political relevance of national minorities' protection is very high.

Now (2009), although protection of the national minorities has not become a generally accepted legally binding principle of the EU, in several legal acts issues of national minorities are mentioned. In external relations protection of national minorities became one of the main criteria for cooperation with the EU or accession.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Civil rights Individual and group rights Cultural rights Disability rights movement European Centre for Minority Issues Global Human Rights Defence Intersex human rights Linguistic rights Minority Rights Group International Minoritarianism Tyranny of the majority European Roma Rights Centre References [ edit ] ^ "The State of Liberal Democracy in Greece and Germany" .

Friedrich Naumann Foundation . 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 6 July 2025 .

^ "The rise of modern populism - Takis S. Pappas" .

TED-Ed . 21 August 2020 . Retrieved 6 July 2025 – via YouTube.

Liberal democracies rely on the rule of law and the protection of minority rights, as specified in constitutions and legal statues.

^ April Carter, ed. (15 April 2013).

Direct Action and Liberal Democracy (Routledge Library Editions:Political Science Volume 6) . Taylor & Francis.

A minority suffering from active discrimination can appeal to the safeguarding of minority rights enshrined in the 'liberal' theory of democracy.

^ "The populist challenge to liberal democracy" .

Brookings Institution . 17 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 July 2025 .

As popular demand for strong leaders grows, rising political actors are beginning to question key liberal-democratic principles such as the rule of law, freedom of the press, and minority rights.

^ For example: Yoneyama, Lisa (15 September 2016).

Cold War Ruins: Transpacific Critique of American Justice and Japanese War Crimes . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press (published 2016).

ISBN 9780822374114 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

The link between memories, historical redress and efforts to extend and secure minority rights is best expressed in the 1988 proposal for the Law Pertaining to Postwar Reparations and the Guarantee of Human Rights for Resident Aliens from Former Colonies [...].

^ Barten, Ulrike (23 September 2014). "Minority Rights".

Minorities, Minority Rights and Internal Self-Determination . Cham, Zug: Springer (published 2014). p. 153.

ISBN 9783319088761 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

While discrimination is generally frowned upon[,] special treatment, also called affirmative action or positive discrimination, for certain groups is not unknown.

^ a b Robson, Laura (2021).

"Capitulations Redux: The Imperial Genealogy of the Post–World War I "Minority" Regimes" .

The American Historical Review .

126 (3): 978– 1000.

doi : 10.1093/ahr/rhab358 .

ISSN 0002-8762 .

^ Laszlo Peter, Martyn C. Rady, Peter A. Sherwood: Lajos Kossuth sas word...: papers delivered on the occasion of the bicentenary of Kossuth's birth (page 101) ^ Staatsgrundgesetz vom 21. Dezember 1867 (R.G.Bl. 142/1867), über die allgemeinen Rechte der Staatsbürger für die im Reichsrate vertretenen Königreiche und Länder Archived 7 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine – see Article 19 (in German) ^ Denis Vovchenko, Containing Balkan Nationalism: Imperial Russia and Ottoman Christians, 1856–1914 (Oxford University Press, 2016).

^ Irena Grosfeld, Seyhun Orcan Sakalli, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, "Middleman minorities and ethnic violence: anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian empire." Review of Economic Studies 87.1 (2020): 289–342 online .

^ Azza Salama Layton, International politics and civil rights policies in the United States, 1941–1960 (Cambridge University Press, 2000).

^ Józsa Hévizi (2004): Autonomies in Hungary and Europe, A COMPARATIVE STUDY, The Regional and Ecclesiastic Autonomy of the Minorities and Nationality Groups [1] ^ P. de  Azcarate, League of Nations and National Minorities (1945) online ^ "Parliamentary Commissioner for the National and Ethnic Minorities Rights" .

Országgyűlési Biztos Hivatala . Archived from the original on 23 February 2007.

^ Šmihula, Daniel (September 2008).

"National Minorities in the Law of the EC/EU" (PDF) .

Romanian Journal of European Affairs .

8 (3): 51– 81. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 August 2011 . Retrieved 23 August 2011 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Azcarate, P. de.

League of Nations and National Minorities (1945) online Barzilai, G. 2003.

Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Fink, Carole. 2006.

Defending the Rights of Others: The Great Powers, the Jews, and International Minority Protection, 1878–1938 excerpt and text search Henrard, K. 2000.

Devising an Adequate System of Minority Protection: Individual Human Rights, Minority Rights, and the Right to Self-Determination Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers Jackson Preece, J. 2005.

Minority Rights: Between Diversity and Community Cambridge: Polity Press Malloy, T.H. 2005.

National Minority Rights in Europe Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

Pentassuglia, G. 2002.

Minorities in international law: an introductory study Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publications Šmihula, D. 2008. "National Minorities in the Law of the EC/EU", Romanian Journal of European Affairs, Vol. 8 no. 3, pp. 2008, pp. 51–81.

online Thornberry, P. 1991.

International Law and the Rights of Minorities.

Oxford: Clarendon Press Weller, M. (ed.) 2006.

The Rights of Minorities in Europe: A Commentary on the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.

Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

Weller, M., Denika Blacklock and Katherine Nobbs (eds.) 2008.

The Protection of Minorities in the Wider Europe Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Links [ edit ] Gabriel N. Toggenburg, Minority Protection and the European Union , OSI, Budapest 2004 Gabriel N. Toggenburg / Günther Rautz, Das ABC des Minderheitenschutz in Europa , Böhlau, Wien 2010 Gabriel N. Toggenburg, The Union's role vis-a-vis its minorities after the enlargement decade: a remaining share or a new part?

, European University Institute, Florence 2006 External links [ edit ] U.N. Declaration on the Rights of Minorities Commentary to the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities , United Nations Working Group on Minorities U.N. Independent Expert on Minority Issues U.N. Forum on Minority Issues , its recommendations U.N. Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide Minority Rights Group International Minority rights implemented at grassroot level OSCE Copenhagen Document 1990 Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Hague recommendations regarding the education rights of national minorities & explanatory note Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Oslo recommendation regarding the linguistic rights of national minorities Congress of the Council of Europe Recommendation 222 (2007) Language Education in Regional or Minority Languages Compilation of reports and opinions concerning the protection of national minorities Venice Commission Documents submitted to the Working Group on Minorities that was replaced by the Forum on Minority Issues, established by Human Rights Council resolution 6/15 " "Protecting and promoting minorities" German Institute for Human Rights (DIMR)" . In: D+C, Vol.42.2015:5.

v t e Ethnicity Concepts Clan Ethnic group Ethnographic group Ethnolinguistic group Ethnonational group Ethnoreligious group Ethnographic realism Diaspora Immigration / Emigration Hyphenated ethnicity Indigenous peoples In-group and out-groups Meta-ethnicity Metroethnicity Minority group Influence Monoethnicity Nation Nationality Panethnicity Polyethnicity Population Race Supraethnicity Symbolic ethnicity Tribe Ethnology Anthropology Ethnic studies Ethnoarchaeology Ethnobiology Ethnobotany Ethnoecology Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnocinema Ethnogeology Ethnography Autoethnography Clinical Critical Institutional Netnography Online Person-centered Salvage Transidioethnography Video Ethnohistory Ethnolinguistics Ethnology Ethnomathematics Ethnostatistics Ethnomedicine Ethnomethodology Ethnomuseology Ethnomusicology Ethnophilosophy Ethnopoetics Ethnopsychopharmacology Ethnoscience Ethnosemiotics Ethnotaxonomy Groups by region World Contemporary ethnic groups Countries by ethnic groups Africa Americas Indigenous Canada Greenland Mexico United States Caribbean Central America South America Asia Central Asia East Asia Northern Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Australia Aboriginal groups Torres Strait Islanders Europe Oceania Indigenous European Identity and ethnogenesis Cross-race effect Cultural assimilation Cultural identity Demonym Development Endonym Ethnarch Ethnic flag Ethnic option Ethnic origin Ethnic religion Ethnicity in censuses Ethnofiction Ethnonym Folk religion Historical Imagined community Kinship Legendary progenitor Linguistic homeland Mores Mythomoteur Nation-building Nation state National language National myth Origin myth Pantribal sodality Statistext Tribal name Tribalism Detribalization Neotribalism White ethnic Multiethnic society Consociationalism Cultural appropriation Diaspora politics Dominant minority Ethnic democracy Ethnic enclave Ethnic interest group Ethnic majority Ethnic media Ethnic nationalism Ethnic pornography Ethnic theme park Ethnoburb Ethnocracy Ethnographic film Ethnographic village Ethnopluralism Indigenous rights Middleman minority Minority rights Model minority Model minority myth Multinational state Ideology and ethnic conflict Allophilia Ethnic bioweapon Ethnic cleansing Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnic party Ethnic penalty Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Ethnic violence Ethnic riots Ethnocentrism Ethnocide Ethnofuturism Ethnosymbolism Indigenism Indigenization Nativism Remigration Separatist movements Xenocentrism Xenophilia Xenophobia Related Minzu (anthropology) v t e International Indigenous and minority rights Rights Ancestral domain Free, prior and informed consent Intellectual property Land rights Language Self-determination in Australia in Canada in the United States Traditional knowledge ecological medical Treaty rights in Australia in New Zealand Non-governmental and political organizations Amazon Watch Assembly of First Nations Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador Congress of Aboriginal Peoples Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations of the Amazon River Basin Cultural Survival Indigenous Environmental Network Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs National Indigenous Organization of Colombia Native American Rights Fund Survival International Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization Zapatista Army of National Liberation ( more ...

) Issues Civilizing mission Colonialism Internal colonialism Settler colonialism Biopiracy Bioprospecting Cultural appropriation Sports mascots Redface Dakota Access Pipeline protests Discovery doctrine Fortress conservation Green grabbing Homeland Lands inhabited by indigenous peoples Bantustan Autonomous okrugs American Indian reservation Indian colony Indian reserve Ranchería Rancherie Russian republics Urban Indian reserve Manifest destiny Plastic shaman Rainbow Warriors Two-spirit Legal representation Governmental bodies Aotearoa-New Zealand Te Puni Kōkiri Brazil Fundação Nacional do Índio Canada Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada Mexico National Institute of Indigenous Peoples Philippines National Commission on Indigenous Peoples Russia Ministry for the Development of the Russian Far East and Arctic Government of Bashkortostan Government of the Sakha Republic Government of Tatarstan Taiwan Council of Indigenous Peoples US Bureau of Indian Affairs Intergovernmental bodies African Union African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights Arctic Council WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge, and Folklore BBNJ ABS Committee Indigenous-led international bodies UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Indigenous Caucus Treaties and Declarations of Rights 1989: Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention (ILO C169) 1992: Convention on Biological Diversity 2007: UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) 2010: Nagoya Protocol on Fair Access and Benefit-Sharing 2018: UN Declaration on the Rights of Peasants (UNDROP) 2023: High Seas Treaty (BBNJ Agreement) 2024: Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge (GRATK) Historical cases Chechen–Russian conflict Sri Lankan Civil War 2009 Peruvian political crisis Alta controversy Chiapas conflict Expulsion of the Chagossians High Arctic relocation Human rights in Tibet Indian removal Little Danes experiment Mapuche conflict Oka Crisis Residential schools Canada New Zealand South Africa United States Rubber boom San controversy Stolen Generations Persecution of Uyghurs in China Indigenous rights • Minority rights Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Latvia Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wwkzx
Cached time: 20250817103939
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.655 seconds
Real time usage: 0.827 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1777/1000000
Revision size: 19804/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 159849/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1504/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 90465/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.404/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20063851/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  630.734      1 -total
 40.46%  255.179      1 Template:Reflist
 15.30%   96.496      1 Template:In_lang
 13.88%   87.557      1 Template:Rights
 13.38%   84.421      1 Template:Sidebar
 12.97%   81.782      2 Template:Cite_news
 12.27%   77.403      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.47%   72.325      1 Template:Liberalism_sidebar
 10.01%   63.141      1 Template:Short_description
  8.07%   50.918      3 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2338892:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817103939 and revision id 1299137684. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Minority_rights&oldid=1299137684 " Categories : Minority rights Affirmative action Liberalism Majority–minority relations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2021 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 19:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Minority rights 25 languages Add topic

