Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Ethics 3 Works and influence 4 Mohism and science 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Mozi 55 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Scots Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese philosopher and logician (c. 470 – c. 391 BCE) For the text, see Mozi (book) . For other uses, see Mozi (disambiguation) .

"Micius" redirects here. For other uses, see Micius (disambiguation) .

"Mo Di" and "Mo Ti" redirect here. For the posthumous name of some Chinese emperors, see Emperor Mo (disambiguation) .

Mozi 墨子 Born c.

470 BCE Lu , Zhou dynasty (present-day Tengzhou , Shandong) Died c.

391 BCE (aged 79) Philosophical work Era Ancient philosophy Region Chinese philosophy School Mohism Main interests Ethics , social and political philosophy , logic , epistemology Mozi "Mozi" in seal script (top) and regular script (bottom) characters Chinese 墨子 Literal meaning Master Mo Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Mòzǐ Bopomofo ㄇㄛˋ ㄗˇ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Mohtzy Wade–Giles Mo 4 -tzu 3 Tongyong Pinyin Mò-zǐh IPA [mwô.tsɹ̩̀] Wu Suzhounese Meʔ-tzy Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Mahk-jí Jyutping Mak6 zi2 IPA [mɐk̚˨ tsi˧˥] Southern Min Tâi-lô Ba̍k-tsú Middle Chinese Middle Chinese Mok-tsí Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) *C.mˤak tseʔ Personal name Chinese 墨 翟 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Mò Dí Bopomofo ㄇㄛˋ ㄉㄧˊ Wade–Giles Mo 4 Ti 2 Tongyong Pinyin Mò Dí IPA [mwô.tǐ] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Mahk Dihk Jyutping Mak6 dik6 IPA [mɐk̚˨ tɪk̚˨] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Ba̍k Ti̍k Middle Chinese Middle Chinese Mok Dek Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) *C.mˤak Lˤewk Mozi , [ note 1 ] personal name Mo Di , [ note 2 ] [ 3 ] was a Chinese philosopher , logician, and the founder of the Mohist school of thought, making him one of the most important figures of the Warring States period ( c.

475 – 221 BCE). Alongside Confucianism , Mohism became the most prominent, organized schools of the Hundred Schools of Thought throughout the period. The Mozi is an anthology of writings traditionally attributed to Mozi and to his followers.

Born in what is now Tengzhou , Shandong, Mozi and his followers argued strongly against both Confucianism and Taoism , with a philosophy emphasizing universal love, social order , the will of Heaven , sharing, and honoring the worthy. Mohism was actively developed and practiced across the Warring States–era in China, falling out of favor following the establishment of the Qin dynasty in 221 BCE.

While tradition assumes the destruction of many Mohist texts in 213 BCE as part of Emperor Qin Shi Huang 's burning of books and burying of scholars , traces of Mohism can still be seen late in the early Han (from 202 BCE), in syncretic texts like the Huainanzi of c.

139 BCE . As Confucianism became the dominant school of thought over the fading legalism system during the Han dynasty (202 BCE – 220 CE), Mohism disappeared almost entirely by the middle of the Western Han period of 202 BCE to 9 CE.

[ 4 ] Mozi is referenced in the 6th-century CE Thousand Character Classic , which records that he was saddened when he saw the dyeing of pure white silk, which to him embodied his conception of austerity as simplicity and chastity.

Life [ edit ] Mozi was born in Lu (seen toward the north, with a small coastline along the Yellow Sea) and spent some time as a government minister in Song (a landlocked state to the south of Lu).

Most historians believe that Mozi was a member of the lower artisan class who managed to climb his way to an official post. Mozi was a native of the state of Lu (modern Tengzhou , Shandong), although for a time he served as a minister in the state of Song .

[ 5 ] Similar to Confucius , Mozi was known to have maintained a school for those who desired to become officials serving in the different ruling courts of the Warring States.

[ 6 ] Mozi was a carpenter and was extremely skilled in creating devices (see Lu Ban ). Though he did not hold a high official position, Mozi was sought out by various rulers as an expert on fortification. He was schooled in Confucianism in his early years, although he viewed Confucianism as being too fatalistic, with an overemphasis on elaborate celebrations and funerals, which Mozi considered to be detrimental to the livelihood and productivity of the common people. Mozi managed to attract a large following during his lifetime, rivaling that of Confucius. His followers—mostly technicians and craftspeople—were organized in a disciplined order that studied both Mozi's philosophical and technical writings.

[ citation needed ] According to some accounts of the popular understanding of Mozi at the time, he had been hailed by many as the greatest hero to come from Henan . His passion was said to be for the good of the people, without concern for personal gain or even for his own life or death. His tireless contribution to society was praised by many, including Confucius's disciple Mencius . Mencius wrote in Jinxin ( Chinese : 孟子盡心 ; pinyin : Mengzi jinxin ) that Mozi believed in love for all mankind, noting that, as long as something benefitted mankind, Mozi would pursue it even if it meant "hurting his head or his feet".

Zhang Tai Yan said that, in terms of moral virtue, even Confucius and Laozi could not compare to Mozi.

[ citation needed ] Mozi travelled from one crisis zone to another throughout the ravaged landscape of the Warring States, trying to dissuade rulers from their plans of conquest. According to the chapter "Gongshu" in the Mozi , he once walked for ten days to the state of Chu in order to forestall an attack on the State of Song. At the Chu court, Mozi engaged in nine simulated war games with Gongshu Ban , the chief military strategist of Chu, and overturned each one of his stratagems. When Gongshu Ban threatened him with death, Mozi informed the king that his disciples had already trained the soldiers of Song in his fortification methods, so it would be useless to kill him. The Chu king was forced to call off the war. On the way back, however, the soldiers of Song, not recognizing Mozi, would not allow him to enter their city, and he had to spend a night freezing in the rain. After this episode, he also prevented the state of Qi from attacking the State of Lu. He taught that the defense of a city did not depend only on fortification, weaponry, and food supply, but rather that it was also important to keep talented people close by and to put trust in them.

[ citation needed ] Philosophy [ edit ] See also: Mozi (book) The Mohists were experts at building fortifications and siege defenses.

Mozi's moral teachings emphasized introspection , self-reflection , and authenticity , rather than obedience to rituals . He observed that people often learned about the world through adversity.

[ 7 ] By reflecting on one's own successes and failures, one attains true self-knowledge rather than mere conformity to ritual.

[ 8 ] Mozi exhorted people to lead a life of asceticism and self-restraint, renouncing both material and spiritual extravagance.

Like Confucius, Mozi idealized the Xia dynasty and the ancients of Chinese mythology , but he also criticized the Confucian belief that modern life should be patterned on the ways of the ancients. Mozi argued that what is thought of as "ancient" was actually innovative in its time, and thus should not be used to hinder present-day innovation .

[ 9 ] Though Mozi did not believe that history necessarily progresses, as did Han Fei Zi , he shared the latter's critique of fate ( 命 , mìng ). Mozi believed that people were capable of changing their circumstances and directing their own lives, which could be achieved by applying one's senses to observing the world, as well as judging objects and events by their causes, functions, and historical bases.

[ 10 ] This was the "three-prong method" Mozi recommended for testing the truth or falsehood of statements. His students later expanded upon this theory to form the School of Names .

Mozi tried to replace what he considered to be the long-entrenched Chinese ideal of strong attachments to family and clan structures with the concept of "impartial caring" or "universal love" ( 兼愛 , jiān ài ). He argued directly against Confucians, who had philosophized that it was natural and correct for people to care about different people in different degrees. Mozi, in contrast, argued that people in principle should care for all people equally, a notion that philosophers in other schools found absurd, as they interpreted this notion as implying no special amount of care or duty towards one's parents and family.

Overlooked by those critics, however, was a passage in the chapter on "Self-Cultivation" which stated, "When people near-by are not befriended, there is no use endeavoring to attract those at a distance." [ 11 ] This point was also precisely articulated by a Mohist in a debate with Mencius (in the Mengzi ), where the Mohist argued, in relation to carrying out universal love, that "we begin with what is near." Also, in the first chapter in the Mozi on the topic of universal love, Mozi argued that the best way of being filial to one's parents is to be filial to the parents of others. The foundational principle was therefore that benevolence, as well as malevolence, is requited, and that one would be treated by others as one treats others. Mozi quoted a popular passage from the Book of Odes to bring home this point: "When one throws to me a peach, I return to him a plum." One's parents will be treated by others as one treats the parents of others. Mozi also differentiated between "intention" and "actuality", thereby placing a central importance on the will to love, even though in practice it might very well be impossible to bring benefit to everyone.

In addition, Mozi argued that benevolence comes to human beings "as naturally as fire turns upward or water turns downward", provided that persons in positions of authority illustrate benevolence in their own lives. In differentiating between the ideas of "universal" ( jian ) and "differential" ( bie ), Mozi said that "universal" originated from righteousness while "differential" entailed human effort.

Mozi also held a belief in the power of ghosts and spirits, although he is often thought to have only worshipped them pragmatically. In fact, in his discussion on ghosts and spirits, he remarked that, even if they did not exist, communal gatherings for the sake of making sacrificial offering would play a role in strengthening social bonds. Furthermore, for Mozi the will of Heaven ( 天 , tiān ) was that people should love one another, and that mutual love by all would bring benefit to all. Therefore, it was in everyone's interest that they would love others "as they love themselves". According to Mozi, Heaven should be respected because failing to do so would subject one to punishment. For Mozi, Heaven was not the "amoral", mystical nature of the Daoists ; rather, it was a benevolent, moral force that rewarded good and punished evil. Similar in some ways to the beliefs systems found in the Abrahamic religions , Mozi believed that all living things lived in a realm ruled by Heaven, and Heaven possessed a will which was independent from, and higher than, the will of people. Thus Mozi wrote that "Universal love is the Way of Heaven", since "Heaven nourishes and sustains all life without regard to status." [ 12 ] Mozi's ideal of government, which advocated a meritocracy based on talent rather than background, also followed his idea of Heaven.

Mozi opposed the Confucian idea of "Destiny", [ 13 ] promoting instead an idea of "anti-fatalism" ( 非命 ). Where the Confucian philosophy held that a person's life, death, wealth, poverty, and social status were entirely dependent upon destiny and therefore could not be changed, Mozi argued that hard work and virtuous acts could change one's position in life.

Ethics [ edit ] Confucian philosopher Mencius was one of several critics of Mozi, in part because Mozi's philosophy was believed to lack filial piety .

Mohist ethics is considered a form of consequentialism , according to which the morality of an action, statement, teaching, policy, judgment, and so on, is determined by the consequences that it brings about. In particular, Mozi thought that actions should be measured by the way they contribute to the benefit of all members of society. With this criterion, Mozi denounced things as diverse as offensive warfare, expensive funerals, and even music and dance, which he saw as serving no useful purpose. According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Mohist consequentialism, dating back to the 5th century BCE, is the "world's earliest form of consequentialism, a remarkably sophisticated version based on a plurality of intrinsic goods taken as constitutive of human welfare".

[ 14 ] Consequentialist theories vary over exactly which consequences are relevant, though they all share the same basic outcome-based structure. With Mozi's overwhelming focus on "benefit" ( 利 , li ) among other ends, and his explicit focus on making moral evaluations in light of them, Mozi's ethics indeed shares this consequentalist structure. For interpreting Mozi, however, there is some debate over how to understand the consequences Mozi seems most concerned with, and therefore over which kind of consequentialism to ascribe to him.

Some believe the best descriptor to be state consequentialism.

[ 15 ] According to this reading, Mohist ethics makes moral evaluations based on how well the action, statement, etc., in question contributes to the stability of a state.

[ 15 ] Such state-related goods include social order, material wealth, and population growth. By centering his ethical theory around the promotion of such state-related ends, Mozi shows himself to be a state consequentialist. Unlike hedonistic utilitarianism , which views pleasure as a moral good, "the basic goods in Mohist consequentialist thinking are ... order, material wealth, and increase in population".

[ 16 ] During Mozi's era, war and famines were common, and population growth was seen as a moral necessity for a harmonious society. Mozi opposed wars because they wasted life and resources while interfering with the fair distribution of wealth, yet he recognized the need for strong urban defenses so he could maintain the harmonious society he desired.

[ 17 ] The "material wealth" of Mohist consequentialism refers to basic needs like shelter and clothing, and the "order" of Mohist consequentialism refers to Mozi's stance against warfare and violence, which he viewed as pointless and a threat to social stability.

[ 18 ] Stanford sinologist David Shepherd Nivison , in The Cambridge History of Ancient China , writes that the moral goods of Mohism "are interrelated: more basic wealth, then more reproduction; more people, then more production and wealth ... if people have plenty, they would be good, filial, kind, and so on unproblematically".

[ 16 ] In contrast to Jeremy Bentham , Mozi did not believe that individual happiness was important; the consequences of the state outweigh the consequences of individual actions.

[ 16 ] Alternative readings locate the main focus of Mozi's consequentialism in the welfare of the people themselves rather than that of the state as a whole.

[ 19 ] Such interpretations as Chris Fraser's argue that it is a mistake to view Mozi's focus on the collective well-being of a population as a focus on the well-being of the state itself rather than its constituents. In this way, Mozi tended to evaluate actions based on whether they provide benefit to the people, which he measured in terms of an enlarged population (states were sparsely populated in his day), a prosperous economy, and social order. Indeed these are collective goods rather than individual ones, which is a major difference between Mohist consequentialism and modern, Western versions. However, this reading emphasizes that collective goods are better considered as aggregated individual goods rather than as state goods.

This consequentialist structure supports Mohist ethics and politics, which survives in the form of 10 core doctrines: Promoting the Worthy Identifying Upward Universal Love (sometimes called "Inclusive Care") Condemning Aggression Moderation in Use Moderation in Burials Heaven's Intent Understanding Ghosts Condemning Music Condemning Fatalism Each of these doctrines is justified on the grounds that it produces the best consequences for society, and that all people stand to benefit from adopting them. Promoting the worthy, for example, encourages people in positions of power to hire competent and worthy subordinates to fill posts, rather than hire friends and relatives instead. The reasoning here is that someone better qualified for the job will perform better and enable society as a whole to benefit. Identifying upward refers to the idea that people in subordinate positions in society must look to their superiors as models for their own conduct. Provided that the superiors are indeed morally competent and worthy of emulation, the rest of society will always have a reliable guide for their own actions, thereby giving rise to social benefits.

Universal love refers to the basic normative attitude the Mohists encourage us to adopt towards others. The idea is that people ought to consider all others as being part of their scope of moral concern. Indeed this is perhaps the most infamous of Mohist doctrines, and was criticized early on by philosophers such as Mengzi, who held that the doctrine was akin to renouncing one's family. However, close readings of the texts by modern scholars have shown the demands of Mohist universal love to be much more mild and reasonable.

[ 20 ] Additionally, given the accretional nature of the texts, the audience of such texts may have changed depending upon the Mohists' social influence, and so the demands for universal love made on rulers, for example, is considerably higher than that made on the masses.

[ 21 ] At its most basic, however, the doctrine merely encourages a general attitude of care towards others. However, this does not require that we renounce all forms of special relationships we have with our families and friends. In fact, the Mohists introduce the problem that universal love is meant to solve by lamenting the fact that fathers and sons don't care for each other, and so must instead adopt an attitude of universal love.

[ 22 ] Conversely, the Mohists hope, when people adopt an attitude of universal love, society as a whole will benefit.

Dovetailing with this idea is that of condemning aggression. The main targets of this doctrine are undoubtedly the rulers of the various warring states in China, who regularly embarked on expansionist military campaigns in order to increase their territory, power, and influence. However, such campaigns were enormously taxing on the population, disrupting regular farming cycles by conscripting able-bodied people for these military ends. Additionally, the practices is ethically wrong for the same reason that robbery and murder are wrong. In fact, according to Mozi, the two are actually one and the same; for what is an expansionist war of aggression other than robbery and murder on a grand scale? And yet, Mozi laments, those rulers who execute robbers and murderers engage in the very same practices. With respect to universal love, indeed part of the reason why rulers believe it is acceptable to invade and conquer other states while it is not acceptable for their own subjects to rob and steal from one another is that the people in neighboring states are not part of the rulers' scope of moral concern. If rulers were to instead include these people and refrain from wars of aggression, all states, those attacking and those defending, will benefit.

[ citation needed ] Moderation in use and moderation in burials are the main Mohist ideas about frugality. In one's own projects, utility ought to be the only consideration.

What is the purpose of houses? It is to protect us from the wind and cold of winter, the heat and rain of summer, and to keep out robbers and thieves. Once these ends have been secured, that is all. Whatever does not contribute to these ends should be eliminated.

[ 18 ] — Mozi, Mozi (5th century BC) Ch 20 The Mohists took particular offense to the practice of extremely lavished funerals and demanding mourning rituals. Such funerals and rituals would potentially bankrupt an entire clan, at least temporarily, and disrupt its farming practices. For the dead in higher positions of authority, this disruption would affect an even greater number of people. Again, the point here is to promote benefit across society, and the Mohists believe that adopting frugal practices will do so.

[ citation needed ] Mozi's ideas about ghosts and spirits follow from their religious beliefs in a morally consistent universe. Heaven, it is argued, is the ultimate moral standard, while ghosts and spirits serve as Heaven's enforcers. Both doctrines, when adopted, promote societal benefit both by enabling people to rely upon an objective standard to guide their actions (namely, Heaven), and by acting as a sort of cosmic authority capable of enacting rewards and punishments.

[ citation needed ] Mozi's condemnation of music rests on the same economic considerations as their general ideas of frugality. In ancient China, grand musical ceremonies established by rulers would place enormous financial and human strains on populations, and so Mozi condemned such ceremonies for this reason. Mozi did not object to music in principle—"It's not that I don't like the sound of the drum" ("Against Music")—but only because of the heavy tax burden such activities placed on commoners and also due to the fact that officials tended to indulge in them at the expense of their duties.

[ citation needed ] Finally, the Mohists rejected the idea of fatalism, or the idea that there is fate. The Mohists reject this idea on the grounds that it encourages lazy and irresponsible behavior. When people believe that there is fate, and that the consequences of their actions lie beyond their control, people will not be encouraged to improve themselves, nor will they be willing to take responsibility for disasters. As a result, society will suffer, and so the doctrine that there is fate ought to be rejected.

[ citation needed ] Works and influence [ edit ] Main article: Mozi (book) A page from the Mozi "Mozi" is also the name of the philosophical anthology written and compiled by followers of Mozi. The text was formed by an accretional process that took place over a period of hundreds of years, beginning perhaps during or shortly after Mozi's lifetime, and lasting until perhaps the early Han dynasty.

[ 23 ] During the Han dynasty, as Confucianism came to be the official school of political thought, Mohism gradually lost both its adherents and influence while simultaneously being partly incorporated into more mainstream political thought.

[ 24 ] The text was eventually neglected, and only 58 of the text's original 71 books ( pian ) survive, some of which, notably the later Mohist Canons , contain significant textual corruptions and are fragmentary in nature.

[ 25 ] The anthology can be divided into 5 main groups, which are determined on the basis of both chronological and thematic features: Books 1-7 consist of short, miscellaneous essays containing summaries of Mohist doctrines, anecdotes about Mozi, and ideals about meritocratic government. Some appear to be relatively late texts, expressing mature Mohist political and ethical thought on some topics.

Books 8-37 contain the Mohists' key essays on the ten "core" Mohist doctrines. Though they exhibit explicit thematic unity, textual evidence suggests that the Mohists revisited their core doctrines throughout their activity, responding to objections and addressing issues unresolved in earlier, often shorter and simpler expositions.

Books 38-39 are a series of polemics against the Ru (Confucians). They are often grouped with books 8-37, though they do not expound a positive doctrine, and their purpose is entirely critical.

Books 40-45 are often referred to as the "dialectical books." These are often considered "later Mohist" writings, though actual chronological details about them are difficult to glean. They are written in an idiosyncratic style, and focus on a broad range of issues that go well beyond those of the Mohist core doctrines, including logic, epistemology, optics, geometry, and ethics.

Books 46-51 are dialogues. They are probably later, and likely fictional, exhibiting Mozi in conversation with various interlocutors.

Books 52-71 are chapters on military affairs, specifically focusing on preparing for defensive warfare.

The Mozi is a rich source of insight into early Chinese dynastic history, culture, and philosophy. The text frequently cites ancient classics, such as the Shang Shu , and at times departs from the received version, giving scholars insight into the textual development of such classics as well.

The texts portray Mozi as a mouthpiece for Mohist philosophy and not much else. This picture contrasts that of Confucius and Mencius found in the Lunyu ( Analects ) and Mengzi respectively, wherein the thinkers in question are portrayed as expressing emotions, chiding students, and even making mistakes. (Consider Mengzi's disastrous advice to the King of Qi to invade the state of Yan.) [ 26 ] To contrast, Mozi has little if any personality in the text, instead serving only as a mouthpiece for Mohist philosophy.

Mohism, like other schools of thought at the time, was suppressed under the Qin and died out completely under the Han , as its more radical adherents gradually dissolved and its most compelling ideas became absorbed by mainstream political thought. The influence of Mozi is still visible in many Han dynasty works written hundreds of years later. For example, the Confucian scholar Gongsun Hong describes the Confucian virtue of ren ("benevolence") in Mohist terms.

[ 27 ] Additionally, Mohist epistemology and philosophy of language had a profound influence on the development of classical Chinese philosophy in general.

[ 28 ] In fact, Mohism was so prominent during the Warring States period that philosophical opponents, including Mencius and some authors of the Daoist anthology, the Zhuangzi , lament the very prevalence and widespread influence of their ideas.

[ 29 ] In modern times, Mohism has been given a fresh analysis.

Sun Yat-Sen used "universal love" as one of the foundations for his idea of Chinese democracy. More recently, Chinese scholars under Communism have tried to rehabilitate Mozi as a "philosopher of the people", highlighting his rational-empirical approach to the world as well as his "proletarian" background. The body in the Mozi is constructed by xing ( 形 , 'body'), xin ( 心 , 'heart'), qi ( 氣 , 'energy') 'which is in accord with the Pre-Qin thinkers' understanding to the body. While xing refers to the flesh-bloody part of human being, the concept of xin focuses on the aspect of cognition and is closely related to the concept of shan ( 善 , 'goodness'), ai ( 愛 , 'love'), zhi ( 志 , 'will') and xing.

[ 30 ] Some views claim that Mozi's philosophy was at once more advanced and less so than that of Confucius. Indeed the Mohists were radical political reformers who sought primarily to benefit the masses and challenge the practices of the ruling orthodoxy, often targeting a perceived wasteful aristocracy whom they referred to as "the gentlemen of the world." The Mohist idea of "universal love" embraced a broader idea of human community than that of the Confucians, arguing that the scope of individuals' moral concern should include all people. Opponents of this idea often claimed that "universal love" was akin to renouncing one's family, [ 31 ] and indeed more strict Mohists living in Mohist communities as the school flourished may have exhibited such behavior. However, there is some scholarly debate over just how radical the provisions of universal love actually are, and, as can be seen from the example of Gongsun Hong above, the less radical components of the doctrine were eventually absorbed by mainstream thought.

Mozi is also famous for his ideas about frugality, such as those concerning moderating expenses and eliminating wasteful ceremonies including music and funerals. A common misconception is that the Mohists eschewed all forms of art, but of course the Mohists' targets are more specifically elaborate, state-sponsored rituals that would place incredible financial burdens upon a mostly peasant population. This can be seen from Xunzi's own arguments against Mozi in book 10 of the Xunzi "Enriching the State," where Xunzi argues against Mozi that prominent displays of wealth on the part of the state is necessary to maintaining social order.

Some modern-day supporters for Mozi [ who?

] (as well as Communism) make the claim that Mohism and modern Communism share a lot in terms of ideals for community life. Others [ who?

] would claim that Mohism shares more with the central ideas of Christianity , especially in terms of the idea of "universal love" (in Greek, " agape "), the " Golden Rule ", and the relation of humanity to the supernatural realm. However, Mohism is undoubtedly a product of Warring States China, a period of tremendous political violence and turmoil. The Mohists were political reformers, but they did not seek to challenge the monarchical model of government that prevailed during that time, and sought instead to reform from within by encouraging governments to hire competent people to carry out political tasks, care for their people inclusively, eliminate frivolous government spending, and halt all wars of aggression.

In many ways the influence of Mohism was a victim of its own successes, and it is fairly easy to understand its decline. The Mohists' ideas about the importance of meritocracy and universal love were gradually absorbed by mainstream Confucian thinking. Their opposition to offensive warfare became irrelevant once the various Warring States were unified under the Qin and later Han dynasty, and their religious superstitions were eventually replaced with less supernatural accounts. So their most promising ideas were metabolized by the tradition, while their more radical and anachronistic ones were gradually discarded, leading to their demise during the Han dynasty.

Mohism and science [ edit ] According to Joseph Needham , Mozi (collected writings of those in the tradition of Mozi, some of which might have been by Mozi himself) contains the following sentence: 'The cessation of motion is due to the opposing force... If there is no opposing force... the motion will never stop. This is as true as that an ox is not a horse.' which, he claims, is a precursor to Newton's first law of motion.

[ 32 ] Mozi also contains speculations in optics and mechanics that are similarly strikingly original, although their ideas were not taken up by later Chinese philosophers. The Mohist tradition is also highly unusual in Chinese thought in that it devoted time to developing principles of logic.

[ 33 ] He is the first to describe the physical principle behind the camera , also known as the camera obscura .

[ 34 ] [ note 3 ] [ 35 ] See also [ edit ] China portal Philosophy portal Religion portal History portal Biography portal A Battle of Wits – a historical film based around Mohism History of geometry List of people on stamps of the People's Republic of China Fa , an influential concept elaborated by Mozi Notes [ edit ] ^ / ˈ m oʊ ˈ t s iː / ; [ 1 ] / ˈ m oʊ ˈ t s uː / [ 2 ] Rarely Latinized as Micius .

^ In this Chinese name , the family name is Mo .

^ In the Mozi passage, a camera obscura is described as a "collecting-point" or "treasure house" ( 庫 ); the 18th-century scholar Bi Yuan ( 畢沅 ) suggested this was a misprint for "screen" ( 㢓 ).

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Mo-Zi" .

Collins English Dictionary .

^ "Mozi" .

Collins English Dictionary .

^ Epps, Henry (August 11, 2012). "State Consequentialism".

Ethics . Vol. 2. Lulu.com. p. 7.

ISBN 978-1-300-07540-0 . Retrieved October 15, 2024 .

There has been considerable debate about the actual name of Mozi. Traditionally, Mozi was said to have inherited the surname 'Mo' from his supposed ancestor, the Lord of Guzhu [...], himself descended from Shennong the legenday emperor. The descendants of the Lord of Guzhu had the clan name 'Motai' [...], which later was shortened to 'Mo'. However, modern scholarship suggests that 'Mo' was not, in fact, the clan name of Mozi, as this clan name is not encountered during the Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods, but that 'Mo' was rather the name of the Mohist school itself, derived from the name of a criminal punishment (tattooing of the forehead of criminals; 'mo' literally means 'ink'), usually inflicted on slaves. [...] It signals the Mohists' identification with the lowest of the common people. The actual ancestral name and clan name of Mozi is not known.

^ Fraser, Chris (2002).

"Mohism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Needham & Wang 1956 165.

^ Needham & Wang 1956 165–184.

^ Mozi , "Embracing Scholars".

^ Mozi , "Refining Self".

^ Mozi , "Against Confucianism, Part 3".

^ Mozi , "Against Fate, Part 3".

^ Mozi , "Self-Cultivation".

^ Mozi , "Laws and Customs".

^ Cui, Dahua (September 1, 2009). "Rational awareness of the ultimate in human life – The Confucian concept of 'destiny' ".

Frontiers of Philosophy in China .

4 (3): 309– 321.

doi : 10.1007/s11466-009-0020-7 .

ISSN 1673-3436 .

S2CID 143576827 .

^ Fraser, Chris, " Mohism ", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Edward N. Zalta.

^ a b Ivanhoe, P.J.; Van Norden, Bryan William (2005).

Readings in classical Chinese philosophy .

Hackett Publishing . p. 60.

ISBN 978-0-87220-780-6 .

"he advocated a form of state consequentialism, which sought to maximize three basic goods: the wealth, order, and population of the state ^ a b c Loewe, Michael; Shaughnessy, Edward L. (2011).

The Cambridge History of Ancient China .

Cambridge University Press . p. 761.

ISBN 978-0-521-47030-8 .

^ Tignor, Robert; Adelman, Jeremy; Brown, Peter; Elman, Benjamin; Liu, Xinru; Pittman, Holly; Shaw, Brent (October 24, 2013).

Worlds Together Worlds Apart Volume One: Beginnings Through the 15th Century (Fourth ed.). W.W. Norton. p. 167.

ISBN 9780393922080 .

^ a b Van Norden, Bryan W. (2011).

Introduction to Classical Chinese Philosophy .

Hackett Publishing . p. 52.

ISBN 978-1-60384-468-0 .

^ Fraser, Chris (2016).

The Philosophy of the Mozi: The First Consequentialists . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 17.

ISBN 9780231149266 .

^ Robins, Dan (2012). "Mohist Care".

Philosophy East and West .

62 (1): 60– 91.

doi : 10.1353/pew.2012.0005 .

S2CID 201752116 .

^ Defoort, Carine (2005). "The Growing Scope of 'jian': Differences between Chapters 14, 15, and 16 of the Mozi ".

Oriens Extremus .

45 : 119– 140.

^ "Mozi : Book 4 : Universal Love I - Chinese Text Project" .

ctext.org .

^ "Mohism > Texts and Authorship (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" .

^ "Mohism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2020.

^ Graham, Angus. (1978). Later Mohist Logic, Ethics, and Science. New Territories, Hong Kong SAR: The Chinese University Press.

^ "Mengzi : Gong Sun Chou II - Chinese Text Project" .

ctext.org .

^ https://ctext.org/dictionary.pl?if=en&id=66344 . Graham (1978) was the first to notice this among contemporary scholars.

^ Chad Hansen. (1992).

A Daoist Theory of Chinese Thought . New York: Oxford University Press.

^ https://ctext.org/dictionary.pl?if=en&id=13330#s10030758 , https://ctext.org/dictionary.pl?if=en&id=2771#s10027275 ^ 王介成 (October 1, 2018).

《墨子》身體觀探研－以「修身」為核心 .

國立臺灣大學哲學論評 國立臺灣大學哲學論評 [ National Taiwan University Philosophy Review ] (in Chinese (Taiwan)) (56): 139– 175.

doi : 10.6276/NTUPR.201810_(56).0004 .

^ "Chinese Text Project Dictionary" .

ctext.org .

^ "No. 2080 The Survival of Invention" .

www.uh.edu .

^ FENRONG, LIU; JIALONG, ZHANG (January 2010).

"NEW PERSPECTIVES ON MOHIST LOGIC" .

Journal of Chinese Philosophy .

37 (4): 605– 621.

^ Needham, Joseph.

Science and Civilization in China, vol. IV, part 1: Physics and Physical Technology (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 3, 2017 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ "Camera Obscura History - Who Invented Camera Obscura?" .

www.photographyhistoryfacts.com . Retrieved July 3, 2019 .

Sources [ edit ] Fraser, Chris.

"Mohism," article in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Graham, A. C.

(1993). "Mo tzu" 墨子 . In Loewe, Michael (ed.).

Early Chinese Texts – A Bibliographical Guide . Berkeley, CA: Society for the Study of Early China & Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California Berkeley. pp.

336– 41.

ISBN 978-1-55729-043-4 .

Knechtges, David R.

(2010).

"Mozi" 墨子 . In Knechtges, David R.; Chang, Taiping (eds.).

Ancient and Early Medieval Chinese Literature: A Reference Guide, Part One . Leiden: Brill. pp.

677– 81.

ISBN 978-90-04-19127-3 .

Needham, Joseph ; Wang, Ling (1956).

Science and Civilization in China . Vol. 2.

History of Scientific Thought . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-05800-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) . (Printings were 1956, 1962, 1969) See also the 1986 edition published in Taipei by Caves Books Ltd.

Cui, D (2009). "Rational awareness of the ultimate in human life—The Confucian concept of "destiny" ".

Frontiers of Philosophy in China .

4 (3): 309– 321.

doi : 10.1007/s11466-009-0020-7 .

S2CID 143576827 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bertolt Brecht .

Me-ti. Buch der Wendungen . Suhrkamp, Frankfurt 1971.

Wing-tsit Chan , ed.

A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy . Princeton University Press, Princeton 1969, ISBN 0-691-01964-9 .

Wejen Chang, Traditional Chinese Jurisprudence: Legal Thought of Pre-Qin Thinkers . Cambridge 1990.

Chris Fraser, The Philosophy of the Mòzi: The First Consequentialists , New York, Columbia University Press, 2016.

Jane Geaney, "A Critique of A. C. Graham's Reconstruction of the 'Neo-Mohist Canons,'" Journal of the American Oriental Society, 119, no. 1 (1999), pp. 1–11.

Anna Ghiglione, Mozi , complete translation from classical Chinese, annotated and commented, Québec, Les Presses de l'Université Laval, 2018. Series « Histoire et cultures chinoises », edited by Shenwen Li.

Angus C. Graham, Disputers of the TAO: Philosophical Argument in Ancient China (Open Court 1993).

ISBN 0-8126-9087-7 —.

Later Mohist Logic, Ethics and Science by A. C. Graham, (1978, reprinted 2004) The Chinese University Press, Hong Kong. 700 pages.

Hansen, Chad (1989). "Mozi: Language Utilitarianism: The Structure of Ethics in Classical China".

The Journal of Chinese Philosophy .

16 ( 3– 4): 355– 380.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6253.1989.tb00443.x .

—.

A Daoist Theory of Chinese Thought . (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992) Kung-chuan Hsiao.

A History of Chinese Political Thought . In: Volume One: From the Beginnings to the Sixth Century A.D.. Princeton University Press, Princeton 1979 (übersetzt von F. W. Mote).

Mei Yi-pao [ zh ] Mo-tse, the Neglected Rival of Confucius . London: Arthur Probsthain, 1934.

Ralf Moritz, Die Philosophie im alten China .

Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften , Berlin 1990, ISBN 3-326-00466-4 .

Peter J. Opitz, Der Weg des Himmels: Zum Geist und zur Gestalt des politischen Denkens im klassischen China . Fink, München 1999, ISBN 3-7705-3380-1 .

Helwig Schmidt-Glintzer, (ed.), Mo Ti: Von der Liebe des Himmels zu den Menschen . Diederichs, München 1992, ISBN 3-424-01029-4 .

—.

Mo Ti: Solidarität und allgemeine Menschenliebe . Diederichs, Düsseldorf/Köln 1975, ISBN 3-424-00509-6 .

—.

Mo Ti: Gegen den Krieg . Diederichs, Düsseldorf/Köln 1975, ISBN 3-424-00509-6 .

Aronovich Rubin Vitaly, Individual and State in Ancient China: Essays on Four Chinese Philosophers . Columbia University Press, New York 1976, ISBN 0-231-04064-4 .

Robin D. S. Yates , "The Mohists on Warfare: Technology, Technique, and Justification", Journal of the American Academy of Religion , 47, mo. 3 (1980, Thematic Issue S), pp. 549–603.

Ian Johnston, The Mozi: A Complete Translation , New York: Columbia University Press, 2010.

External links [ edit ] Mozi at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Mozi , biographical profile, including quotes and further resources, at Utilitarianism.net Full text of the Mozi (Chinese with English translation based on Mei's translation) Mozi in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Links to related articles v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐ndczz
Cached time: 20250817043829
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.354 seconds
Real time usage: 1.681 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13331/1000000
Revision size: 48229/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 376074/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 101880/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 164764/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.794/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20600993/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1329.324      1 -total
 19.02%  252.819      2 Template:Reflist
 17.64%  234.503      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 13.71%  182.260      1 Template:Navboxes
 10.18%  135.364     11 Template:Cite_book
  9.66%  128.422     17 Template:Lang
  8.99%  119.508      3 Template:Navbox
  8.21%  109.192      1 Template:Langn
  8.03%  106.714      1 Template:Infobox_Chinese
  8.01%  106.425      1 Template:Normal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:196578:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043829 and revision id 1302918325. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mozi&oldid=1302918325 " Categories : Mohism 470s BC births 390s BC deaths 5th-century BC Chinese philosophers 5th-century BC Chinese writers 4th-century BC Chinese philosophers 4th-century BC Chinese writers Ancient Chinese military writers Chinese military engineers Zhou dynasty philosophers Aphorists Ascetics Asian pacifists Chinese essayists Chinese ethicists Chinese logicians Chinese non-fiction writers Chinese political philosophers Chinese technology writers Consequentialists Critics of Confucianism Critics of Taoism Epistemologists Literacy and society theorists Logicians Metaphysicians Metaphysics writers Moral psychologists Moral realists Natural philosophers Nonviolence advocates Ontologists Philosophers from Lu (state) Philosophers of culture Philosophers of education Philosophers of history Philosophers of law Philosophers of logic Philosophers of psychology Philosophers of science Philosophers of social science Philosophers of technology Philosophers of war Simple living advocates Social philosophers Technical writers Writers about activism and social change Writers about religion and science Writers of lost works Writers who illustrated their own writing Hidden categories: CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese (Taiwan)-language sources (zh-tw) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2020 Use American English from November 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2021 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Year of birth uncertain Year of death uncertain This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 03:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mozi 55 languages Add topic

