Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Campus 3 Organization 4 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 4.1 Scholars 4.2 Internships 4.3 Graduate and professional programs 5 Student life Toggle Student life subsection 5.1 Clubs and organizations 6 Sexual assault cases 7 Athletics Toggle Athletics subsection 7.1 Clemente Field 8 Notable people 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Emmanuel College (Massachusetts) 3 languages Français Italiano Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°20′30″N 71°6′12″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.34167°N 71.10333°W ﻿ / 42.34167; -71.10333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Emmanuel Saints ) Private college in Boston, Massachusetts, US Emmanuel College Motto "God with us" Type Private college Established 1919 ; 106 years ago ( 1919 ) Accreditation NECHE Affiliation Roman Catholic ( Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur ) Academic affiliations Colleges of the Fenway Annapolis Group Endowment $159.1 million (2020) [ 1 ] President E. Elizabeth "Beth" Ross Academic staff 77 full-time Administrative staff 92 full-time Students 2,500 [ 2 ] Undergraduates 2,198 Postgraduates 290 Location Boston, Massachusetts , U.S.

42°20′30″N 71°6′12″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.34167°N 71.10333°W ﻿ / 42.34167; -71.10333 Campus Urban, 17 acres (6.9 ha) Fight Song When the Saints Go Marching In Colors Nickname Saints Sporting affiliations NCAA Division III - GNAC NEISA Mascot Halo the Saint Bernard Website emmanuel.edu/ Emmanuel College is a private Roman Catholic college in Boston , Massachusetts . The college was founded by the Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur as the first women's Catholic college in New England in 1919.

[ 3 ] In 2001, the college officially became a coeducational institution. It is a member of the Colleges of the Fenway consortium. In addition to the Fenway campus, Emmanuel operates a living and learning campus in Roxbury, Massachusetts .

History [ edit ] The Emmanuel College Administration Building was built in 1919 by the architecture firm Maginnis & Walsh . Maginnis & Walsh are also known for building Gasson Hall at Boston College and the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, D.C.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The Administration Building at Emmanuel College is notable for its early 20th century Gothic architecture .

In the early years, Emmanuel was a day college preparing women for professional fields such as education, nursing, and social work. Despite being commuters, students were involved in numerous co-curricular activities including student publications and athletics. The 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s saw growth not only in the student population, academic programs and activities, but also in the physical campus, with additional land purchases on Brookline Avenue and Avenue Louis Pasteur. In 1949, the college completed the construction of Alumnae Hall, a science center, the first building constructed on campus after the original Administration Building.

The trustees of the college were incorporated by the state in 1921.

[ 6 ] John F. Kennedy served on the college's advisory board from 1946 until his death in 1963.

[ 7 ] Longtime President Sister Janet Eisner , who had presided over years of enrollment decline and sought to save the college from closure, oversaw a signed agreement with Merck Pharmaceuticals. With this, the college agreed to lease a portion of its campus for a new research laboratory to Merck for  75 years and approximately $50 million. The agreement made Emmanuel the only college in the country with a pharmaceutical lab on campus.

[ 8 ] At the same time, Emmanuel started admitting men, enrolling its first undergraduate male students in 2001. The financially stabilizing alliance with Merck permitted Emmanuel to begin building new dorms and buying back buildings it had sold in leaner times.

[ citation needed ] Going co-ed and improving the campus sparked a sustained revival that made Emmanuel one of the fastest-growing colleges in New England at that time.

[ citation needed ] Emmanuel's building plan also included the Jean Yawkey Student Center, which opened in 2004 as the first new building on campus in 35 years.

[ 9 ] The college administration used the windfall to secure millions in federal science grants to fund the construction of a $50 million science center. The Maureen Murphy Wilkens Science Center opened in the fall of 2009, effectively doubling the academic space of the campus. The Wilkens Center is four floors and 47,500 feet and contains faculty/student research space and offices, student study areas, new classrooms for all academic areas, 120 underground parking spaces, as well as teaching laboratories for biology , chemistry , biochemistry , and physics .

[ 10 ] In 2016, Julie Hall was torn down to make way for a new apartment-style 18-floor residence hall. Built for a cost of $140 million, the cost of the project was the same as Emmanuel's total endowment. The resulting residence hall opened in 2018, provides 692 beds of apartment-style housing to upper-class Emmanuel students and approximately 250 students from nearby Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences , generating additional revenue.

[ 11 ] Emmanuel College celebrated its centennial anniversary in 2019. In 2022, President Janet Eisner retired, and Mary K. Boyd was named the college's 13th president.

[ 12 ] She abruptly resigned the following year.

[ 13 ] In August 2023, Dr. Beth Ross was named Acting President.

[ 13 ] In January 2024, Dr. Beth Ross was named the college's 14th president.

[ 14 ] Campus [ edit ] Emmanuel's 17- acre campus is located adjacent to the Longwood Medical District in the Fenway area of Boston . The gated campus consists of 11 buildings, including seven academic buildings and four dormitories . Academic buildings include the original Administration Building, the Cardinal Cushing Library, the Jean Yawkey Center, Marian Hall, the Maureen Murphy Wilkens Science Center and Merck Research Laboratories-Boston.

[ 15 ] Approximately 75% of Emmanuel's traditional undergraduates reside in the residence halls on campus, while the remainder commute from the local area. The four dormitories include St. Ann Hall, Loretto Hall, St. Joseph Hall and St. Julie Hall (formerly New Residence Hall).

[ 16 ] In 2018, Emmanuel College opened an 18-story residence hall at the location of the original Julie Hall. The new St. Julie Hall provides apartment-style housing to upper-class students, as well as a convenience store and a Dunkin' Donuts .

[ 17 ] Emmanuel College was ranked among the top ten best college locations in America and the #1 college location in Massachusetts.

[ 18 ] Organization [ edit ] The college is Roman Catholic , founded by the Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur .

[ 19 ] It is also a member of the Colleges of the Fenway consortium, which also includes neighboring Massachusetts College of Art and Design , Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences , Simmons College , Wentworth Institute of Technology , and formerly Wheelock College .

[ 20 ] Academics [ edit ] Jean Yawkey Center At the undergraduate level, Emmanuel offers over 70 majors, minors and concentrations in the liberal arts and sciences.

[ 21 ] The Bachelor of Arts , Bachelor of Science , and Bachelor of Fine Arts degrees require the successful completion of a minimum of 128 credits, distributed among the general requirements, major requirements and elective or minor courses. Students are required to complete the first-year seminar program during the first semester of their freshman year, which consists of a one-semester topical seminar related to "Knowledge, Values and Social Change." [ 22 ] Emmanuel College is composed of six schools. These are the School of Humanities & Social Sciences, the School of Science & Health, the School of Business & Management, the School of Education, and the School of Nursing.

[ 23 ] In 2019, the Massachusetts Board of Registration in Nursing granted the college initial approval status for four-year Bachelor of Science in Nursing Program.

[ 24 ] The most popular majors at Emmanuel College are Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Psychology, Business, Management, Marketing, Education, and Communication and Media Studies.

[ 25 ] Emmanuel College is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education .

[ 26 ] Scholars [ edit ] As of Fall 2022, Emmanuel College has produced several Fulbright faculty scholars in the past decade: two in 2015–16 and one in 2020–2021. In addition, Emmanuel produced student Fulbright scholars annually from 2010 to 2014, and again saw two students awarded Fulbright grants in the 2020–2021 academic year.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Internships [ edit ] Internships are an integral part of the curriculum. 100% of Emmanuel graduates complete an internship.

[ 29 ] The Office of Internships and Career Development has over 850 internship opportunities in Greater Boston listed on its career website, EC3: Emmanuel College Career Connect. As of 2010, 1/3 of the job offers that new Emmanuel graduates receive come from the companies at which they interned.

[ 30 ] Graduate and professional programs [ edit ] Emmanuel began offering graduate and professional programs in management, nursing and education in 1980. Today the college enrolls 700 graduate and professional students in online programs and offers degrees and certificates in business, education, and nursing.

[ 31 ] Student life [ edit ] Clubs and organizations [ edit ] Emmanuel College, Maureen Murphy Wilkens Science Center The college sponsors approximately 50 student clubs and organizations, most of which are managed by the Office of Student Activities and Multicultural Programs. Academic clubs include Art, Art Therapy, Art History, Biology, Chemistry, Education, Business Organization, Political Forum, Philosophy, Pre-Med (36 Hours), Psychology and Sociology.

[ 32 ] Arts/Performances clubs include the Emmanuel College Theatre Guild, Shakespeare Society, Acapocalypse, For Good Measure, Pep Band, Photography club, and more.

[ 33 ] Community Service /volunteer clubs include the Emmanuel College Community Outreach (ECCO), Habitat for Humanity , Love Your Melon and Support Our Troops.

Since 2012, Emmanuel College has worked with Children's Miracle Network to hold an annual dance marathon, raising funds for childhood cancer research at Boston Children's Hospital .

[ 34 ] There are a variety of cultural organizations, including an International Student Association, Asian Student Association, Black Student Union, Muslim Student Association, Latino Student Association, Irish Club, Italian Club, Gender Equality Club, and OUTspoken (LGBTQ).

[ 35 ] Media/Publications groups include Emmanuel College Radio, Epilogue (Yearbook), Her Campus, Writer's Block, Spoon University, and The Hub (Newspaper).

Political/special interest groups include Political Forum, Model U.N.

, and Youth in Government The Student Government /Programming Board groups include the Programming Team, Class Officers, Commuter Council, Residence Hall Councils and Student Government Association.

[ 36 ] Sexual assault cases [ edit ] In 2016, a female student decided to leave Emmanuel College in her sophomore year to protest the fact that a male student she said had raped her in 2015 was found “not responsible” for assaulting her by the university administration, after administrators advised her to let the college handle the allegations, rather than police.

[ 37 ] Her announcement, which complained that the university "did not think a rape kit and countless accounts of the night were sufficient evidence to find the male student [accountable],", [ 37 ] received significant media attention.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 37 ] Boston.com reported, "The college issued a statement in response, and said it handles all cases in a comprehensive manner that fully complies with Title IX." [ 38 ] In 2018, a male student who was determined to be responsible for “all forms of sexual misconduct including any form of unwanted sexual advances and contact” during an academic hearing, was allowed to remain on campus.

[ 40 ] The student was later featured in an Emmanuel College athletics promotional video. The college's decision to feature him prompted the female student who made the allegations of assault to take to the matter to social media.

[ 40 ] Emmanuel's vice president of college relations, Molly DiLorenzo, later told the Boston Globe that the video “did not violate any conditions of the student conduct process,” but that “it is unfortunate that the posting happened.” DiLorenzo also told the Globe, “no individual found responsible for rape...has been allowed to remain enrolled at Emmanuel College.” [ 40 ] In 2020, The Spectrum reported that 10 rapes and 7 instances of nonconsensual fondling had been reported on the Emmanuel College campus between 2014 and 2019.

[ 41 ] Looking at the 2019 data, College Factual found that, in raw numbers, Emmanuel had more reported incidents of violence against women on campus than other universities nationwide. It also noted that 67% of college campuses recorded 0 instances of reported violence against women in the same period.

[ 42 ] In a story on the sexual assault reports and their administrative handling, Emmanuel College campus newspaper, The Hub, noted that survivors' stories from 2015 onward shared the common theme, "the drive for justice and a need for change." [ 43 ] In response to allegations of sexual assault, students planned a series of protests, including a Day of Silence in May 2020, to raise attention to what organizers claim was the school's pattern of failure to adequately manage incidents of sexual assault on campus.

[ 44 ] The protestors called on President Janet Eisner and her administration to implement zero-tolerance sexual assault policies.

[ 40 ] [ 45 ] The college responded to the protests with a Title IX listening session, and the initiation of a “campus climate task force.” [ 40 ] [ 46 ] Athletics [ edit ] Emmanuel Saints wordmark Emmanuel athletic teams are the Saints. The college is a member of the Division III level of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), primarily competing in the Great Northeast Athletic Conference (GNAC) since the 1995–96 academic year.

Emmanuel competes in 16 intercollegiate varsity sports: Men's sports include basketball, cross country, golf, lacrosse, soccer, track & field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, lacrosse, soccer, softball, track & field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball.

[ 47 ] Club and intramural sports include men's baseball, women's dance, women's field hockey, co-ed sailing and co-ed cheerleading.

[ 48 ] Former sports included women's tennis, which competed until after the 2013 spring season (2012–13 school year). Emmanuel began to sponsor men's sports since the college became co-educational, effective in the 2001–02 school year.

Clemente Field [ edit ] Roberto Clemente Field is home of several EC's sports teams In the summer 2009, Emmanuel College partnered with the City of Boston for the $4 million comprehensive restoration of Roberto Clemente Field, a city-owned field located in the Back Bay Fens across the street from the campus in the Emerald Necklace . The renovations included an upgraded 120,000 sq. ft. NCAA-regulation synthetic turf field, a three-lane rubberized all-weather track, Musco lighting, practice facilities for expanded track and field events, a new scoreboard, as well as spectator stands and handicapped seating.

[ 49 ] The field serves as home for Emmanuel softball, men's and women's soccer and women's lacrosse teams, as well as the practice facility for men's and women's track and field. The field is open to the public, and is used by Boston Latin School athletics, Fenway High School gym classes, [ 50 ] Colleges of the Fenway intramurals, and adult and young summer softball leagues.

[ 51 ] The City of Boston-Emmanuel agreements is valid for 10 years and was revisited in 2019.

[ 52 ] The track is approximately 422 meters long.

[ 53 ] Notable people [ edit ] Mary McGrory , a Pulitzer Prize winning columnist. Placed on Nixon's Enemies List .

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Mary Beth Cahill , interim CEO of the Democratic National Committee and campaign manager for Senator John Kerry ’s 2004 presidential run.

[ 56 ] Gregory John Hartmayer O.F.M. Conv.

, Archbishop of Atlanta Rebecca Hains , a communication and media studies scholar known for her expertise in children's media culture.

Nancy Kerrigan , a figure skater who represented the United States at the 1992 Winter Olympics and the 1994 Winter Olympics .

[ 57 ] Marian T. Ryan , District Attorney of Middlesex County, Massachusetts . At one point the Commonwealth's only female District Attorney.

Helen Vendler , a literary critic and distinguished Harvard University Professor .

[ 58 ] Brian Gallivan , actor and executive producer of sitcoms Sassy Gay Friend and The McCarthys .

[ 59 ] Dick Berggren , a motorsports announcer and editor, a former faculty member at the college.

[ 60 ] Linda McCarriston , an award-winning poet. Former professor at Vermont College , George Washington University , and Radcliffe College . Currently a professor at the University of Alaska Anchorage .

[ 61 ] In addition to serving on the advisory board, John F. Kennedy gave the college's commencement speech in 1949.

[ 62 ] References [ edit ] ^ As of June 30, 2020.

U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2020 Endowment Market Value and Change in Endowment Market Value from FY19 to FY20 (Report). National Association of College and University Business Officers and TIAA . February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 20, 2021 .

^ Rankings and reviews US News Archived 2011-11-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Emmanuel College Boston" .

www.nndb.com .

^ "Maginnis & Walsh | Biographical Dictionary of Architects in Canada" .

dictionaryofarchitectsincanada.org .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 2018-08-14 . Retrieved 2019-03-05 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Hood, William Ross (1922).

State Laws Relating to Education Enacted in 1920 and 1921 . District of Columbia: Department of the Interior: Bureau of Education. p. 224.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "Emmanuel Remembers John F. Kennedy | Emmanuel College Boston" .

www.emmanuel.edu .

^ "Merck Partnership | Emmanuel College Boston" .

www.emmanuel.edu .

^ Schworm, Peter (2007-12-01).

"College Finds Its Angel" .

Boston Globe . Retrieved 2010-11-01 .

^ "Maureen Murphy Wilkens Science Center - Emmanuel College Boston" . Retrieved 29 July 2023 .

^ Stendahl, Max (25 September 2018).

"First look: Emmanuel College opens new $140M dorm tower in the Fenway" . Boston Business Journal . Retrieved 14 September 2019 .

^ Andersen, Travis (June 28, 2022).

"Dr. Mary K. Boyd selected as Emmanuel College's next president" .

BostonGlobe.com . Retrieved 2022-09-24 .

^ a b "A Message from Margaret L. McKenna '83, Chair of the Emmanuel College Board of Trustees" . Emmanuel College. August 2, 2023 . Retrieved August 3, 2023 .

^ "A message from Margaret L. McKenna '83, Chair, Emmanuel College Board of Trustees" . Emmanuel College. January 29, 2024 . Retrieved February 8, 2024 .

^ "Emmanuel College" .

massinteract.com .

^ "Residence Halls | Emmanuel College Boston" .

www.emmanuel.edu .

^ "Emmanuel College Opens New Residence Hall, Welcomes Largest First-Year Class" .

^ "Explore Emmanuel College - Massachusetts" .

Niche .

^ Best Colleges | Find the Best College for You | US News Education ^ "Colleges of the Fenway" .

Colleges of the Fenway .

^ https://www.emmanuel.edu/sites/default/files/2024-10/24-25_academic-catalog_web.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ "Academics | Emmanuel College Boston" .

www.emmanuel.edu .

^ "Emmanuel Announces Formation of Academic Schools" . 22 November 2021.

^ "Update on Four-Year Undergraduate Nursing Program" .

www.emmanuel.edu .

^ "Emmanuel College (MA) - Profile, Rankings and Data" .

US News Best Colleges . 10 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 July 2023 .

^ Massachusetts Institutions – NECHE , New England Commission of Higher Education , retrieved May 26, 2021 ^ "Emmanuel College Named a Top Producer of Fulbright U.S. Scholars | Emmanuel College Boston" .

www.emmanuel.edu .

^ "Top Fulbright Producers Interactive Map" . 6 February 2023.

^ "Emmanuel Facts | Emmanuel College Boston" .

^ "The Office of Internships & Career Development - Emmanuel College" . Archived from the original on 2010-11-23 . Retrieved 2010-11-27 .

^ "Graduate & Professional Programs | Emmanuel College Boston" .

www.emmanuel.edu .

^ "Academic Clubs and Organizations | Emmanuel College" .

^ "Creative Arts and Communications Groups | Emmanuel College Boston" .

^ "History of DM" .

Emmanuel College Dance Marathon . Retrieved 2022-09-24 .

^ "Multicultural Clubs and Organizations | Emmanuel College Boston" .

^ "Student Organizations and Government | Emmanuel College Boston" .

^ a b c "Emmanuel College Student Joanna Vandyke Says To Leave School After Her Rape Case" .

University Herald . 2016-07-29 . Retrieved 2022-09-27 .

^ a b "Emmanuel student says she will leave college after administration's handling of her rape case" .

www.boston.com . Retrieved 2022-09-27 .

^ Caesar, Chris (2016-07-27).

"Emmanuel College freshman says she won't return after school's handling of sex assault case – Metro US" .

www.metro.us . Retrieved 2022-09-27 .

^ a b c d e "Emmanuel College students stage virtual day of silence to condemn Title IX practices" .

The Boston Globe . 3 May 2020.

^ "Criminal Offenses on Emmanuel College - Main Campus" .

Spectrum . Retrieved 2022-09-27 .

^ "How Safe Is Emmanuel College Massachusetts? Learn About Campus Crime Statistics" .

www.collegefactual.com . Retrieved 2022-09-27 .

^ "Students Supporting Students: Emmanuel Students Strive for Justice" .

The Hub . 2021-04-20 . Retrieved 2022-09-27 .

^ "Emmanuel College students stage virtual day of silence to condemn Title IX practices" .

The Boston Globe . 3 May 2020.

^ "An Open Letter from Her Campus at Emmanuel | Her Campus" .

www.hercampus.com . 2020-05-02 . Retrieved 2022-09-27 .

^ "While we remain confident..." Twitter . Retrieved 2022-09-27 .

^ "College Search - Fastweb" . Archived from the original on 2011-07-24 . Retrieved 2009-06-01 .

^ "collegeprofiles.com domain name is for sale. Inquire now" .

www.collegeprofiles.com . Retrieved 29 July 2023 .

^ http://emmanuel.edu/About_Emmanuel/News_and_Events/News/News_Articles/Clemente_Field.html9 [ permanent dead link ] ^ Fenway on homes.com ^ "Roberto Clemente Field | Emmanuel College Boston" .

www.emmanuel.edu .

^ Wiltham, Margaret (2009-09-13).

"Clemente Field Update" .

Fenway News . Archived from the original on 2011-07-26.

^ "Notice of Intent: Roberto Clemente Field Project" (PDF) . p. 173 . Retrieved 7 May 2021 .

^ Toner, Robin (23 April 2004).

"Mary McGrory, 85, Longtime Washington Columnist, Dies" .

The New York Times .

^ "Appreciation: Mary McGrory, Post columnist, dies" .

^ Karen Tumulty (March 1, 2004).

"The miracle worker" .

CNN . Retrieved 2022-06-10 .

^ "Nancy Kerrigan | PEOPLE.com" .

People.com .

^ "Drew Faust named Harvard University Professor" . 17 December 2018.

^ " 'The McCarthys' hits close to home for Boston creator - the Boston Globe" .

The Boston Globe .

^ "Archived copy" .

motorsport.com . Archived from the original on 22 November 2008 . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Linda McCarriston | Creative Writing and Literary Arts | University of Alaska Anchorage" . Archived from the original on 2019-03-06 . Retrieved 2019-03-05 .

^ "Emmanuel Remembers John F. Kennedy | Emmanuel College Boston" .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Emmanuel College (Massachusetts) .

Official website Athletics website v t e Colleges of the Fenway Emmanuel College Massachusetts College of Art Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Simmons University Wentworth Institute of Technology Wheelock College v t e Colleges and universities in metropolitan Boston Current Babson College Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology Bentley University Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Baptist College Boston College Boston Conservatory Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Boston University Brandeis University Bunker Hill Community College Cambridge College Curry College Eastern Nazarene College Emerson College Emmanuel College Fisher College Harvard University Hebrew College Hellenic College Hult International Business School Labouré College Lasell University Lesley University Longy School of Music Massachusetts Bay Community College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology MGH Institute New England College of Optometry New England Conservatory of Music New England School of Law Northeastern University North Shore Community College Quincy College Roxbury Community College St. John's Seminary Simmons University Suffolk University Tufts University University of Massachusetts Boston Urban College of Boston Wellesley College Wentworth Institute of Technology William James College Former Episcopal Divinity School v t e American women's colleges that became coeducational Became coeducational Adelphi Albertus Magnus Andrew Anna Maria Arcadia Avila Barber–Scotia Belhaven Belmont Bennington Blue Mountain Christian Brescia Caldwell Carlow Chatham Chestnut Hill Chowan Columbia (MO) Columbia (SC) Connecticut College Converse Dominican (CA) Dominican (NY) Drexel College of Medicine D'Youville Elms Elmira Emmanuel (MA) Felician Florida State Fontbonne Georgia College Georgian Court Goucher Greensboro Holy Cross (LA) Holy Family (PA) Hood Hunter Huston–Tillotson Immaculata Incarnate Word James Madison Keuka LaGrange Lake Erie Lasell Lesley Lindenwood Longwood Lynn Manhattanville Mary Baldwin Mary Hardin–Baylor Mary Washington Marygrove Marymount (VA) Marymount Manhattan Maryville (MO) Marywood Mercy (NY) Mercyhurst Midway Misericordia Mississippi University for Women Montevallo Mount Mercy Mount St. Joseph Mount Saint Vincent Moravian Notre Dame (MD) Notre Dame de Namur Ohio Dominican Our Lady of the Lake Queens (NC) Radford Randolph Regis (MA) Rivier Rosemont Russell Sage Saint Elizabeth St. Francis (IL) Saint Joseph (CT) Saint Joseph's (ME) St. Joseph's (NY) Saint Mary (KS) St. Mary's (MD) Saint Mary-of-the-Woods St. Scholastica Saint Xavier (IL) Salve Regina Sarah Lawrence Seton Hill Shorter Skidmore Southern Virginia Spalding Stevenson Texas Woman's Thomas More (KY) Trocaire UNC Greensboro University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma UT Southern Valdosta State Vassar Virginia Union Viterbo Washington College of Law Webster West Alabama Wheaton (MA) William Peace William Woods Wilson (PA) Winthrop Coordinate colleges H. Sophie Newcomb Memorial College (merged with Tulane University ) Margaret Morrison Carnegie College (merged with Carnegie Mellon University ) Maryhill College (merged with St. Edward's University ) Mt. Vernon College (with George Washington University ) Pembroke (merged with Brown University ) Radcliffe College (merged with Harvard University ) v t e Great Northeast Athletic Conference Full members Albertus Magnus Falcons Colby-Sawyer Chargers Dean Bulldogs Elms Blazers Emmanuel Saints Lasell Lasers Mitchell Mariners New England College Pilgrims Norwich Cadets Regis Pride Rivier Raiders Saint Joseph (CT) Blue Jays Saint Joseph's (ME) Monks Simmons Sharks Associate members Eastern Nazarene Lions ( men's tennis ) Husson Eagles ( swimming & diving ) Rhode Island College Anchormen ( men's golf ) Southern Maine Huskies ( men's golf ) UMass Dartmouth Corsairs ( men's golf ) Wentworth Leopards ( men's volleyball ) Former members Anna Maria Amcats Daniel Webster Eagles Endicott Gulls Emerson Lions Mount Ida Mustangs Pine Manor Gators Southern Vermont Mountaineers Suffolk Rams Western New England Golden Bears v t e Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston Ordinaries Bishops Jean-Louis Lefebvre de Cheverus Benedict Joseph Fenwick John Bernard Fitzpatrick Archbishops John Joseph Williams William Henry O'Connell Richard Cushing Humberto Sousa Medeiros Bernard Francis Law Seán Patrick O'Malley Richard Henning Auxiliary bishops Cristiano Borro Barbosa Robert Francis Hennessey Mark William O'Connell Robert Philip Reed Peter J. Uglietto Emeriti bishops John Anthony Dooher Arthur L. Kennedy Deceased Joseph Gaudentius Anderson Thomas Francis Markham Emilio S. Allué Francis Xavier Irwin Walter James Edyvean Churches List List of churches in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston Cathedral Cathedral of the Holy Cross Basilicas and shrines Basilica and Shrine of Our Lady of Perpetual Help, Boston St. Anthony Shrine, Boston St. Clement Eucharistic Shrine, Boston Our Lady of Good Voyage, the Seaport Shrine Parishes Holy Name, West Roxbury Holy Trinity, Lowell Our Lady of Czestochowa, Boston Our Lady of Good Voyage, Gloucester Our Lady Help of Christians, Newton Sacred Heart, Cambridge St. Albert the Great, Weymouth St. Charles Borromeo, Waltham St. John the Baptist, Salem St. John the Evangelist, Cambridge St. Joseph, Boston St. Leonard, Boston St. Mary, Dedham ( History ) St. Mary, Milton St. Mary, Newton St. Mary, Waltham St. Mary, Winchester St. Mary - St. Catherine of Siena, Charlestown St. Paul, Cambridge St. Stanislaus Bishop & Martyr, Chelsea St. Susanna, Dedham Former parishes Holy Cross, Boston Our Lady of Mount Carmel, East Boston St. Aidan, Brookline St. Catherine of Sienna, Charlestown St. Joseph, Roxbury St. Mary, Charlestown St. Stephen, Boston Education Seminaries Pope St. John XXIII National Seminary St. John's Seminary Colleges Boston College Emmanuel College Labouré College Merrimack College Regis College St. John's Seminary Closed Marian Court College High schools Academy of Notre Dame , Tyngsboro Arlington Catholic High School , Arlington Austin Preparatory School , Reading Bishop Fenwick High School , Peabody Boston College High School , Dorchester Cathedral High School , Boston Catholic Memorial School , West Roxbury Central Catholic High School , Lawrence Cristo Rey Boston High School , Dorchester Fontbonne Academy , Milton Lowell Catholic High School , Lowell Malden Catholic High School , Malden Newton Country Day School , Newton Notre Dame Academy , Hingham Notre Dame High School , Lawrence St. John's Preparatory School , Danvers St. Mary's High School , Lynn Saint Sebastian's School , Needham Ursuline Academy , Dedham Xaverian Brothers High School , Westwood Closed Cambridge Matignon School , Cambridge Don Bosco Technical High School , Boston Elizabeth Seton Academy , Boston Hudson Catholic High School , Hudson Marian High School , Framingham Mount Alvernia High School , Newton Nazareth Academy , Wakefield Our Lady of Nazareth Academy , Wakefield Pope John XXIII High School , Everett Presentation of Mary Academy , Methuen Sacred Heart High School , Kingston Saint Clement High School , Medford Saint Joseph Preparatory High School , Boston St. Dominic Savio Preparatory High School , Boston Trinity Catholic High School , Newton Former Archbishop Williams High School , Braintree Cardinal Spellman High School , Brockton Priests John P. Brennan Charles A. Finn Gerald Fitzgerald John Geoghan George Kerr Philip King Mimie Pitaro Patrick O'Beirne Dennis J. O'Donovan Paul Fitzpatrick Russell Paul Shanley Henry A. Walsh Other The Pilot (archdiocese newspaper) CatholicTV Regina Cleri Catholic Archdiocese of Boston sex abuse scandal United States portal Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Emmanuel_College_(Massachusetts)&oldid=1303915578#Athletics " Categories : Emmanuel College (Massachusetts) Former women's universities and colleges in the United States Universities and colleges in Boston Catholic universities and colleges in Massachusetts Universities and colleges established in 1919 Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur colleges and universities 1919 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 maint: publisher location All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from July 2025 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 20:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Emmanuel College (Massachusetts) 3 languages Add topic

