Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Instrumentation 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Symphony No. 2 (Górecki) 5 languages Español Français مصرى 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Choral symphony by Henryk Górecki Symphony No. 2, the "Copernican," Op. 31 ( II Symfonia "Kopernikowska ") ( sample ⓘ ) is a choral symphony composed by Henryk Górecki in 1972 to celebrate the 500th anniversary of the birth of  astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus . Composed in a monumental style for solo soprano , baritone , choir and orchestra , it features text from Psalms no. 145, 6 and 135, along with an excerpt from Copernicus' book De revolutionibus orbium coelestium .

The symphony was commissioned by the Kosciuszko Foundation in New York and presented to Górecki as an opportunity to reach an audience outside his native Poland. Typically, he undertook extensive research on the subject, and was particularly taken by the philosophical implications of Copernicus' discovery, not all of which he viewed as positive.

[ 1 ] Norman Davies commented: "His discovery, of the earth's motion round the sun, caused the most fundamental revolutions possible in the prevailing concepts of the human predicament." [ 2 ] Its world premiere took place on June 22, 1973 in Warsaw, featuring soprano Stefania Woytowicz and baritone Andrzej Hiolski.

[ 3 ] Adrian Thomas writes in the New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, Second Edition , "The second movement marks an important stage in Górecki's conversion to a more consonant language since the late 1960s, a process which was clarified in several choral pieces and the Third Symphony ." [ 4 ] The symphony is written in two movements, following a binary design Górecki had followed in several previous works, "where the fortissimo dynamic, long silent pauses and rapid, chromatic motifs of the first movement are counterbalanced by a comparatively calm second movement.... The thunderous cosmic vision of the mostly orchestral first movement is answered by a second movement whose proportions are considerably expanded in order to release the earlier tensions." [ 4 ] The second symphony has been performed and recorded less than some of his other work (certainly less than his Symphony No. 3 ), in part because it demands a particularly large orchestra, soprano and baritone soloists, and a large choir.

[ 5 ] However, more than one interpretation of Symphony No. 2 is available on compact disc. The most readily available is the Naxos Records CD of the Polish National Radio Symphony Orchestra of Katowice, the Polish Radio Choir and the Silesian Philharmonic Choir with soloists Zofia Kilanowicz and Andrzej Dobber , conducted by Antoni Wit , which includes Beatus Vir .

Instrumentation [ edit ] The symphony is scored for a very large orchestra.

Woodwind 4 Flutes (3rd and 4th doubling Piccolo ) 4 Oboes 4 Clarinet in E ♭ (4th doubling Bass Clarinet in E ♭ ) 4 Bassoons (3rd and 4th doubling Contrabassoon ) Brass 4 Horns in F 4 Trumpets in C 4 Trombones Tuba Percussion 3 Snare Drums 3 Timpani 3 Bass Drums 2 Tam-Tam Keyboards Piano Voices Choir S-A-T-B Baritone solo Soprano solo Strings 1st, 2nd and 3rd Violins Violas Cellos Contra basses Harp Notes [ edit ] ^ Thomas (1997), 74 ^ Davies, Norman.

God's Playground: A history of Poland . Oxford, 1981. 150 ^ "Henryk Górecki - Symphony No.2 `Copernican' " .

www.boosey.com . Retrieved 2016-07-13 .

^ a b Thomas, New Grove (2001) , 10:160.

^ Perlez, Jane. "Henryk Gorecki".

New York Times , 27 February 1994.

References [ edit ] Thomas, Adrian, "Górecki, Henryk Mikolaj," The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, Second Edition (London: Macmillan Publishers Limited, 2001), 29 vols.

ISBN 0-333-60800-3 .

Thomas, Adrian.

Gorecki (Oxford Studies of Composers). Clarendon Press, April 1997.

ISBN 0-19-816394-0 External links [ edit ] Excerpt from the 1st movement Excerpt from the 2nd movement v t e Henryk Górecki List of compositions Music Two Sacred Songs, Op. 30 Symphony No. 2, Op. 31 Symphony No. 3, Op. 36 Beatus Vir , Op. 38 Harpsichord Concerto, Op. 40 Miserere , Op. 44 Totus Tuus , Op. 60 String Quartet No. 1, Op. 62 Kleines Requiem für eine Polka, Op. 66 Recordings Henryk Górecki: String Quartets Nos. 1 and 2 Henryk Górecki: String Quartet No. 3 ('...songs are sung') Henryk Mikolaj Górecki: Already It Is Dusk/"Lerchenmusik" Henryk Górecki: Symphony No. 3 (Symphony of Sorrowful Songs) Family Mikołaj Górecki (son) Related Holy minimalism Karol Szymanowski Academy of Music Category Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Sweden Israel Other MusicBrainz work Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Symphony_No._2_(Górecki)&oldid=1268308423 " Categories : 1972 compositions Compositions by Henryk Górecki Choral symphonies 20th-century symphonies Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 January 2025, at 04:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Symphony No. 2 (Górecki) 5 languages Add topic

