Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Globalization Toggle Globalization subsection 1.1 Continental regions 1.2 Regional geography 2 Human geography Toggle Human geography subsection 2.1 Historical regions 2.2 Tourism region 2.3 Natural resource regions 2.4 Religious regions 2.5 Political regions 2.6 Administrative regions 2.6.1 Local administrative regions 2.7 Traditional or informal regions 2.8 Functional regions 2.9 Military regions 2.10 Media geography 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Region 97 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Македонски Malagasy მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Regions ) This article is about the concept of region in geography. For other uses, see Region (disambiguation) .

Two or three-dimensionally defined  space, mainly in terrestrial and astrophysics sciences In geography , regions , otherwise referred to as areas , zones , lands or territories , are portions of the Earth's surface that are broadly divided by physical characteristics ( physical geography ), human impact characteristics ( human geography ), and the interaction of humanity and the environment ( environmental geography ). Geographic regions and sub-regions are mostly described by their imprecisely defined, and sometimes transitory boundaries, except in human geography, where jurisdiction areas such as national borders are defined in law. More confined or well bounded portions are called locations or places .

Apart from the global continental regions, there are also hydrospheric and atmospheric regions that cover the oceans , and discrete climates above the land and water masses of the planet. The land and water global regions are divided into subregions geographically bounded by large geological features that influence large-scale ecologies, such as plains and features.

As a way of describing spatial areas, the concept of regions is important and widely used among the many branches of geography, each of which can describe areas in regional terms.  For example, ecoregion is a term used in environmental geography , cultural region in cultural geography , bioregion in biogeography , and so on.  The field of geography that studies regions themselves is called regional geography . Regions are an area or division, especially part of a country or the world having definable characteristics but not always fixed boundaries.

In the fields of physical geography , ecology , biogeography , zoogeography , and environmental geography , regions tend to be based on natural features such as ecosystems or biotopes , biomes , drainage basins , natural regions , mountain ranges , soil types . Where human geography is concerned, the regions and subregions are described by the discipline of ethnography .

Globalization [ edit ] See also: Category:Global regions Map of the world as of 2021 Global regions are distinguishable from space, and are therefore clearly distinguished by the two basic terrestrial environments, land and water . However, they have been generally recognized as such much earlier by terrestrial cartography because of their impact on human geography. They are divided into the largest of land regions, known as continents and the largest of water regions known as oceans . There are also significant regions that do not belong to either classification, such as archipelago regions that are littoral regions, or earthquake regions that are defined in geology .

Continental regions [ edit ] Continental regions are usually based on broad experiences in human history and attempt to reduce very large areas to more manageable regionalization for the purpose of the study. As such they are conceptual constructs, usually lacking distinct boundaries. The oceanic division into maritime regions is used in conjunction with the relationship to the central area of the continent, using directions of the compass .

Some continental regions are defined by the major continental feature of their identity, such as the Amazon basin , or the Sahara , which both occupy a significant percentage of their respective continental land area.

To a large extent, major continental regions are mental constructs created by considering an efficient way to define large areas of the continents. For the most part, the images of the world are derived as much from academic studies, from all types of media, or from personal experience of global exploration . They are a matter of collective human knowledge of their own planet and are attempts to better understand their environments.

Regional geography [ edit ] Regional geography is a branch of geography that studies regions of all sizes across the Earth . It has a prevailing descriptive character. The main aim is to understand or define the uniqueness or character of a particular region, which consists of natural as well as human elements. Attention is paid also to regionalization, which covers the proper techniques of space delimitation into regions.

Regional geography is also considered as a certain approach to study in geographical sciences (similar to quantitative or critical geographies ; for more information, see history of geography ).

Human geography [ edit ] Human geography is a branch of geography that focuses on the study of patterns and processes that shape human interaction with various discrete environments. It encompasses human , political , cultural , social , and economic aspects among others that are often clearly delineated. While the major focus of human geography is not the physical landscape of the Earth (see physical geography ), it is hardly possible to discuss human geography without referring to the physical landscape on which human activities are being played out, and environmental geography is emerging as a link between the two. Regions of human geography can be divided into many broad categories: Cultural geography Demography Development geography Economic geography Ethnography Geopolitics Health geography Historical geography Language geography Media geography Religion geography Social geography Time geography Tourism geography Transportation geography Urban geography Historical regions [ edit ] Main article: Historical region The field of historical geography involves the study of human history as it relates to places and regions , or the study of how places and regions have changed over time.

D. W. Meinig , a historical geographer of America, describes many historical regions in his book The Shaping of America: A Geographical Perspective on 500 Years of History . For example, in identifying European "source regions" in early American colonization efforts, he defines and describes the Northwest European Atlantic Protestant Region , which includes sub-regions such as the "Western Channel Community", which itself is made of sub-regions such as the English West Country of Cornwall , Devon , Somerset , and Dorset .

In describing historic regions of America, Meinig writes of "The Great Fishery" off the coast of Newfoundland and New England, an oceanic region that includes the Grand Banks . He rejects regions traditionally used in describing American history, like New France , "West Indies", the Middle Colonies , and the individual colonies themselves ( Province of Maryland , for example). Instead he writes of "discrete colonization areas", which may be named after colonies but rarely adhere strictly to political boundaries. Among other historic regions of this type, he writes about "Greater New England" and its major sub-regions of "Plymouth", "New Haven shores" (including parts of Long Island), "Rhode Island" (or "Narragansett Bay"), "the Piscataqua", "Massachusetts Bay", "Connecticut Valley", and to a lesser degree, regions in the sphere of influence of Greater New England, "Acadia" (Nova Scotia), "Newfoundland and The Fishery/The Banks".

Other examples of historical regions are Iroquoia, Ohio Country , Illinois Country , and Rupert's Land .

In Russia , historical regions include Siberia and the Russian North , as well as the Ural Mountains . These regions had an identity that developed from the early modern period and led to Siberian regionalism .

[ 1 ] Tourism region [ edit ] Main article: Tourism region A tourism region is a geographical region that has been designated by a governmental organization or tourism bureau as having common cultural or environmental characteristics. These regions are often named after a geographical, former, or current administrative region or may have a name created for tourism purposes. The names often evoke certain positive qualities of the area and suggest a coherent tourism experience to visitors. Countries, states, provinces, and other administrative regions are often carved up into tourism regions to facilitate attracting visitors.

Some of the more famous tourism regions based on historical or current administrative regions include Tuscany [ 2 ] in Italy and Yucatán [ 3 ] in Mexico. Famous examples of regions created by a government or tourism bureau include the United Kingdom 's Lake District [ 4 ] and California's Wine Country .

[ 5 ] great plains region Natural resource regions [ edit ] Natural resources often occur in distinct regions. Natural resource regions can be a topic of physical geography or environmental geography, but also have a strong element of human geography and economic geography. A coal region, for example, is a physical or geomorphological region, but its development and exploitation can make it into an economic and a cultural region. Examples of natural resource regions are the Rumaila Field , the oil field that lies along the border or Iraq and Kuwait and played a role in the Gulf War ; the Coal Region of Pennsylvania, which is a historical region as well as a cultural, physical, and natural resource region; the South Wales Coalfield , which like Pennsylvania's coal region is a historical, cultural, and natural region; the Kuznetsk Basin , a similarly important coal mining region in Russia; Kryvbas , the economic and iron ore mining region of Ukraine; and the James Bay Project , a large region of Quebec where one of the largest hydroelectric systems in the world has been developed.

Religious regions [ edit ] Sometimes a region associated with a religion is given a name, like Christendom , a term with medieval and renaissance connotations of Christianity as a sort of social and political polity .  The term Muslim world is sometimes used to refer to the region of the world where Islam is dominant.  These broad terms are somewhat vague when used to describe regions.

Within some religions there are clearly defined regions.  The Roman Catholic Church , the Church of England , the Eastern Orthodox Church , and others, define ecclesiastical regions with names such as diocese , eparchy , ecclesiastical provinces , and parish .

For example, the United States is divided into 32 Roman Catholic ecclesiastical provinces .  The Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod is organized into 33 geographic districts , which are subdivided into circuits (the Atlantic District (LCMS) , for example).

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints uses regions similar to dioceses and parishes, but uses terms like ward and stake .

Political regions [ edit ] See also: Administrative division In the field of political geography , regions tend to be based on political units such as sovereign states ; subnational units such as administrative regions, provinces , states (in the United States) , counties , townships , territories , etc.; and multinational groupings, including formally defined units such as the European Union , the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , and NATO , as well as informally defined regions such as the Third World , Western Europe , and the Middle East.

Administrative regions [ edit ] Further information: Administrative division The word "region" is taken from the Latin regio (derived from regere , 'to rule'), and a number of countries have borrowed the term as the formal name for a type of subnational entity (e.g., the región , used in Chile ). In English, the word is also used as the conventional translation for equivalent terms in other languages (e.g., the область ( oblast ), used in Russia alongside a broader term регион ).

The following countries use the term "region" (or its cognate ) as the name of a type of subnational administrative unit: Belgium (in French, région ; in German, Region ; the Dutch term gewest is often mistakenly translated as "regio") Chile ( región ) Côte d'Ivoire ( région ) Denmark (effective from 2007) Eritrea France ( région ) Ghana Guinea ( région ) Guinea-Bissau ( região ) Guyana Hungary ( régió ) Italy ( regione ) Madagascar ( région ) Mali ( région ) Malta ( reġjun ) Namibia New Zealand Peru ( región ) Portugal ( região ) Philippines ( rehiyon ) Senegal ( région ) Tanzania Thailand Togo ( région ) Trinidad and Tobago ( Regional Corporation ) The Canadian province of Québec also uses the "administrative region" ( région administrative ).

Regions of England (not the United Kingdom as a whole) used to be administrative units until 2011. Since then they're only used for statistical purposes.

[ 6 ] Scotland had local government regions from 1975 to 1996.

In Spain the official name of the autonomous community of Murcia is Región de Murcia . Also, some single-province autonomous communities such as Madrid use the term región interchangeably with comunidad autónoma .

Two län (counties) in Sweden are officially called 'regions': Skåne and Västra Götaland , and there is currently a controversial proposal to divide the rest of Sweden into large regions , replacing the current counties.

The government of the Philippines uses the term "region" (in Filipino , rehiyon ) when it is necessary to group provinces, the primary administrative subdivision of the country. This is also the case in Brazil , which groups its primary administrative divisions ( estados ; "states") into grandes regiões ( greater regions ) for statistical purposes, while Russia uses экономические районы ( economic regions ) in a similar way, as does Romania and Venezuela .

The government of Singapore makes use of the term " region " for its own administrative purposes.

The following countries use an administrative subdivision conventionally referred to as a region in English: Bulgaria , which uses the област ( oblast ) Greece , which uses the Περιφέρεια ( periferia ) Russia , which uses the область ( oblast' ), and for some regions the край ( krai ) Ukraine , which uses the область ( oblast' ) Slovakia ( kraj ) China has five 自治区 ( zìzhìqū ) and two 特別行政區 (or 特别行政区; tèbiéxíngzhèngqū ), which are translated as " autonomous region " and " special administrative region ", respectively.

Local administrative regions [ edit ] There are many relatively small regions based on local government agencies such as districts, agencies, or regions. In general, they are all regions in the general sense of being bounded spatial units.  Examples include electoral districts such as Washington's 6th congressional district and Tennessee's 1st congressional district ; school districts such as Granite School District and Los Angeles Unified School District ; economic districts such as the Reedy Creek Improvement District ; metropolitan areas such as the Seattle metropolitan area , and metropolitan districts such as the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago , the Las Vegas-Clark County Library District , the Metropolitan Police Service of Greater London , as well as other local districts like the York Rural Sanitary District , the Delaware River Port Authority , the Nassau County Soil and Water Conservation District , and C-TRAN .

Traditional or informal regions [ edit ] Regions of Finland The traditional territorial divisions of some countries are also commonly rendered in English as "regions". These informal divisions do not form the basis of the modern administrative divisions of these countries, but still define and delimit local regional identity and sense of belonging. Examples are: England Finland Japan Korea Norway ( landsdeler ) Romania Slovakia United States Functional regions [ edit ] Functional regions are usually understood to be the areas organised by the horizontal functional relations (flows, interactions) that are maximised within a region and minimised across its borders so that the principles of internal cohesiveness and external separation regarding spatial interactions are met (see, for instance, Farmer and Fotheringham, 2011; [ 7 ] Klapka, Halas, 2016; [ 8 ] Smart, 1974 [ 9 ] ). A functional region is not an abstract spatial concept, but to a certain extent it can be regarded as a reflection of the spatial behaviour of individuals in a geographic space. 
The functional region is conceived as a general concept while its inner structure, inner spatial flows, and interactions need not necessarily show any regular pattern, only selfcontainment. The concept of self-containment remains the only crucial defining characteristic of a functional region. Nodal regions, functional urban regions, daily urban systems, local labour-market areas (LLMAs), or travel-to-work areas (TTWAs) are considered to be special instances of a general functional region that need to fulfil some specific conditions regarding, for instance, the character of the region-organising interaction or the presence of urban cores, (Halas et al., 2015 [ 10 ] ).

Military regions [ edit ] v t e Army units and organization Subordinated element Fireteam / Crew Ø Squad ● Section / Patrol ●● Platoon / Troop / Flight ●●● Staffel / Echelon  ●●●● Unit Company / Battery / Squadron ❘ Battalion / Squadron / Cohort ❘ ❘ Regiment / Group ❘ ❘ ❘ Formation Brigade / Group / Wing ☓ Division / Legion ☓☓ Corps ☓☓☓ Command Field army / Command ☓☓☓☓ Army group / Front ☓☓☓☓☓ Region / Theater ☓☓☓☓☓☓ Temporary Detachment Chalk Patrol Field force Task force Brigade group Flying column Combat command Regimental combat team Battalion tactical group Battlegroup Group army Combat team See also: Military district In military usage, a region is shorthand for the name of a military formation larger than an Army Group and smaller than a Theater . The full name of the military formation is Army Region.

[ 11 ] The size of an Army Region can vary widely but is generally somewhere between about 1 million and 3 million soldiers. Two or more Army Regions could make up a Theater. An Army Region is typically commanded by a full General (US four stars), a Field Marshal or General of the Army (US five stars), or Generalissimo (Soviet Union); and in the US Armed Forces an Admiral (typically four stars) may also command a region. Due to the large size of this formation, its use is rarely employed. Some of the very few examples of an Army Region are each of the Eastern, Western, and southern (mostly in Italy) fronts in Europe during World War II . The military map unit symbol for this echelon of formation (see Military organization and APP-6A ) is identified with six Xs.

Media geography [ edit ] Media geography is a spatio-temporal understanding, brought through different gadgets of media, nowadays, media became inevitable at different proportions and everyone supposed to consumed at different gravity. The spatial attributes are studied with the help of media outputs in shape of images which are contested in nature and pattern as well where politics is inseparable. Media geography is giving spatial understanding of mediated image.

See also [ edit ] Autonomous region Committee of the Regions Continent Continental fragment Euroregion Field (geography) Latin names of regions Military district Regional district Regionalism (disambiguation) Regional municipality Subcontinent Submerged continents Subregion Supercontinent United Nations geoscheme Notes [ edit ] ^ Susan Smith-Peter, "The Six Waves of Russian Regionalism in European Context, 1830–2000", in Russia's Regional Identities: The Power of the Provinces, ed. Edith W. Clowes, Gisela Erbsloh and Ani Kokobobo (London: Routledge, 2018), 14–43.

^ Turismo.intoscana.it Archived 2009-11-30 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 2009-11-25 ^ Visitmexico.com Archived 2010-01-02 at the Wayback Machine , Retrieved 2009-11-25 ^ Lakedistrict.gov.uk , Retrieved 2009-11-25 ^ Winecountry.com , Retrieved 2009-11-25 ^ "England" .

Office for National Statistics . Retrieved 2025-02-26 .

^ Farmer, CJQ; Fotheringham, AS (2011). "Network-based functional regions".

Environment and Planning A .

43 (11): 2723– 2741.

Bibcode : 2011EnPlA..43.2723F .

doi : 10.1068/a44136 .

S2CID 144055983 .

^ Klapka, P; Halas, M (2016).

"Conceptualising patterns of spatial flows: five decades of advances in the definition and use of functional regions" .

Moravian Geographical Reports .

24 (2): 2– 11.

Bibcode : 2016MorGR..24....2K .

doi : 10.1515/mgr-2016-0006 .

^ Smart, MW (1974). "Labour market areas: uses and definition".

Progress in Planning .

2 : 239– 353.

Bibcode : 1974ProgP...2..239S .

doi : 10.1016/0305-9006(74)90008-7 .

^ Halas, M; Klapka, P; Tonev, P; Bednar, M (2015). "An alternative definition and use for the constraint function for rule-based methods of functional regionalisation".

Environment and Planning A .

47 (5): 1175– 1191.

Bibcode : 2015EnPlA..47.1175H .

doi : 10.1177/0308518X15592306 .

S2CID 143263476 .

^ "Military Units: Army Region" .

US Department of Defense . Retrieved 2023-05-18 .

References [ edit ] Bailey, Robert G. (1996) Ecosystem Geography . New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 0-387-94586-5 Meinig, D.W.

(1986).

The Shaping of America: A Geographical Perspective on 500 Years of History, Volume 1: Atlantic America, 1492-1800 . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-03548-9 Moinuddin Shekh. (2017) " Mediascape and the State: A Geographical Interpretation of Image Politics in Uttar Pradesh, India. Netherland, Springer.

Smith-Peter, Susan (2018) Imagining Russian Regions: Subnational Identity and Civil Society in Nineteenth-Century Russia . Leiden: Brill, 2017.

ISBN 9789004353497 External links [ edit ] Map and descriptions of hydrologic unit regions of the United States Federal Standards for Delineation of Hydrologic Unit Boundaries [ dead link ] Physiographic regions of the United States v t e Continents of Earth Africa Antarctica Asia Australia Europe North America South America Afro-Eurasia Americas Eurasia Oceania Prehistoric supercontinents Columbia Gondwana Kenorland Laurasia Nena Pangaea Pannotia Rodinia Ur Vaalbara Other prehistoric continents Amazonia Arctica Asiamerica Atlantica Avalonia Baltica Chilenia Cimmeria Congo Craton Cuyania East Antarctica Euramerica Kalaharia Kazakhstania Laramidia Laurentia North China Pampia Sahul Siberia South China Submerged continent / lands and microcontinents Beringia Cathaysia Iceland Davis Strait Doggerland Great Australian Bight Jan Mayen Kerguelen Plateau Madagascar Mauritia Rockall Basin Sahul Seychelles Sunda Zealandia Possible future supercontinents Amasia Aurica Novopangaea Pangaea Proxima Mythical , lost , and hypothesised continents Atlantis Hyperborea Kumari Kandam Lemuria Meropis Mu Terra Australis Subcontinents Alaska Arabia Central America Eastern Africa Eastern Siberia Greenland (Territory) Indian Subcontinent See also: World portal Regions of the world Continental fragment Category Chronology of continents v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth v t e Designations for types of administrative division English terms Common English terms Area Insular area Local government area Special area Unincorporated area Unorganized area Borough County borough Metropolitan borough Canton Half-canton Capital Federal capital Imperial capital City Autonomous city Charter city Independent city Incorporated city Imperial city Free imperial city Royal free city Community Autonomous community Residential community County Administrative county Autonomous county Consolidated city-county County seat County town Metropolitan county Non-metropolitan county Regional county municipality Viscounty Country Overseas country Department Overseas department District Capital district City district Congressional district Electoral district Federal district Indian government district Land district Local government district Metropolitan district Non-metropolitan district Military district Municipal district Police district Regional district Rural district Sanitary district Service district Educational service district Local service district School district Intermediate school district Special district in the US Urban district Division Census division Police division Subdivision of India Indian reserve/reservation Indian reservation (United States) Indian reserve (Canada) Municipality City municipality County municipality Direct-controlled municipality District municipality Neutral municipality Regional municipality Resort municipality Mountain resort municipality Rural municipality Specialized municipality Prefecture Autonomous prefecture Subprefecture Super-prefecture Praetorian prefecture Province Autonomous province Overseas province Roman province Region Administrative region Special administrative region Autonomous region Capital region National capital region Development region Mesoregion Microregion Overseas region Subregion State Proto-state City-state Federal state Free state Sovereign state Territory Capital territory Federal capital territory National capital territory Dependent territory Federal territory Incorporated territory Organized incorporated territory Overseas territory Union territory Town Census town Market town Township Charter township Civil township Paper township Survey township Urban township Unit Regional unit Zone Economic zone Exclusive economic zone Free economic zone Special economic zone Exclusion zone Military exclusion zone Free speech zone Neutral zone Self-administered zone Trade zone Free-trade zone Other English terms Current Alpine resort Bailiwick Banner Autonomous Block Cadastre Circle Circuit Colony Commune Condominium Constituency Duchy District Eldership Emirate Enclave and exclave Federal dependency Governorate Hamlet Manor Royal Muftiate Neighbourhood Parish Precinct Principality Protectorate Quarter Regency Autonomous republic Riding Sector Autonomous Shire Sultanate Suzerainty Townland Village Summer Ward Historical Agency Barony Burgh Exarchate Hide Hundred Imperial Circle March Monthon Presidency Residency Roman diocese Seat Tenth Tithing Viceroyalty Non-English terms or loanwords Current Amt Apskritis Bakhsh Barangay Bashki Bezirk Regierungsbezirk Comarca Comune Frazione Freguesia Fu Gemeinde Austria Germany South Tyrol Switzerland Gemeente Gmina Hromada Județ Kampong Kommun/Kunta Finland Sweden Län (Sweden) Landskap Finland Località Maakunta Megye Muban Mukim Njësi administrative Obec Oblast Autonomous Okrug Ostān Poblacion Purok Qark Raion Savivaldybė Selsoviet Sitio Seniūnija Shahrestān Sum China Sýsla Tehsil Townlet Vingtaine Historical Commote Gau Heerlijkheid Komunë Köping Korale Län/Lääni Landskap Sweden Landskommun Maalaiskunta Nome Egypt Greece Pagus Pargana Plasă Rreth Satrapy Socken Subah Syssel Zhou Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics .

See also Autonomous administration Census division Electoral district List of administrative divisions by country Greek administrative divisions Slavic administrative divisions Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐5r7fr
Cached time: 20250814214810
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.602 seconds
Real time usage: 0.753 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2782/1000000
Revision size: 26112/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 301367/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3492/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 75733/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.338/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19086022/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  521.928      1 -total
 22.10%  115.323      1 Template:Reflist
 19.05%   99.450     17 Template:Navbox
 15.16%   79.111     12 Template:Lang
 13.78%   71.903      2 Template:Cite_web
 12.32%   64.320      1 Template:Army_units
 12.04%   62.827      1 Template:Military_navigation
  9.65%   50.342      1 Template:About
  7.97%   41.616      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.12%   31.961      1 Template:Continents_of_the_world Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:55633:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214810 and revision id 1304562323. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Region&oldid=1304562323 " Categories : Regions Geography terminology Regional geography Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing Filipino-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2025 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 20:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Region 97 languages Add topic

