Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Measurement 2 Impacts of climate change 3 Conjunctive use of ground and surface water 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Surface water 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша ລາວ Limburgs Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русиньскый Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Water located on top of land forming terrestrial bodies of water An inland lake, an example of surface water The entire surface water flow of the Alapaha River near Jennings, Florida going into a sinkhole leading to the Floridan Aquifer groundwater .

Surface water is water located on top of land , forming terrestrial (surrounding by land on all sides) waterbodies , and may also be referred to as blue water , opposed to the seawater and waterbodies like the ocean .

The vast majority of surface water is produced by precipitation . As the climate warms in the spring, snowmelt runs off towards nearby streams and rivers contributing towards a large portion of human drinking water . Levels of surface water lessen as a result of evaporation as well as water moving into the ground becoming ground-water . Alongside being used for drinking water, surface water is also used for irrigation, wastewater treatment , livestock , industrial uses, hydropower , and recreation.

[ 1 ] For USGS water-use reports, surface water is considered freshwater when it contains less than 1,000 milligrams per liter (mg/L) of dissolved solids.

[ 2 ] There are three major types of surface water.

Permanent (perennial) surface waters are present year round, and includes lakes , rivers and wetlands ( marshes and swamps ).

Semi-permanent (ephemeral) surface water refers to bodies of water that are only present at certain times of the year including seasonally dry channels such as creeks , lagoons and waterholes .

Human-made surface water is water that can be continued by infrastructures that humans have assembled. This would be dammed artificial lakes , canals and artificial ponds (e.g.

garden ponds ) or swamps.

[ 3 ] The surface water held by dams can be used for renewable energy in the form of hydropower. Hydropower is the forcing of surface water sourced from rivers and streams to produce energy.

[ 4 ] Measurement [ edit ] A stream gauge used to measure surface water.

Surface water can be measured as annual runoff. This includes the amount of rain and snowmelt drainage left after the uptake of nature, evaporation from land, and transpiration from vegetation. In areas such as California , the California Water Science Center records the flow of surface water and annual runoff by utilizing a network of approximately 500 stream gages collecting real time data from all across the state. This then contributes to the 8,000 stream gage stations that are overseen by the USGS national stream gage record. This in turn has provided to date records and documents of water data over the years. Management teams that oversee the distribution of water are then able to make decisions of adequate water supply to sectors. These include municipal, industrial, agricultural, renewable energy (hydropower), and storage in reservoirs.

[ 5 ] Impacts of climate change [ edit ] Further information: Effects of climate change on the water cycle and Effects of climate change Due to climate change , sea ice and glaciers are melting, contributing to the rise in sea levels. As a result, salt water from the ocean is beginning to infiltrate our freshwater aquifers contaminating water used for urban and agricultural services. It is also affecting surrounding ecosystems as it places stress on the wildlife inhabiting those areas. It was recorded by the NOAA in the years 2012 to 2016, ice sheets in Greenland and the Antarctic reduced by 247 billion tons per year.

[ 6 ] This number will continue to increase as global warming persists.

Climate change has a direct connection with the water cycle . It has increased evaporation yet decreased precipitation, runoff, groundwater, and soil moisture. This has altered surface water levels. Climate change also enhances the existing challenges we face in water quality. The quality of surface water is based on the chemical inputs from the surrounding elements such as the air and the nearby landscape. When these elements are polluted due to human activity, it alters the chemistry of the water.

[ 7 ] Conjunctive use of ground and surface water [ edit ] Surface and groundwater are two separate entities, so they must be regarded as such. However, there is an ever-increasing need for management of the two as they are part of an interrelated system that is paramount when the demand for water exceeds the available supply (Fetter 464). Depletion of surface and ground water sources for public consumption (including industrial, commercial, and residential) is caused by over-pumping.

Aquifers near river systems that are over-pumped have been known to deplete surface water sources as well. Research supporting this has been found in numerous water budgets for a multitude of cities.

Response times for an aquifer are long (Young & Bredehoeft 1972). However, a total ban on ground water usage during water recessions would allow surface water to retain better levels required for sustainable aquatic life . By reducing ground water pumping, the surface water supplies will be able to maintain their levels, as they recharge from direct precipitation , surface runoff , etc.

It is recorded by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), that approximately 68 percent of water provided to communities in the United States comes from surface water.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Water portal Environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutant Meltwater Optimum water content for tillage Water resources Surface-water hydrology References [ edit ] ^ United States Environmental Protection Agency (2017-11-02).

"Fresh Surface Water" .

US EPA . Retrieved 2020-04-06 .

^ U.S Department of the Interior.

"Surface-Water Use" .

www.usgs.gov . Retrieved 2020-04-06 .

^ Department of Environment and Natural Resources.

"What is Surface Water?" (PDF) .

www.denr.nt.gov.au . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-09-21 . Retrieved 2020-04-06 .

^ U.S Energy Information Administration (2020-04-30).

"Hydropower Explained" .

^ U.S Department of the Interior.

"Surface Water & Drought" .

ca.water.usgs.gov . Retrieved 2020-04-21 .

^ Rebecca, Lindsey.

"Climate Change: Global Sea Level" .

www.climate.gov . Archived from the original on July 27, 2013 . Retrieved 2020-04-21 .

^ Whitehead, P. G.; Wilby, R. L.; Battarbee, R. W.; Kernan, M.; Wade, A. J. (2009).

"A review of the potential impacts of climate change on surface water quality" .

Hydrological Sciences Journal .

54 (1): 101– 123.

Bibcode : 2009HydSJ..54..101W .

doi : 10.1623/hysj.54.1.101 .

^ Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (2018-10-10).

"Water Sources" .

www.cdc.gov . Retrieved 2020-04-06 .

Applied Hydrogeology, Fourth Edition by C.W. Fetter.

R.A. Young and J.D. Bredehoeft Digital simulation for solving management problems with conjunctive groundwater and surface water systems from Water Resources Research 8:533-56 External links [ edit ] "Surface Water," Iowa State University v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category v t e Rivers , streams and springs Rivers ( lists ) Alluvial river Braided river Blackwater river Channel Channel pattern Channel types Confluence Distributary Drainage basin Mountain river Subterranean river River bifurcation River ecosystem River source Tributary Streams Arroyo Beck Bourne Burn Chalk stream Coulee Current Stream bed Stream channel Streamflow Stream gradient Stream pool Perennial stream Winterbourne Springs ( list ) Estavelle/Inversac Geyser Holy well Hot spring list list in the US Karst spring list Mineral spring Ponor Rhythmic spring Spring horizon Sedimentary processes and erosion Abrasion Anabranch Aggradation Armor Bed load Bed material load Granular flow Debris flow Deposition Dissolved load Downcutting Erosion Headward erosion Knickpoint Palaeochannel Progradation Retrogradation Saltation Secondary flow Sediment transport Suspended load Wash load Water gap Fluvial landforms Ait Alluvial fan Antecedent drainage stream Avulsion Bank Bar Bayou Billabong Canyon Chine Cut bank Estuary Floating island Fluvial terrace Gill Gulch Gully Glen Meander scar Mouth bar Oxbow lake Riffle-pool sequence Point bar Ravine Rill River island Rock-cut basin Sedimentary basin Sedimentary structures Strath Thalweg River valley Wadi Fluvial flow Helicoidal flow International scale of river difficulty Log jam Meander Plunge pool Rapids Riffle Shoal Stream capture Waterfall list of waterfalls Whitewater Surface runoff Agricultural wastewater First flush Urban runoff Floods and stormwater 100-year flood Crevasse splay Flash flood Flood Urban flooding Non-water flood Flood barrier Flood control Flood forecasting Flood-meadow Floodplain Flood pulse concept Flooded grasslands and savannas Inundation Storm Water Management Model Return period Point source pollution Effluent Industrial wastewater Sewage River measurement and modelling Baer's law Baseflow Bradshaw model Discharge (hydrology) Drainage density Exner equation Groundwater model Hack's law Hjulström curve Hydrograph Hydrological model Hydrological transport model Infiltration (hydrology) Main stem Playfair's law Relief ratio River Continuum Concept Rouse number Runoff curve number Runoff model (reservoir) Stream gauge Universal Soil Loss Equation WAFLEX Wetted perimeter Volumetric flow rate River engineering Aqueduct Balancing lake Canal Check dam Dam Drop structure Daylighting Detention basin Erosion control Fish ladder Floodplain restoration Flume Infiltration basin Leat Levee River morphology Retention basin Revetment Riparian-zone restoration Stream restoration Weir River sports Canyoning Fly fishing Rafting River surfing Riverboarding Stone skipping Triathlon Whitewater canoeing Whitewater kayaking Whitewater slalom Related Aquifer Aquatic toxicology Body of water Hydraulic civilization Limnology Riparian zone River valley civilization River cruise Sacred waters Surface water Wild river Rivers by length Rivers by discharge rate Drainage basins Whitewater rivers Flash floods River name etymologies Countries without rivers Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Surface_water&oldid=1299011764 " Categories : Hydrology Water Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 02:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Surface water 41 languages Add topic

