Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classical notation 2 Algebraic notation 3 Applications 4 Tensor field theory 5 Abstract algebra 6 Spinors 7 References 8 Books Toggle the table of contents Glossary of tensor theory 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This is a glossary of tensor theory . For expositions of tensor theory from different points of view, see: Tensor Tensor (intrinsic definition) Application of tensor theory in engineering science For some history of the abstract theory see also multilinear algebra .

Classical notation [ edit ] Ricci calculus The earliest foundation of tensor theory – tensor index notation.

[ 1 ] Order of a tensor The components of a tensor with respect to a basis is an indexed array. The order of a tensor is the number of indices needed. Some texts may refer to the tensor order using the term degree or rank .

Rank of a tensor The rank of a tensor is the minimum number of rank-one tensor that must be summed to obtain the tensor.  A rank-one tensor may be defined as expressible as the outer product of the number of nonzero vectors needed to obtain the correct order.

Dyadic tensor A dyadic tensor is a tensor of order two, and may be represented as a square matrix . In contrast, a dyad is specifically a dyadic tensor of rank one.

Einstein notation This notation is based on the understanding that whenever a multidimensional array  contains a repeated index letter, the default interpretation is that the product is summed over all permitted values of the index. For example, if a ij is a matrix, then under this convention a ii is its trace . The Einstein convention is widely used in physics and engineering texts, to the extent that if summation is not to be applied, it is normal to note that explicitly.

Kronecker delta Levi-Civita symbol Covariant tensor Contravariant tensor The classical interpretation is by components. For example, in the differential form a i dx i the components a i are a covariant vector. That means all indices are lower; contravariant means all indices are upper.

Mixed tensor This refers to any tensor that has both lower and upper indices.

Cartesian tensor Cartesian tensors are widely used in various branches of continuum mechanics , such as fluid mechanics and elasticity . In classical continuum mechanics , the space of interest is usually 3-dimensional Euclidean space , as is the tangent space at each point.  If we restrict the local coordinates to be Cartesian coordinates with the same scale centered at the point of interest, the metric tensor is the Kronecker delta .  This means that there is no need to distinguish covariant and contravariant components, and furthermore there is no need to distinguish tensors and tensor densities .  All Cartesian-tensor indices are written as subscripts.

Cartesian tensors achieve considerable computational simplification at the cost of generality and of some theoretical insight.

Contraction of a tensor Raising and lowering indices Symmetric tensor Antisymmetric tensor Multiple cross products Algebraic notation [ edit ] This avoids the initial use of components, and is distinguished by the explicit use of the tensor product symbol.

Tensor product If v and w are vectors in vector spaces V and W respectively, then v ⊗ ⊗ w {\displaystyle v\otimes w} is a tensor in V ⊗ ⊗ W .

{\displaystyle V\otimes W.} That is, the ⊗ operation is a binary operation , but it takes values into a fresh space (it is in a strong sense external ). The ⊗ operation is a bilinear map ; but no other conditions are applied to it.

Pure tensor A pure tensor of V ⊗ W is one that is of the form v ⊗ w .

It could be written dyadically a i b j , or more accurately a i b j e i ⊗ f j , where the e i are a basis for V and the f j a basis for W . Therefore, unless V and W have the same dimension, the array of components need not be square. Such pure tensors are not generic: if both V and W have dimension greater than 1, there will be tensors that are not pure, and there will be non-linear conditions for a tensor to satisfy, to be pure. For more see Segre embedding .

Tensor algebra In the tensor algebra T ( V ) of a vector space V , the operation ⊗ ⊗ {\displaystyle \otimes } becomes a normal (internal) binary operation . A consequence is that T ( V ) has infinite dimension unless V has dimension 0. The free algebra on a set X is for practical purposes the same as the tensor algebra on the vector space with X as basis.

Hodge star operator Exterior power The wedge product is the anti-symmetric form of the ⊗ operation. The quotient space of T ( V ) on which it becomes an internal operation is the exterior algebra of V ; it is a graded algebra , with the graded piece of weight k being called the k -th exterior power of V .

Symmetric power, symmetric algebra This is the invariant way of constructing polynomial algebras .

Applications [ edit ] Metric tensor Strain tensor Stress–energy tensor Tensor field theory [ edit ] Jacobian matrix Tensor field Tensor density Lie derivative Tensor derivative Differential geometry Abstract algebra [ edit ] Tensor product of fields This is an operation on fields, that does not always produce a field.

Tensor product of R-algebras Clifford module A representation of a Clifford algebra which gives a realisation of a Clifford algebra as a matrix algebra.

Tor functors These are the derived functors of the tensor product, and feature strongly in homological algebra . The name comes from the torsion subgroup in abelian group theory.

Symbolic method of invariant theory Derived category Grothendieck's six operations These are highly abstract approaches used in some parts of geometry.

Spinors [ edit ] See: Spin group Spin-c group Spinor Pin group Pinors Spinor field Killing spinor Spin manifold References [ edit ] ^ Ricci, Gregorio ; Levi-Civita, Tullio (March 1900), "Méthodes de calcul différentiel absolu et leurs applications" [Absolute differential calculation methods & their applications], Mathematische Annalen (in French), 54 ( 1– 2), Springer: 125– 201, doi : 10.1007/BF01454201 , S2CID 120009332 Books [ edit ] Bishop, R.L.

; Goldberg, S.I. (1968), Tensor Analysis on Manifolds (First Dover 1980 ed.), The Macmillan Company, ISBN 0-486-64039-6 Danielson, Donald A.

(2003).

Vectors and Tensors in Engineering and Physics (2/e ed.). Westview (Perseus).

ISBN 978-0-8133-4080-7 .

Dimitrienko, Yuriy (2002).

Tensor Analysis and Nonlinear Tensor Functions . Kluwer Academic Publishers (Springer).

ISBN 1-4020-1015-X .

Lovelock, David; Hanno Rund (1989) [1975].

Tensors, Differential Forms, and Variational Principles . Dover.

ISBN 978-0-486-65840-7 .

Synge, John L ; Schild, Alfred (1949).

Tensor Calculus .

Dover Publications 1978 edition.

ISBN 978-0-486-63612-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) v t e Tensors Glossary of tensor theory Scope Mathematics Coordinate system Differential geometry Dyadic algebra Euclidean geometry Exterior calculus Multilinear algebra Tensor algebra Tensor calculus Physics Engineering Computer vision Continuum mechanics Electromagnetism General relativity Transport phenomena Notation Abstract index notation Einstein notation Index notation Multi-index notation Penrose graphical notation Ricci calculus Tetrad (index notation) Van der Waerden notation Voigt notation Tensor definitions Tensor (intrinsic definition) Tensor field Tensor density Tensors in curvilinear coordinates Mixed tensor Antisymmetric tensor Symmetric tensor Tensor operator Tensor bundle Two-point tensor Operations Covariant derivative Exterior covariant derivative Exterior derivative Exterior product Hodge star operator Lie derivative Raising and lowering indices Symmetrization Tensor contraction Tensor product Transpose (2nd-order tensors) Related abstractions Affine connection Basis Cartan formalism (physics) Connection form Covariance and contravariance of vectors Differential form Dimension Exterior form Fiber bundle Geodesic Levi-Civita connection Linear map Manifold Matrix Multivector Pseudotensor Spinor Vector Vector space Notable tensors Mathematics Kronecker delta Levi-Civita symbol Metric tensor Nonmetricity tensor Ricci curvature Riemann curvature tensor Torsion tensor Weyl tensor Physics Moment of inertia Angular momentum tensor Spin tensor Cauchy stress tensor stress–energy tensor Einstein tensor EM tensor Gluon field strength tensor Metric tensor (GR) Mathematicians Élie Cartan Augustin-Louis Cauchy Elwin Bruno Christoffel Albert Einstein Leonhard Euler Carl Friedrich Gauss Hermann Grassmann Tullio Levi-Civita Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro Bernhard Riemann Jan Arnoldus Schouten Woldemar Voigt Hermann Weyl Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Glossary_of_tensor_theory&oldid=1253691608 " Categories : Glossaries of mathematics Tensors Multilinear algebra Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia glossaries using description lists This page was last edited on 27 October 2024, at 11:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Glossary of tensor theory 1 language Add topic

