Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Hyperbolic crochet 3 Books 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Daina Taimiņa 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Български Català Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Українська Moore Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latvian mathematician Daina Taimiņa Daina Taimiņa (born August 19, 1954) [ 1 ] is a Latvian mathematician , retired adjunct associate professor of mathematics at Cornell University , known for developing a way of modeling hyperbolic geometry with crocheted objects.

Education and career [ edit ] Taimiņa received all of her formal education in Riga , Latvia , where in 1977 she graduated summa cum laude from the University of Latvia and completed her graduate work in Theoretical Computer Science (with thesis advisor Prof.

Rūsiņš Mārtiņš Freivalds ) in 1990. As one of the restrictions of the Soviet system at that time, a doctoral thesis was not allowed to be defended in Latvia, so she defended hers in Minsk , receiving the title of Candidate of Sciences . This explains the fact that Taimiņa's doctorate was formally issued by the Institute of Mathematics of the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus . After Latvia regained independence in 1991, Taimiņa received her higher doctoral degree ( doktor nauk ) in mathematics from the University of Latvia , where she taught for 20 years.

[ 2 ] Daina Taimiņa joined the Cornell Math Department in December 1996.

Combining her interests in mathematics and crocheting, she is one of 24 mathematicians and artists who make up the Mathemalchemy Team.

[ 3 ] Hyperbolic crochet [ edit ] While attending a geometry workshop at Cornell University about teaching geometry for university professors in 1997, Taimiņa was presented with a fragile paper model of a hyperbolic plane, made by the professor in charge of the workshop, David Henderson (designed by geometer William Thurston .

[ 4 ] ) It was made «out of thin, circular strips of paper taped together».

[ 5 ] She decided to make more durable models, and did so by crocheting them.

[ 4 ] The first night after first seeing the paper model at the workshop she began experimenting with algorithms for a crocheting pattern, after visualising hyperbolic planes as exponential growth.

The following fall, Taimiņa was scheduled to teach a geometry class at Cornell. She was determined to find what she thought was the best possible way to teach her class. So while she, together with her family, spent the preceding summer at a tree farm in Pennsylvania, she also spent her days by the pool watching her two daughters learning how to swim whilst simultaneously making a classroom set of models of the hyperbolic plane. This was the first ever made from yarn and crocheting.

The models made a significant difference to her students, according to themselves. They said they "liked the tactile way of exploring hyperbolic geometry" and that it helped them acquire experiences that helped them move on in said geometry.

[ 6 ] This was what Taimina herself had been missing when first learning about hyperbolic planes and is also what has made her models so effective, as these models have later become the preferred way of explaining hyperbolic space within geometry.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In a TedxRiga by Taimiņa she tells the story of how the need for a visual, intuitive way of understanding hyperbolic planes spurred her toward inventing crocheted geometry models. In the talk she also gives a basic introduction to hyperbolic geometry using her models as well as rendering some of the negative responses she initially received from some who viewed crocheting as unfitting in mathematics.

In the foreword to Taimiņa's book Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes mathematician William Thurston, the designer of the paper model of hyperbolic planes, called Taimiņa's models «deceptively interesting». He attributed much of his view on them to how they make possible a tactile, non-symbolic, cognitively holistic way of understanding the highly abstract and complex part of mathematics non-euclidean geometry, is.

[ 9 ] Taimiņa has led several workshops at Cornell University for college geometry instructors together with professor David Henderson (of the aforementioned 1997 workshop and who later became her husband).

[ 10 ] Crocheted mathematical models later appeared in three geometry textbooks they wrote together, of which the most popular is Experiencing Geometry: Euclidean and non-Euclidean with History . In 2020 Taimiņa published 4th edition of this book as open source Experiencing Geometry An article about Taimiņa's innovation in New Scientist was spotted by the Institute For Figuring , a small non-profit organisation based in Los Angeles , and she was invited to speak about hyperbolic space and its connections with nature to a general audience  which included artists and movie producers.

[ 10 ] Taimiņa's initial lecture and following other public presentations sparked great interest in this new tactile way of exploring concepts of hyperbolic geometry, making this advanced topic accessible to wide audiences. Originally creating purely mathematical models, Taimiņa soon became popular as a fiber artist and public presenter for general audiences of ages five and up. In June 2005, her work was first shown as art in an exhibition "Not The Knitting You Know" at Eleven Eleven Sculpture Space , an art gallery in Washington, D.C.

[ 11 ] Since then she has participated regularly in various shows in galleries in US, UK, Latvia, Italy, Belgium, Ireland, Germany.  Her artwork is in the collections of several private collectors, colleges and universities, and has been included in the American Mathematical Model Collection of the Smithsonian Museum , Cooper–Hewitt, National Design Museum , and Institut Henri Poincaré .

Her work and its far-flung influence has received wide interest in media.

[ 12 ] It has been written about in 'Knit Theory' in Discover magazine [ 13 ] and in The Times , [ 14 ] explaining how a hyperbolic plane can be crocheted by increasing the number of stitches: For example, adding an extra stitch in the second line for every five stitches in the first. And for every five stitches in the second line, adding an extra one in the third. The number of stitches increases at an exponential rate. As the lines are longer, but joined together, the material quickly starts to fold in interesting ways.

— Alex Bellos, The Times [ 14 ] Margaret Wertheim interviewed Daina Taimiņa and David Henderson for Cabinet Magazine [ 15 ] Later, based on Taimiņa's work, the Institute For Figuring published a brochure "A Field Guide to Hyperbolic Space". In 2005 the IFF decided to incorporate Taimiņa's ideas and approach of explaining hyperbolic space in their mission of popularizing mathematics, and curated an exhibition at Machine Project gallery, which was the subject of a piece in the Los Angeles Times .

[ 16 ] Taimiņa's way of exploring hyperbolic space via crochet and connections with nature, combatting math phobia , was adapted by Margaret Wertheim in her talks [ 17 ] and became highly successful in the IFF-curated Hyperbolic Crochet Coral Reef project .

[ 18 ] Books [ edit ] Taimiņa's book " Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes " ( A K Peters, Ltd.

, 2009, ISBN 978-1-56881-452-0 ) [ 19 ] won the 2009 Bookseller/Diagram Prize for Oddest Title of the Year .

[ 20 ] It also won the 2012 Euler Book Prize of the Mathematical Association of America .

[ 21 ] Taimiņa also contributed to David W. Henderson 's book Differential Geometry: A Geometric Introduction (Prentice Hall, 1998) and, with Henderson, wrote Experiencing Geometry: Euclidean and Non-Euclidean with History (Prentice Hall, 2005).

See also [ edit ] Mathematics and fiber arts Notes [ edit ] ^ Birth date from Library of Congress catalog entry , retrieved 2019-11-15 ^ "Daima Taimina - info" .

pi.math.cornell.edu . Retrieved 2020-07-08 .

^ "Mathemalchemy's Team" .

Mathemalchemy . January 19, 2021.

^ a b "Body" .

www.math.cornell.edu .

^ Criado Perez, Caroline (2020).

Invisible Women, Exposing Data Bias in a World Designed for Men . Penguin Random House UK, Vintage. p. 310.

ISBN 9781784706289 .

^ Taimina, Daina (2009).

Crocheting Adventures with hyperbolic Planes . CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, A K Peters Book. p. 5.

^ Criado Perez, Caroline (2020).

Invisible Women, Exposing Data Bias in a World Designed for Men . Penguin Random House, Vintage. p. 312.

ISBN 9781784706289 .

^ "Crocheting Hyperbolic Planes: Daina Taimina at tedxRiga" .

Youtube . 28 June 2021.

^ Taimina, Daina (2009).

Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes . CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, an A K Peters book.

^ a b York, Michelle (July 11, 2005), "Professor Lets Her Fingers Do the Talking" , The New York Times .

^ "Eleven Eleven -- Not The Knitting You Know: Daina Taimina" .

eleveneleven.50webs.com .

^ Roberts, Siobhan (January 15, 2024).

"The Crochet Coral Reef Keeps Spawning, Hyperbolically" – via NYTimes.com.

^ "Knit Theory - DiscoverMagazine.com" .

discovermagazine.com .

^ a b Alex Bellos (July 1, 2008).

"How Crochet Solved age-old Math Problem" .

The Times .

^ Wertheim, Margaret (Winter 2004–2005), "Crocheting the Hyperbolic Plane: An Interview with David Henderson and Daina Taimiņa" , Cabinet , 16 .

^ Pagel, David (July 29, 2005).

"Well now, isn't this a cozy little cosmos" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ "The beautiful math of coral" .

ted.com .

^ "Crochet Coral Reef" .

crochetcoralreef.org .

^ Reviews of Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes : Mohorianu, Corina, zbMATH , Zbl 1160.00009 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: untitled periodical ( link ) Wildstrom, David Jacob (2010), Mathematical Reviews , MR 2492335 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: untitled periodical ( link ) Osinga, Hinke M.

(February 2010), "Crocheting adventures with hyperbolic planes", Journal of Mathematics and the Arts , 4 (1): 52– 54, doi : 10.1080/17513470903459526 , S2CID 121575146 Euler Book Prize Committee (September 2012), "Review" , MAA Reviews , Mathematical Association of America Leatham, Keith R. (December 2010 – January 2011), The Mathematics Teacher , 104 (5): 399, JSTOR 20876893 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: untitled periodical ( link ) ^ Bloxham, Andy (March 26, 2010), "Crocheting Adventures with Hyperbolic Planes wins oddest book title award" , The Telegraph , London .

^ "2012 Euler Winner Announced - Mathematical Association of America" .

www.maa.org .

References [ edit ] David W. Henderson, Daina Taimina Experiencing Geometry: Euclidean and non-Euclidean with History, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2005 Experiencing Geometry Further reading [ edit ] "Crafty Geometry: Mathematicians are knitting and crocheting to visualize complex surfaces" , Science News , December 23, 2006 .

External links [ edit ] Personal web page at Cornell University Strongly Connected Components , ACME Science, archived from the original on 2011-06-22 .

Crochet and Math meet beautiful mind , Crochet Insider, archived from the original on 2011-07-08 .

Daina Taimina , Community Arts Partnership .

Exhibition on Crocheting Hyperbolic Space , The Institute For Figuring .

TEDxRiga talk Crocheting Hyperbolic Planes: Daina Taimiņa at TEDxRiga v t e Mathematics and art Concepts Algorithm Catenary Fractal Golden ratio Hyperboloid structure Minimal surface Paraboloid Perspective Camera lucida Camera obscura Plastic ratio Projective geometry Proportion Architecture Human Symmetry Tessellation Wallpaper group Forms Algorithmic art Anamorphic art Architecture Geodesic dome Pyramid Vastu shastra Computer art Fiber arts 4D art Fractal art Islamic geometric patterns Girih Jali Muqarnas Zellij Knotting Celtic knot Croatian interlace Interlace Music Origami Mathematics Sculpture String art String figure Tiling Artworks List of works designed with the golden ratio Continuum Mathemalchemy Mathematica: A World of Numbers... and Beyond Octacube Pi Pi in the Sky Buildings Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption Hagia Sophia Kresge Auditorium Pantheon Parthenon Pyramid of Khufu Sagrada Família Sydney Opera House Taj Mahal Artists Renaissance Paolo Uccello Piero della Francesca Leonardo da Vinci Vitruvian Man Albrecht Dürer Parmigianino Self-portrait in a Convex Mirror 19th–20th Century William Blake The Ancient of Days Newton Jean Metzinger Danseuse au café L'Oiseau bleu Giorgio de Chirico Man Ray M. C. Escher Circle Limit III Print Gallery Relativity Reptiles Waterfall René Magritte La condition humaine Salvador Dalí Crucifixion The Swallow's Tail Crockett Johnson Contemporary Max Bill Martin and Erik Demaine Scott Draves Jan Dibbets John Ernest Helaman Ferguson Peter Forakis Susan Goldstine Bathsheba Grossman George W. Hart Desmond Paul Henry Anthony Hill Charles Jencks Garden of Cosmic Speculation Andy Lomas Robert Longhurst Jeanette McLeod Hamid Naderi Yeganeh István Orosz Hinke Osinga Antoine Pevsner Tony Robbin Alba Rojo Cama Reza Sarhangi Oliver Sin Hiroshi Sugimoto Daina Taimiņa Roman Verostko Margaret Wertheim Theorists Ancient Polykleitos Canon Vitruvius De architectura Renaissance Filippo Brunelleschi Leon Battista Alberti De pictura De re aedificatoria Piero della Francesca De prospectiva pingendi Luca Pacioli De divina proportione Leonardo da Vinci A Treatise on Painting Albrecht Dürer Vier Bücher von Menschlicher Proportion Sebastiano Serlio Regole generali d'architettura Andrea Palladio I quattro libri dell'architettura Romantic Samuel Colman Nature's Harmonic Unity Frederik Macody Lund Ad Quadratum Jay Hambidge The Greek Vase Modern Owen Jones The Grammar of Ornament Ernest Hanbury Hankin The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art G. H. Hardy A Mathematician's Apology George David Birkhoff Aesthetic Measure Douglas Hofstadter Gödel, Escher, Bach Nikos Salingaros The 'Life' of a Carpet Publications Journal of Mathematics and the Arts Lumen Naturae Making Mathematics with Needlework Rhythm of Structure Viewpoints: Mathematical Perspective and Fractal Geometry in Art Organizations Ars Mathematica The Bridges Organization European Society for Mathematics and the Arts Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science Institute For Figuring Mathemalchemy National Museum of Mathematics Related Droste effect Mathematical beauty Patterns in nature Sacred geometry Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Israel Academics CiNii zbMATH DBLP MathSciNet Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Daina_Taimiņa&oldid=1293541027 " Categories : 1954 births Topologists Hyperbolic geometers Latvian emigrants to the United States Women mathematicians Cornell University faculty 20th-century Latvian mathematicians Living people Latvian women writers Mathematical artists Mathematics popularizers Riga State Gymnasium No.1 alumni University of Latvia alumni Latvian women scientists 21st-century Latvian mathematicians Crochet Hidden categories: CS1 maint: untitled periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 08:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Daina Taimiņa 30 languages Add topic

