Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Teachings Toggle Teachings subsection 2.1 Linguistics 2.2 Ethics 2.3 Naturalism 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Prodicus 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek philosopher (c. 465 – c. 395 BC) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Prodicus" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Choice of Hercules , by Annibale Carracci , depicting the fable recounted by Prodicus Prodicus of Ceos ( / ˈ p r oʊ d ɪ k ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Πρόδικος ὁ Κεῖος , Pródikos ho Keios ; c. 465 BC – c. 395 BC) was a Greek philosopher , and part of the first generation of Sophists . He came to Athens as ambassador from Ceos , and became known as a speaker and a teacher.

Plato treats him with greater respect than the other sophists, and in several of the Platonic dialogues Socrates appears as the friend of Prodicus. One writer claims Socrates used his method of instruction.

[ 1 ] Prodicus made linguistics and ethics prominent in his curriculum. The content of one of his speeches is still known, and concerns a fable in which Heracles has to make a choice between Virtue and Vice . He also interpreted religion through the framework of naturalism .

Life [ edit ] Prodicus was a native of Ioulis on the island of Ceos , the birthplace of Simonides , [ 2 ] whom he is described as having imitated.

[ 3 ] Prodicus came frequently to Athens for the purpose of transacting business on behalf of his native city, and attracted admiration as an orator, [ 4 ] although his voice was deep and apt to fall.

[ 5 ] Plutarch describes him as slender and weak; [ 6 ] and Plato also alludes to his weakness, and a degree of effeminacy which thus resulted.

[ 7 ] Philostratus accuses him of luxury and avarice, [ 8 ] but no earlier source mentions this.

In the Protagoras of Plato, (dramatic date c. 430 BC), Prodicus is mentioned as having previously arrived in Athens . He appears in a play of Eupolis , and in The Clouds (423 BC) and The Birds (414 BC) of Aristophanes .

[ 9 ] He came frequently to Athens on public business.

[ 10 ] His pupils included the orators Theramenes [ 11 ] and Isocrates , [ 12 ] and in the year of the death of Socrates (399 BC), Prodicus was still living.

[ 13 ] According to the statement of Philostratus, on which little reliance can be placed, he delivered his lecture on virtue and vice in Thebes and Sparta also. The Apology of Plato unites him with Gorgias and Hippias as among those who were considered competent to instruct the youth in any city.

Lucian mentions him among those who held lectures at Olympia .

[ 14 ] In the dialogues of Plato he is mentioned or introduced with a certain degree of esteem, compared with the other sophists.

[ 15 ] In Meno , Socrates refers to him as his teacher.

[ 16 ] Aristophanes , in The Clouds , [ 9 ] deals more indulgently with him than with Socrates; and Xenophon 's Socrates, for the purpose of combating the voluptuousness of Aristippus , borrows from the book of "the wise Prodicus" the story of the choice of Hercules .

[ 17 ] Like Protagoras and others, Prodicus delivered lectures in return for payment [ 18 ] of from half a drachma to 50 drachmae, probably according to whether the hearers limited themselves to a single lecture or a more complete course.

[ 19 ] Prodicus is said to have amassed a great amount of money.

[ 20 ] The assertion that he hunted after rich young men is only found in Philostratus.

Teachings [ edit ] Prodicus was part of the first generation of Sophists . "He was a Sophist in the full sense of a professional freelance educator." [ 21 ] As he taught both philosophy and politics , [ 22 ] so Plato represents his instructions as chiefly ethical , [ 23 ] and gives preference to his distinction of ideas, such as courage, rashness, boldness, over similar attempts of other sophists.

[ 24 ] He sometimes gave individual show-orations, and though known to Callimachus , they do not appear to have been long preserved. In contrast with Gorgias and others, who boasted of possessing the art of making the small appear great, the great small, and of expatiating in long or short speeches, Prodicus required that the speech should be neither long nor short, but of the proper measure, [ 25 ] and it is only as associated with other sophists that he is charged with endeavouring to make the weaker cause appear strong by means of his rhetoric (thereby inspiring, e.g.

, Milton's description of Belial).

[ 26 ] Linguistics [ edit ] Several of Plato 's dialogues focus upon Prodicus' linguistic theory, and his insistence upon the correct use of names. He paid special attention to the correct use of words, [ 27 ] and the distinction of expressions related in sense.

[ 28 ] In Meno , Plato has Socrates observe that Prodicus might more tightly distinguish certain words which Socrates was happy to treat as sharing broadly the same meaning.

[ 29 ] Thucydides is said to have gained from him his accuracy in the use of words.

[ 30 ] In the Cratylus , [ 31 ] Socrates jokes that if he could have afforded the fifty drachma lectures he would now be an expert on "the correctness of names". In several of the Platonic dialogues Socrates appears as the friend and companion of Prodicus, which reveals at least that the two did have close personal relations, and that Socrates did attend at least a few of his lectures. "For Socrates, correct language was the prerequisite for correct living (including an efficient government). But Prodicus, though his linguistic teaching undoubtedly included semantic distinctions between ethical terms, had stopped at the threshold. The complete art of logoi embraced nothing less than the whole of philosophy." [ 32 ] Ethics [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hercules at the crossroads .

The speech on the choice of Hercules [ 33 ] was entitled Horai ( Ancient Greek : Ὧραι ).

[ 34 ] Hercules, as he was entering manhood, had to choose one of the two paths of life, that of virtue and that of vice . There appeared two women, the one of dignified beauty, adorned with purity, modesty, and discretion, the other of a voluptuous form, and meretricious look and dress. The latter promises to lead him by the shortest road, without any toil, to the enjoyment of every pleasure. The other, while she reminds him of his progenitors and his noble nature, does not conceal from him that the gods have not granted what is really beautiful and good apart from trouble and careful striving. While one seeks to deter him from the path of virtue by urging the difficulty of it; the other calls attention to the unnatural character of enjoyment which anticipates the need of it, its want of the highest joy, that arising from noble deeds, and the consequences of a life of voluptuousness, and how she herself, honoured by gods and men, leads to all noble works, and to true well-being in all circumstances of life. Hercules decides for virtue. This outline in Xenophon probably represents, in a very abbreviated form, the leading ideas of the original, of which no fragments remain.

Another speech, apparently by Prodicus, is mentioned in the spurious Platonic dialogue Eryxias . Prodicus undertakes to show that the value of external goods depends simply upon the use which is made of them, and that virtue must be learnt. Similar sentiments were expressed in Prodicus's Praise of Agriculture .

[ 35 ] The spurious dialogue Axiochus attributes to him views respecting the worthlessness of earthly life in different ages and callings, and how we must long after freedom from connection with the body in the heavenly and cognate aether . Also found here is a doctrine that death is not to be feared, as it affects neither the living nor the departed.

[ 36 ] Naturalism [ edit ] Prodicus, like some of his fellow Sophists, interpreted religion through the framework of naturalism . The gods he regarded as personifications of the sun, moon, rivers, fountains, and whatever else contributes to the comfort of our life, [ 37 ] and he was sometimes charged with atheism .

[ 38 ] "His theory was that primitive man was so impressed with the gifts nature provided him for the furtherance of his life that he believed them to be the discovery of gods or themselves to embody the godhead. This theory was not only remarkable for its naturalism but for its discernment of a close connection between religion and agriculture." [ 39 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Herbert Ernest Cushman (1918).

A Beginner's History of Philosophy . Vol. 1. p. 68.

^ Plato, Protagoras , 316d; Suda, Prodicus ^ Plato, Protagoras , 339c, 340e, 341b ^ Plato, Hippias Major 282, comp. Philostratus Vit. Soph.

i. 12 ^ Plato, Protag.

316a; Philostratus, Vit. Soph.

i. 12 ^ Plutarch, an seni ger. sit Resp.

c. 15 ^ Plato, Protag.

315d ^ Philost.

Vit. Soph.

i. 12 ^ a b Aristophanes, 1. 360 ^ Plato, Hipp. Maj.

282.

^ Aeschines in Athenenaeus, v. 220b.; Scholium ad Aristophanes, Nub.

360 ^ Dionys. Hal.

Isocr.

1; Photius, cod. 260 ^ Plato, Apology , 19. c.

^ Lucian, Vit. Herod , c. 3 ^ Plato, Hipp. Maj.

282, Theaet.

151b, Phaedo , 60, Protag.

341a, Charmid.

163d, Cratyl.

384b., Symp.

177, Euthyd.

305 ^ Plato, Meno , 96d ^ Xenophon, Memor.

ii. 1. § 21 ^ Xenophon, Mem.

ii. 1. § 21, comp. Philostratus; Diogenes Laertius, ix. 50; Plato, Prot.

314b ^ Pseudo-Plato, Axioch.

6; Plato, Cratyl.

384b.; Aristotle, Rhet.

iii. 14. § 9; Suda, Prodicus ^ Plato, Hipp. Maj.

282d; Xenophon, Symp.

iv. 62, i. 5 ^ Guthrie, William.

The Sophists . New York: Cambridge University Press, 1971.

ISBN 0-521-09666-9 . p. 275.

^ Plato, Euthyd.

305c ^ Plato, Meno , 96d; comp.

de Rep.

x. 600e ^ Plato, Lach.

197c ^ Plato, Phaed.

267a; comp.

Gorg.

449c, Prot.

334e, 335b, 338d; Aristotle, Rhet.

iii. 17 ^ Cicero, Brut.

c. 8.

^ Plato, Euthyd.

187e, Cratyl.

384b, comp. Galen, in Hippocr. de Articul.

iv. p. 461. 1 ^ Plato, Lach.

197d, Prot.

340a, 341a, Charmid.

163d; comp.

Themistius , Orat.

iv. p. 113 ^ Plato, Meno , 75e ^ Marcell.

Vit. Thuc.

; comp. Scholium ap. Hemsterhus.

Annot. in Lucian.

, App. 3; Maxim. Tyr.

Dissert.

vii.

^ Plato, Cratylus , 384b ^ Guthrie, William., The Sophists . New York: Cambridge University Press, 1971.

ISBN 0-521-09666-9 . p. 276.

^ Philostratus, p. 496; Xenophon, Mem.

ii. 1. § 21 ^ Suda, Horai , Prodicus ; Scholium ad Aristoph.

Nub.

1. 360. The meaning of the title is obscure.

^ Themistius, Orat.

30 ^ comp. Stobaeus, Serm.

xx. 35 ^ Sextus Empiricus, adv. Math.

i. 52; Cicero, de Nat. Deor.

i. 42 ^ Cicero, de Nat. Deor.

i. 55 ^ Guthrie, William.

The Sophists . New York: Cambridge University Press, 1971.

ISBN 0-521-09666-9 . p. 279.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Prodicus".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . Vol. 3. pp.

541– 543.

v t e Sophists of the 5th century BC Antiphon Callicles Critias Damon Dionysodorus Euthydemus Gorgias Hippias Lycophron Prodicus Protagoras Thrasymachus v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prodicus&oldid=1292327165 " Categories : Sophists Presocratic philosophers Ancient Greek physicists 5th-century BC Greek people Ancient Greek grammarians Ancient Greek ambassadors 460s BC births 390s BC deaths People from Kea (island) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from September 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link is locally defined Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 11:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Prodicus 36 languages Add topic

