Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life (1887–1910s) Toggle Early life (1887–1910s) subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Indian independence movement 1.3 The Hindu-German conspiracy 2 Communist movement (1910s–1929) 3 In India (1930–1954) 4 Personal life and Radical Humanism 5 Death and legacy 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents M. N. Roy 28 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Français गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia ქართული മലയാളം मराठी مصرى ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Русский سنڌي Slovenščina Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian revolutionary and political theorist (1887–1954) M. N. Roy M. N. Roy Born Narendra Nath Bhattacharya ( 1887-03-21 ) 21 March 1887 Arbelia, Bengal Presidency , British India (present-day West Bengal , India) Died 25 January 1954 (1954-01-25) (aged 66) Dehradun , Uttar Pradesh , India Nationality Indian Education Jadavpur University , Communist University of the Toilers of the East Occupation(s) Revolutionary, radical activist, political theorist, philosopher Political party Jugantar , Communist Party of India , Mexican Communist Party , Radical Democratic Party Movement Indian Independence movement , Indian revolutionary movement , Hindu–German Conspiracy Manabendra Nath Roy (born Narendra Nath Bhattacharya , better known as M. N. Roy ; 21 March 1887 – 25 January 1954) was a 20th-century Indian revolutionary , philosopher, radical activist and political theorist . Roy was the founder of the Mexican Communist Party and the Communist Party of India (Tashkent group).

He was also a delegate to the Communist International congresses and Russia's aide to China . In the aftermath of World War II Roy moved away from orthodox Marxism to espouse the philosophy of radical humanism , attempting to chart a third course between liberalism and communism .

[ 1 ] Early life (1887–1910s) [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Part of a series on Communism in India People M. N. Roy M. P. T. Acharya Sahajanand Saraswati Shripad Amrit Dange Abani Mukherji Yashpal A. K. Gopalan B. T. Ranadive Nripen Chakraborty P. Krishna Pillai Puran Chand Joshi Damodar Dharmananda Kosambi Bhagat Singh Ajoy Ghosh E. M. S. Namboodiripad S.K. Limaye Promode Dasgupta V. Subbiah Puchalapalli Sundarayya Kondapalli Seetharamaiah Saroj Dutta Jyoti Basu Bhupesh Gupta Hare Krishna Konar Dasarath Deb Harkishan Singh Surjeet T. Nagi Reddy Jagjit Singh Lyallpuri Charu Majumdar Indrajit Gupta E. K. Nayanar Shibdas Ghosh V. S. Achuthanandan Geeta Mukherjee Mohit Sen A. G. Noorani Biman Bose Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee Pinarayi Vijayan Vinod Mishra Manik Sarkar D. Raja Ganapathy Kobad Ghandy Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya Sitaram Yechury Anuradha Ghandy Mohammed Salim History Colonial period and partition Communism in the independence movement Conspiracy cases Peshawar Kanpur Bolshevik Meerut Kakori conspiracy Foundation of the CPI Tanka movement Quit India Movement Telangana Rebellion 1946 Naval Uprising Tebhaga movement Punnapra-Vayalar uprising Post-independence and Cold War 2nd Congress of the CPI Goa liberation movement 1957 general election in Kerala Angamaly police firing Sino-Indian border dispute 1964 split in the CPI Historic Eight Documents Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising Timeline Left Front Tripura West Bengal Rajan case Operation Barga Left Democratic Front Indravelli massacre Contemporary history Bara massacre Laxmanpur Bathe massacre Maoism in the Nandigram violence Salwa Judum 2013 Naxal attack in Darbha valley Ideologies Marxism–Leninism Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Stalinism Marxist feminism Marxist humanism National communism Primitive communism Trotskyism Principles Agrarian socialism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Class conflict Land reform in Kerala Left-wing nationalism Left-wing populism People's war Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary socialism Welfare Current organisations AIFB TUCC BPI CPI AISF AITUC AIYF BKMU NFIW CPI(M) AIDWA AIKS CITU DYFI SFI CPI (Maoist) KAMS PLGA RYL CPI(ML)L AIKM AISA CPIML ND MCPI(U) AICTU MFB MLPI (Red Flag) NSA RCPI RMPI RSP SUCI(C) UCPI Defunct organisations AICP BLPI CIC CC Communist Marxist Party Communist Party of French India Comrades Association CPI (ML) HSRA ICS Lal Communist Party Lal Sena LKPH MCPI WPP Media Deshabhimani Ganashakti LeftWord Books Nava Telangana People's Democracy Prajasakti Qaumi Jang Theekkathir Visalaandhra Related topics Anarchism in India Communism in Kerala Communism in Nepal Communist movements in India Gandhian socialism Inquilab Zindabad Lal Salam List of communist parties in India Red corridor Socialism in India State of socialist orientation Communism portal v t e Anushilan Samiti Influence List Indian Nationalism ( Militant nationalism ) Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay Swami Vivekananda Sister Nivedita Aurobindo Ghosh Shakta philosophy Indian National Congress Bipin Chandra Pal 1905 Partition of Bengal Bande Mataram Jugantar M. C. Samadhyayi Anushilan Samiti List History Dhaka Anushilan Samiti Jugantar Aurobindo Raja Subodh Mallik Pramathanath Mitra Sarala Devi C.R. Das Surendranath Tagore Kanailal Dutta Jatindra Nath Banerjee Barin Ghosh Pulin Behari Das Bhupendranath Datta Bagha Jatin Atulkrishna Ghosh Jadugopal Mukherjee Rash Behari Bose Bhupendra Kumar Datta Hemchandra Kanungo Ullaskar Dutta Khudiram Bose Prafulla Chaki Tarak Nath Das Abhinash Bhattacharya Guran Ditt Kumar Naren Bhattacharya Bhavabhushan Mitra Bipin Behari Ganguli Sachindra Nath Sanyal Jogesh Chandra Chattopadhyay Pratul Chandra Ganguli Hindustan Republican Association Narendra Mohan Sen Niranjan Sengupta M. N. Roy Jatin Das Surya Sen Pritilata Waddedar More Notable events List Alipore Bomb Conspiracy Howrah-Sibpur Conspiracy Delhi–Lahore Conspiracy Barisal Conspiracy Rodda robbery Indo-German Conspiracy Annie Larsen Christmas Day plot Kakori conspiracy Chittagong armoury raid More Related topics List Sir Andrew Fraser Department of Criminal Intelligence Sir Harold Stuart Sir Charles Stevenson-Moore Sir Robert Nathan John Wallinger India House Paris Indian Society Abhinav Bharat Society V.D. Savarkar Madam Cama Har Dayal Ghadar Party Anarchism in Bangladesh Socialism in Bangladesh More v t e Narendra Nath "Naren" Bhattacharya was born on 21 March 1887 in Arbelia, North 24 Parganas , West Bengal , near Calcutta (Kolkata) .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The Bhattacharyas were Sakta Brahmins – a family of hereditary priests.

[ 4 ] Roy's paternal grandfather was the head priest of the goddess Kheputeswari in the village of Kheput, Midnapore district .

[ 4 ] His father Dinabandhu Bhattacharya also served as a priest before moving to the village of Arbelia with his 12 children.

[ 4 ] Following the death of his first wife, Roy's father married Basantakumari Devi, the niece of Dwarkanath Vidyabhushan. He then taught Sanskrit at a nearby school.

[ 2 ] The couple had a total of eight children, including the fourth-born Naren.

[ 4 ] Roy's early schooling took place at Arbelia.

[ 2 ] In 1898, the family moved to Kodalia [ 2 ] and he continued his studies at the Harinavi Anglo-Sanskrit School, where his father taught, until 1905. He was considered tall, strong and athletic for his age.

[ 2 ] He later enrolled at the National College under the tutelage of Sri Aurobindo , before studying at Bengal Technical Institute (now Jadavpur University ) where he studied engineering and chemistry .

[ 2 ] However, much of Roy's knowledge was gained through self-study.

[ 2 ] Indian independence movement [ edit ] Towards the end of the 19th century, revolutionary nationalism began to spread among the educated middle classes of Bengal, inspired by the writings of Bankim and Vivekananda .

[ 5 ] According to one biographer, Roy agreed with Bankim that true religion was not being cloistered from the world, but working actively for the public good. Vivekananda reinforced this and advanced the idea that Hinduism and Indian culture were superior to anything the Western world could offer.

[ 6 ] He formed a rationalist group with his cousin Hari Kumar Chakravarti (1882–1963).

[ 7 ] Members included Satkori Banerjee (Bandhopadhyay), brothers Saileshvar and Shyamsundar Bose, Roy's cousins Phani and Narendra Chakravarti, and Mokshadacharan Samadhyayi , an organiser of the Anushilan Samiti in Chinsura .

In July 1905, the partition of Bengal was announced, scheduled to take effect in October. A mass movement aimed at annulling the partition emerged, giving radical nationalists like Roy an opportunity to build broader support.

[ 8 ] Following his high school expulsion for organising a meeting and a march against the partition, Roy and Chakravarti moved to Kolkata and joined the Anushilans.

[ 8 ] Under Mokshada's leadership, on 6 December 1907 Roy committed political theft to raise money for the Anushilans. When arrested, he was carrying two seditious books by Barin Ghosh . Defended by J. N. Roy (close friend of Bagha Jatin ) and Promothonath Mukherjee, he was released on bail, thanks to his reputation as a student and social worker.

[ 9 ] Barin sent Prafulla Chaki with Charuchandra Datta to see Bagha Jatin at Darjeeling who was posted there on official duty, and do away with the Lt. Governor. On explaining to Prafulla that it was not the right time, Jatin promised to contact him later. Though Prafulla was impressed by him, Barin cynically commented that it would be too much effort for a government officer to serve a patriotic cause. Phani returned from Darjeeling and, fascinated by Jatin's charisma, he informed his friends about him. On hearing Barin censuring Phani for disloyalty, Roy decided to meet Dada but was caught by Barin.

[ 10 ] The Howrah-Shibpur Trial (1910–11) brought Bhattacharya closer to Jatindra Mukherjee.

[ further explanation needed ] The Hindu-German conspiracy [ edit ] Many Indian nationalists, including Roy, became convinced that only through a revolution would they be able to achieve India's independence from the British Empire . So revolutionary nationalists looked to a rival imperial power, that of Kaiser Wilhelm's Germany , as a potential source for funds and weapons.

In August 1914, World War I began, affecting both the UK and Germany. Expatriate Indian nationalists organised as the Indian Revolutionary Committee in Berlin made an informal appeal to the German government to support a revolution in India.

[ 11 ] Towards the end of the year, the Germans had agreed to provide funding and material to start an uprising against British rule.

[ 11 ] Revolution seemed near.

[ 11 ] The task of attaining said funding and material was entrusted to Roy.

[ 11 ] He was sent to Java , then controlled by the Netherlands as part of the Dutch East Indies , where over the next two months Roy was only able to obtain little funding and no armaments.

[ 11 ] In early 1915, Roy set out again, leaving India to search for the German armaments which were believed to be en route somewhere in the Pacific.

[ 1 ] Roy would not see his homeland again for 16 years.

[ 1 ] The plan seemed fantastic, as Roy later recounted in his posthumously published memoirs: "The plan was to use German ships interned in a port at the northern tip of Sumatra , to storm the Andaman Islands and free and arm the prisoners there, and land the army of liberation on the Orissa coast. The ships were armoured, as many big German vessels were, ready for wartime use. They also carried several guns each. The crew was composed of naval ratings. They had to escape from the internment camp, seize the ships, and sail.... Several hundred rifles and other small arms with an adequate supply of ammunition could be acquired through Chinese smugglers who would get then on board the ships." [ 12 ] Last minute however, the money failed to materialise and the German Consul General had seemingly vanished the day when he was to issue orders for the plan, Roy recalls.

[ 13 ] Disgusted but still holding out hope, Roy left Indonesia for Japan , hoping to win Japanese support for their cause, despite Japan's nominal alliance with Great Britain .

[ 13 ] There he met with Chinese nationalist leader Sun Yat-sen , who had escaped to Japan following the failure of the July 1913 uprising in Nanking .

[ 13 ] Sun Yat-sen refused to assist Roy in his task of organising an anti-British revolution in India, instead informing Roy that Japanese support would prove sufficient. His inability to assist was due to Hong Kong's status as a British colony , Sun's own base of operations.

[ 14 ] Efforts to raise money from the German Ambassador to China were likewise unsuccessful.

[ 15 ] Roy's activities soon drew the attention of the Japanese secret police .

[ 15 ] When he learned he was going to be served formal notice to leave Japan, not wishing to be deported to Shanghai, Roy immediately left the country and arrived in Korea .

[ 16 ] He tried to make his way to Peking (Beijing), but he was identified by the British authorities, who detained him.

[ 17 ] However, he was able to escape jail time due to the British Consul General's ill ease with holding a British subject indefinitely without formal charges.

[ 18 ] Efforts to raise funds from the German consulate at Hankow resulted in a tentative agreement.

[ 19 ] However, this plan also failed due to the scale of the commitment, which had to be approved in Berlin according to Admiral Paul von Hintze .

[ 20 ] Roy decided to search for German funding from the German Ambassador in the United States, before heading to Germany.

[ 20 ] Employees of the German embassy were able to assist Roy in stowing away aboard a German-crewed American ship bound for San Francisco.

[ 20 ] Although they knew he was on the ship, British colonial authorities stopping the vessel in international waters were unable to locate Roy hidden in a secret compartment.

[ 21 ] In an effort to throw the British off his trail, and in an effort to obtain more suitable accommodations for the long trans-Pacific voyage, Roy disembarked from Kobe , Japan.

[ 22 ] In Kobe, he used a fake French-Indian passport previously obtained for him by the Germans in China.

[ 22 ] Posing as a seminary student bound for Paris, Roy obtained an American visa, bought a ticket, and sailed for San Francisco.

[ 22 ] Communist movement (1910s–1929) [ edit ] Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e During his stay in Palo Alto , a period of about two months, Roy met his future wife, Evelyn Leonora Trent (alias Shanthi Devi). The pair fell in love and journeyed together across the country to New York City.

[ 23 ] It was in the New York City public library that Roy began to develop his interest in Marxism.

[ 24 ] His socialist transition owed much to Bankim Chandra Chatterjee 's essays on communism and Vivekananda 's message of serving the proletariat.

[ citation needed ] Due to the presence of British spies, Roy fled to Mexico in July 1917 with Evelyn. German military authorities, on the spot, gave him large amounts of money.

[ further explanation needed ] Mexican president Venustiano Carranza and other liberal thinkers appreciated Roy's contributions to the El Pueblo newspaper. The Socialist Party he founded in December 1917 later became the Communist Party of Mexico in 1919, the first Communist Party outside Russia. The Roys lodged a penniless Mikhail Borodin under special circumstances. Due to Borodin's grateful reports, Moscow planned to invite Roy to the 2nd World Congress of the Communist International , held in Moscow during the summer of 1920.

[ 25 ] A few weeks before the Congress, Vladimir Lenin warmly received Roy. At Lenin's behest, Roy formulated his own ideas supplemented from Lenin's Preliminary Draft Theses on the National and the Colonial Questions .

[ 26 ] Roy's writings on the colonial question were then discussed in the 2nd World Congress of the Communist International .

Roy's writings were published by the International Press Correspondence ( Inprecor ), the weekly bulletin of the Communist International . Roy served as a member of the Comintern's Presidium for eight years [ 27 ] and at one stage was the Political Secretariat, the executive committee, and the World Congress.

Commissioned by Lenin to prepare the East—especially India—for revolution, Roy founded military and political schools in Tashkent . In October 1920, as he formed the Communist Party of India , he contacted his revolutionary colleagues who, at this time, were determining allegiances between Radicalism ( Jugantar ) and Mohandas K. Gandhi 's novel programme.

Close to the Jugantar in spirit and action, C. R. Das inspired Roy's confidence. From Moscow, Roy published his major reflections, India in Transition , which were translated into other languages. In 1922, Roy's own journal, the Vanguard , was published. This was followed by The Future of Indian Politics (1926) and Revolution and Counter-revolution in China (1930), while he was moving between Germany and France.

Leading a Comintern delegation appointed by Joseph Stalin to develop an agrarian revolution in China, Roy reached Canton in February 1927. Despite fulfilling his mission, [ citation needed ] a disagreement between the CCP leaders and Borodin led to breakdown of communication. Roy returned to Moscow where Trotskyists and Zinovievists were fighting the Stalinists . Here he voted for Trotsky's expulsion from the executive committee of the Comintern.

Stalin refused to meet Roy and give him a hearing at the plenum in February 1928. Denied treatment for an infected ear, Roy escaped with Nikolai Bukharin 's help, sparing himself from Stalin's anger. Shortly after Trotsky's deportation on 22 May 1928, Roy received permission to go abroad for medical treatment on board a Berlin-bound Deruluft plane.

[ 28 ] In December 1929, the Inprecor announced Roy's expulsion from the Comintern, almost simultaneously with Bukharin's fall from grace .

In India (1930–1954) [ edit ] Roy returned to India for the first time in December 1930.

[ 29 ] Upon reaching Bombay , Roy met with Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Bose , the former of whom recalled that despite significant political differences, "I was attracted to him by his remarkable intellectual capacity." [ 30 ] Roy's political activity in India proved to be brief as on 21 July 1931 he was arrested in Bombay on an arrest warrant issued in 1924.

[ 29 ] Roy was taken to Kanpur to face charges under Section 121-A of the Indian Penal Code which was "conspiring to deprive the King Emperor of his sovereignty in India." [ 29 ] No trial was held in open court; rather, the proceedings were conducted inside the jail in which Roy was held.

[ 31 ] Roy was allowed neither trial by jury nor defense witnesses, nor was he allowed to make a defense statement.

[ 32 ] Proceedings were conducted from 3 November 1931 until 9 January 1932 when Roy was sentenced to 12 years imprisonment.

[ 32 ] Roy was taken to the Bareilly Central Jail , however he was able to smuggle out the defence statement which he was not allowed to present in court.

[ 32 ] This disallowed declaration was published in full by Roy's supporters in India as My Defence , and in abridged form in New York as I Accuse .

[ 32 ] Roy was unapologetic for his views against British colonial rule, declaring: The oppressed people and exploited classes are not obliged to respect the moral philosophy of the ruling power....

A despotic power is always overthrown by force.

The force employed in this process is not criminal. On the contrary, precisely the guns carried by the army of the British government in India are instruments of crime. They become instruments of virtue when they are turned against the imperialist state.

[ 33 ] Roy filed an appeal to the Allahabad High Court , but this was dismissed on 2 May 1933. Roy's sentence was, however, reduced from 12 to 6 years.

[ 32 ] Roy ultimately served 5 years and 4 months, sitting in five different jails.

[ 32 ] Dismal prison conditions took a severe toll on Roy's health, and he suffered lasting damage to his heart, kidneys, lungs, and digestive tract as a result of his time behind bars.

[ 34 ] Roy also lost several teeth, was frequently feverish, and suffered constant pain from a chronically infected inner ear.

[ 34 ] Despite his imprisonment, Roy still managed to contribute to the Indian independence movement. A steady stream of letters and articles were smuggled out of jail. He also wrote a 3,000-page draft manuscript provisionally titled The Philosophical Consequence of Modern Science . His followers, including A. A. Alwe, formed the Bombay Provincial Working Class Party in 1933 to continue his work while he was imprisoned.

[ 35 ] Released in November 1936 in bad health, Roy went to Allahabad for recovery. Defying the Comintern order to boycott the Indian National Congress , Roy urged Indian communists to join this Party.

Jawaharlal Nehru , in his address at the Faizpur session in December 1936, described Roy as: ...one who, though young, is an old and well-tried soldier in India's fight for freedom. Comrade M.N. Roy has just come to us after a long and most distressing period in prison, but though shaken up in body, he comes with a fresh mind and heart, eager to take part in that old struggle that knows no end till it ends in success.

[ 36 ] From the podium, Roy in his speech recommended the capture of power by Constituent Assembly . Unable to collaborate with Gandhi, however, Roy stuck to his own conviction. In April 1937, his weekly Independent India appeared and was welcomed by progressive leaders like Bose and Nehru, however was criticised by Gandhi and the staunch Communists who accused Roy of deviation.

Personal life and Radical Humanism [ edit ] In marrying Ellen Gottschalk , his second wife, "Roy found not only a loving wife but also an intelligent helper and close collaborator." [ 37 ] They settled in Dehra Dun . Roy proposed an alternative leadership, seizing the crisis following Bose's re-election as the Congress President in 1938. In Pune , he formed his League of Radical Congressmen . Disillusioned with both bourgeois democracy and communism, he devoted the last years of his life to the formulation of an alternative philosophy which he called Radical Humanism and of which he wrote a detailed exposition in Reason, Romanticism and Revolution .

In his biography, In Freedom's Quest , Sibnarayan Ray writes: If Nehru had his problems, so had Roy. From early life his sharp intellect was matched by a strong will and extra-ordinary self-confidence. It would seem that in his long political career there were only two persons and a half who, in his estimate, qualified to be his mentors. The first was Jatin Mukherji (or Bagha Jatin ) from his revolutionary nationalist period; the second was Lenin. The half was Joseph Stalin....

[ 38 ] With the declaration of World War II , Roy (in a similar position as Sri Aurobindo ) condemned the rising totalitarian regimes in Germany and Italy, instead supporting England and France in the fight against fascism. He severed connections with the Congress Party and created the Radical Democratic Party in 1940. Gandhi proceeded to lead the Quit India movement in August 1942. In response, the British colonial government imprisoned without trial nearly the entire Indian National Congress leadership. Roy's views clearly differed from the mainstream of the independence movement. According to Roy, a victory for Germany and the Axis powers would have resulted in the end of democracy worldwide and that India would never be independent. In his view, India could only win her independence in a free world.

Sensing India's independence to be a post-war reality following the defeat of the Axis powers and the weakening of the British Empire, Roy wrote a series of articles in Independent India on the economic and political structures of the new India, presenting a ten-year plan, and drafting a Constitution of Free India (1944).

Roy in his philosophy devised means to ensure human freedom and progress . Remembering Bagha Jatin who "personified the best of mankind", Roy worked "for the ideal of establishing a social order in which the best in man could be manifest." In 1947, he elaborated his theses into a manifesto, New Humanism , expected to be as important as the Communist Manifesto by Karl Marx a century earlier.

[ 39 ] Death and legacy [ edit ] 1987 stamp of India A planned lecture tour to the United States was canceled on 25 January 1954 due to Roy's death from a heart attack.

[ 40 ] Beginning in 1987, Oxford University Press began the publication of the Selected Works of M. N. Roy . A total of 4 volumes were published through to 1997, gathering Roy's writings through his prison years. Project editor Sibnarayan Ray died in 2008, however, [ 41 ] so the project was prematurely terminated. Noted personalities like T. M. Tarkunde, Govardhandas Parekh, V. B. Karnik, Sunil Bhattacharya, B. R. Sunthankar, Saleel Wagh , V. R. Jawahire and Dr. Nalini Taralekar were influenced by M. N. Roy and his philosophy.

[ 42 ] See also [ edit ] Communist involvement in the Indian independence movement References [ edit ] ^ a b c Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs , p. 4.

^ a b c d e f g "Manabendra Nath Roy," Archived 1 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine Banglapedia ^ This date found in the Dictionary of National Biography and accepted by Sibnarayan Ray, In Freedom's Quest: Life of M.N. Roy (Vol. 1: 1887–1922).

Calcutta: Minerva Associates, 1998; p. 14. This is based on the diary of Dinabandhu. Samaren Roy in The Restless Brahmin claims that Bhattacharya was born on 22 February 1887 in Arbelia.

^ a b c d Ray, In Freedom's Quest, vol. 1, p. 14.

^ Ray, In Freedom's Quest , vol. 1, p. 15.

^ Ray, In Freedom's Quest , vol. 1, pp. 15–16.

^ Sealy's Report in Terrorism in Bengal , Vol. V, p. 17.

^ a b Ray, In Freedom's Quest , vol. 1, p. 16.

^ V. B. Karnik, M. N. Roy: Political Biography . Bombay: Nav Jagriti Samaj, 1978; pp. 11–12.

^ M. N. Roy, Jatindranath Mukherjee in Men I Met , reprinted from Independent India , 27 February 1949. Sibnarayan in vol. I, p. 19 quotes Bhattacharya farther: "all the Dadas practised magnetism: only Jatin Mukherjee possessed it." ^ a b c d e M. N. Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs . Delhi: Ajanta Publications, 1984; p. 3.

^ Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs , pp. 4–5.

^ a b c Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs , p. 5.

^ Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs , p. 6.

^ a b Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs , p. 7.

^ Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs , p. 8.

^ Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs , p. 9.

^ Roy, M.N. Roy's Memoirs , p. 10.

^ Roy, M.N. Roy's Memoirs, pp. 12–13.

^ a b c Roy, M.N. Roy's Memoirs, p. 14.

^ Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs , p. 16.

^ a b c Roy, M. N. Roy's Memoirs , p. 18.

^ Satyabrata Rai Chowdhuri , Leftism in India, 1917–1941 . Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan , 2007; p. 46.

^ Diary of Lala Lajpat Rai, 1914–1917 , National Archives , New Delhi ^ Goebel, "Geopolitics," pp. 488–490.

^ Sibnarayan, vol. 1, pp. 93–94 ^ "M.N. Roy Dead," Archived 13 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine The Hindu , 29 January 1954.

^ Sibnarayan, III/pp57-58 ^ a b c Sibnarayan Ray, "Introduction to Volume IV," Selected Works of M.N. Roy: Volume IV, 1932–1936 . Delhi: Oxford University Press , 1997; p. 3.

^ Jawaharlal Nehru, An Autobiography (Nehru) The Bodley Head, London, 1936; pp, 154, 218.

^ Ray, "Introduction to Volume IV," pp. 3–4.

^ a b c d e f Ray, "Introduction to Volume IV," p. 4.

^ M. N. Roy, "I Accuse!" From the Suppressed Statement of Marabendra Nath Roy on Trial for Treason Before Sessions Court, Cawnpore, India . New York: Roy Defense Committee of India, January 1932; pp. 11–12.

^ a b Ray, "Introduction to Volume IV," p. 11.

^ Roy, Subodh, Communism in India – Unpublished Documents  1925–1934.

Calcutta : National Book Agency, 1998. p. 240 ^ Tribune , Lahore, 24 and 27 December 1936, quoted by Sibnarayan , III/p323 ^ Karnik, M.N. Roy, p. 86.

^ op. cit , Vol. III-Part I, 2005, p. 320 ^ V. B. Karnik, M. N. Roy , p. 104 ^ "Roy, Manbendra Nath | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Retrieved 12 July 2023 .

^ Selected Works of M. N. Roy, Edited by Sibnarayan Ray, UO Libraries, University of Oregon, janus.uoregon.edu/ ^ "El Roy y su música" .

vice.com . 11 June 2014.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2016 . Retrieved 5 May 2018 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Note: Adapted from "A Checklist of the Writings of M.N. Roy" in M.N. Roy's Memoirs.

Delhi: Ajanta Publications, 1984; pp. 607–617.

La voz de la India (The Voice of India). Mexico City: n.p., n.d. [c. 1917].

La India: Su Pasado, Su Presente y Su Porvenir (India: Its Past, Its Present, and Its Future). Mexico City: n.p., 1918.

Indien (India). Hamburg: Verlag der Kommunistischen Internationale, 1922.

India in Transition . With Abani Mukherji. Geneva: J.B. Target, 1922.

What Do We Want?

Geneva: J. B. Target, 1922.

One Year of Non-Cooperation from Ahmedabad to Gaya . With Evelyn Roy. Calcutta: Communist Party of India, 1923.

—Imprint probably fictitious.

India's Problem and Its Solution . n.c.: n.p., n.d. [c. 1923].

Political Letters . Zurich: Vanguard Bookshop, 1924.

—Alternate title: Letters to Indian Nationalists .

Cawnpore Conspiracy Case: An Open Letter to the Rt. Hon. J. R. MacDonald . London: Indian Defence Committee, 1924.

The Aftermath of Non-Cooperation: Indian Nationalism and Labour Politics . London: Communist Party of Great Britain, 1926.

The Future of Indian Politics . London: R. Bishop [Communist Party of Great Britain], 1926.

Our Task in India . n.c.: Bengal Committee of the Revolutionary Party of the Indian Working Class, n.d. [c. 1932].

"I Accuse!" : From the Suppressed Statement of Manabendra Nath Roy on Trial for Treason before Sessions Court, Cawnpore, India . New York: Roy Defense Committee of India, 1932.

—Title of unexpurgated Indian edition: My Defence.

Congress at Crossroads, by a Congressman (M. N. Roy) . Bombay: Independence of India League, [c. 1934].

On Stepping Out of Jail . Bombay: V. B. Karnik, n.d. [c. 1936].

Letters by M. N. Roy to the Congress Socialist Party, Written in 1934 . Bombay: Renaissance Publishing Co., 1937.

The Historical Role of Islam: An Essay on Islamic Culture . Bombay: Vora, 1937.

Presidential Address of M. N. Roy, United Provinces Youths' Conference, 29 and 30 May 1937, Sitapur . Bombay: R. D. Nadkarni, n.d. [1937].

Materialism and Spiritualism: Presidential Address of M. N. Roy at the 3rd Session of the Madras Presidency Radical Youths' Conference, Held at Madras on 25 July 1937 . Bombay: R. D. Nadkarni, n.d. [1937].

My Crime . Bombay: Ramesh D. Nadkarni, n.d. [c. 1937].

The Russian Revolution: A Review and the Perspective . Calcutta: D. M. Library, n.d. [c. 1937].

Presidential Address of Com. M.N. Roy, First Rajputana-Central India Students' Conference, Benwar, 1 and 2 January 1938 . Bombay: n.p., n.d. [1938].

All-India Sugar Mill Workers' Conference, Gorakhpur, Held on 30 April and 1 May 1938: Presidential Address by Manabendra Nath Roy . Gorakhpur: n.p., n.d. [1938].

Fascism: Its Philosophy, Professions and Practice . Calcutta: D.M. Library, 1938.

On the Congress Constitution . Calcutta: "Independent India" Office, 1938.

Our Differences . With V. B. Karnik. Calcuta: Saraswaty Library, 1938.

Our Problems . With V. B. Karnik. Calcutta; Barendra Library, 1938.

Gandhi vs. Roy: Containing Com. Roy's Letter to Gandhiji, the Latter's Reply and the Former's Rejoinder . Bombay: V. B. Karnik, 1939.

Heresies of the Twentieth Century: Philosophical Essays . Bombay: Renaissance Publishers, 1939.

Presidential Address by M. N. Roy at the First All-India Conference of the League of Radical Congressmen, Poona, 27 and 28 June 1939 . Bombay: n.p., n.d. [1939].

Tripuri and After . Nasik: Radical Congressmen's League, n.d. [1930s].

Which Way, Lucknow? By a Radical Congressman (M. N. Roy) . Bombay: M. R. Shetty, n.d. [1930s].

The Memoirs of a Cat . n.c. [Dehra Dun]: Renaissance Publishers, 1940.

Whither Europe?

Bombay: Vora, 1940.

The Alternative . Bombay: Vora, 1940.

From Savagery to Civilisation . Calcutta: Digest Book House, 1940.

Gandhism, Nationalism, Socialism . Calcutta: Bengal Radical Club, 1940.

Science and Superstition . Dera Dun: Indian Renaissance Association, 1940.

Materialism: An Outline of the History of Scientific Thought . Dera Dun: Renaissance Publishers, 1940.

World Crisis (International Situation) . (contributor) Ahmedabad: Gujarat Radical Democratic People's Party, 1940.

The Relation of Classes in the Struggle for Indian Freedom . Patna: Bihar Radical Democratic People's Party, n.d. [c. 1940].

Science, Philosophy and Politics . Moradabad: J. S. Agarwal, n.d. [c. 1940].

A New Path: Manifesto and Constitution of the Radical Democratic Party . Bombay: V. B. Karnik, n.d. [c. 1940].

Twentieth Century Jacobinism: Role of Marxism in Democratic Revolution . Patna: Radical Democratic Party, n.d. [c. 1940].

Some Fundamental Problems of Mass Mobilization . Calcutta: D. Goonawardhana, n.d. [c. 1940].

My Differences with the Congress: Speech at Allahbad University, 27 November 1940 . Bombay: V. B. Karnik, League of Radical Congressmen, n.d. [c. 1940].

On Communal Question . With V. B. Karnik. Lucknow: A.P. Singh, n.d. [c. 1940].

Culture at the Crossroads: Cultural Requisites of Freedom . Calcutta: Leftist Book Club, n.d. [1940s].

Radical Democratic Party's Message to the USSR . Calcutta: D. Goonawardhan, n.d. [1940s].

Presidential Address by Com. M. N. Roy at the Maharashtra Provincial Conference of the Radical Democratic Party held at Poona on 22 and 23 March 1941 , Bombay: V. B. Karnik, n.d. [1941].

The Ideal of Indian Womanhood . n.c. [Dehra Dun?]: Renaissance Publishers, 1941.

Problem of the Indian Revolution . Bombay: Rajaram Panday, 1941.

All-India Anti-Fascist Trade Union Conference: Presidential Address by M. N. Roy: Lahore, 29–30 November 1941 . Lahore: M. A. Kahn, n.d. [1941].

Scientific Politics: Lectures in the All India Political Study Camp, Dehradun, May and June 1940: Held under Auspices of All-India League of Radical Congressmen . Dehra Dun: Indian Renaissance Association, 1942.

Freedom or Fascism?

n.c. [Bombay?]: Radical Democratic Party, 1942.

India and the War . (contributor) Lucknow: Radical Democratic Party, 1942.

This War and Our Defence . Karachi: Sind Provincial Radical Democratic Party, 1942.

War and Revolution: International Civil War . Madras: Radical Democratic Party, 1942.

Origin of Radicalism in the Congress . Lucknow: S.S. Suri, 1942.

Library of a Revolutionary: Being a List of Books for Serious Political Study . Lucknow: New Life Union, for the Indian Renaissance Association, 1942.

This Way to Freedom: Report of the All-India Conference of the Radical Democratic Party held in December 1942 . (contributor) Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, 1942.

Nationalism: An Antiquated Cult . Bombay: Radical Democratic Party, n.d. [c. 1942].

Nationalism, Democracy, and Freedom . Bombay: Radical Democratic Party, n.d. [c. 1942].

Letters from Jail . n.c. [Dehra Dun?]: Renaissance Publishing, 1943.

The Communist International . Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, 1943.

What is Marxism?

Bombay: n.p., 1943.

The Future of Socialism: Talk to the Calcutta Students' Club, November 1943 . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, n.d. [1943].

Poverty or Plenty?

Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1943.

Indian Labour and Post-war Reconstruction . Lucknow: A. P. Singh, 1943.

Indian Renaissance Movement: Three Lectures . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1944.

The Future of the Middle Class: Lecture Delivered in Poona on 29 May 1944, in the Annual Spring Lecture Series . Patna: Radical Democratic Party, n.d. [1944].

Constitution of India, A Draft: Endorsed and Released for Public Discussion by the Central Secretariat of the Radical Democratic Party . Delhi: V. B. Karnik, 1944.

Your Future: An Appeal to the Educated Middle Class. Issued by the Radical Democratic Party . Lucknow: Radical Democratic Party, 1944.

Planning a New India . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, n.d. [c. 1944].

National Government or People's Government?

Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, n.d. [c. 1944].

Constitution of Free India, A Draft by M. N. Roy: Endorsed and Released for Public Discussion by the Radical Democratic Party . Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, 1945.

The Last Battles of Freedom: Being the Report of the Calcutta Conference of the Radical Democratic Party, 27 to 30 December 1944 . Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, n.d. [1945].

Post-War Perspective: A Peep into the Future . Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, 1945.

Future of Democracy in India: Being the Full Text of a Speech Delivered at a Public Meeting Held at the Town Hall, Lucknow, on 6 October 1945 . Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, n.d. [1945].

The Problem of Freedom . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1945.

My Experiences in China . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1945.

Sino-Soviet Treaty . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1947.

Jawaharial Nehru , Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, n.d. [c. 1945].

INA and the August Revolution . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1946.

Revolution and Counter-Revolution in China . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1946.

—Published in German in 1931.

A New Orientation: Statement on the International Situation . Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, 1946.

A New Orientation: Review and Perspective of the International Struggle for a New World Order of Democratic Freedom, Economic Prosperity, and Cultural Progress . Dehra Dun: Radical Democratic Party, Bengal, 1946.

New Orientation: Lectures Delivered at the Political Study Camp Held at Dehra Dun, from 8 to 18 May 1946 . With Phillip Spratt. Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1946.

Radical Democratic Party Conference Inaugural Address: Bombay, 20th, 21st, 22 December 1946: Presidential Address and Resolutions . Bombay: V. B. Karnik, n.d. [1947].

Principles of Radical Democracy: Adopted by the Third All-India Conference by the Radical Democratic Party of India held in Bombay, 26 to 29 December 1946 . Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, 1947.

—Attributed to Roy.

Leviathan and Octopus . Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, n.d. [1947].

Asia and the World: A Manifesto . Delhi: Radical Democratic Party, 1947.

Science and Philosophy . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1947.

New Humanism: A Manifesto . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1947.

Beyond Communism . With Philip Spratt. Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1947.

A New Approach to the Communal Program: Lecture Delivered at the International Fellowship, Madras, 22 February 1941 . Bombay: V. B. Karnik, n.d. [c. 1947].

The Russian Revolution . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1949.

India's Message . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1950.

The Rhythm of Cosmos: Inaugural Address of the Second All-India Rationalist Conference at Tenali held on 9 and 10 February 1952 . Tenali: n.p., n.d. [1952].

Radical Humanism . New Delhi: n.p., 1952.

Reason, Romanticism and Revolution . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1952.

The Way Ahead in Asia . n.c.: British Information Service in Southeast Asia, n.d. [c. 1950s].

Crime and Karma, Cats and Women . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1957.

Memoirs . Bombay: Allied Publishers, 1964.

—Reissued 1984.

Further reading [ edit ] R. K. Awasthi, Scientific Humanism: Socio-Political Ideas of M.N . Roy: A Critique . Delhi: Research Publications in Social Sciences, 1973.

Shiri Ram Bakshi, M. N. Roy . New Delhi: Anmol Publications, 1994.

N. R. Basannavar, 'The Indian in the Comintern'. University of Bristol Dissertation 2007 G. P. Bhattacharjee, Evolution of Political Philosophy of M. N. Roy . Calcutta: Minerva Associates, 1971.

M.N. Roy and Radical Humanism.

Bombay: A. J. B. H. Wadia Publication, 1961.

Phanibhusan Chakravartti, M. N. Roy . Calcutta: M. N. Roy Death Anniversary Observance Committee, 1961.

Prakash Chandra, Political Philosophy of M. N. Roy . Meerut: Sarup & Sons, 1985.

Satyabrata Rai Chowdhuri, Leftism in India, 1917–1947 . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave, 2007.

Ramyansu Sekhar Das, M. N. Roy the Humanist Philosopher . Calcutta: W. Newman, 1956.

B. N. Dasgupta, M. N. Roy: Quest for Freedom . Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay, 1970.

Niranjan Dhar, The Political Thought of M. N. Roy, 1936–1954 . Calcutta: Eureka Publishers, 1966.

S. M. Ganguly, Leftism in India: M. N. Roy and Indian Politics, 1920–1948 . Columbia, MO: South Asia Books, 1984.

Dharmadasa Goonawardhana and Debassaran Das Gupta (eds.), Royism Explained . Calcutta: Saraswaty Library, 1938.

Michael Goebel, "Geopolitics, Transnational Solidarity, or Diaspora Nationalism? The Global Career of M. N. Roy, 1915–1930," European Review of History 21, no. 4 (2014), pp. 485–499.

D. C. Grover, M. N. Roy: a Study of Revolution and Reason in Indian Politics . Calcutta: Minerva Associates, 1973.

John Patrick Haithcox, Communism and Nationalism in India; M. N. Roy and Comintern Policy, 1920–1939 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971.

V. B. Karnik, M. N. Roy: Political Biography . Bombay: Nav Jagriti Samaj, 1978.

Usha Krishna, M. N. Roy and the Radical Humanist Movement in India: A Sociological Study . Meerut: Chaudhary Charan Singh University, 2005.

B. K. Mahakul, "Radical Humanism of M. N. Roy," Indian Journal of Political Science , vol. 66, no. 3 (July 2005), pp. 607–618.

In JSTOR Kris Manjapra, M. N. Roy: Marxism and Colonial Cosmopolitanism . Delhi: Routledge India, 2010.

Giles Milton Russian Roulette: How British Spies Thwarted Lenin's Global Plot , Sceptre, 2013.

ISBN 978 1 444 73702 8 Innaiah Narisetti (ed.), M. N. Roy: Radical Humanist: Selected Writings , New York: Prometheus Books, 2004.

R. L. Nigram, Radical Humanism of M. N. Roy An Exposition of his 22 Theses . n.c.: Indus Publishing Co., n.d.

Robert C. North and Xenia J. Eudin, M. N. Roy's Mission to China: The Communist-Kuomintang Split of 1927 . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1963.

Vishnudeo Narain Ojha, M. N. Roy and His Philosophical Ideas , n.c. [Muzaffarpur]: Shankhnad Prakashan, 1969.

Alok Pant, Indian Radicalism and M. N. Roy . Delhi: Adhyayan, 2005.

Govardhan Dhanaraj Parikh (ed.), Essence of Royism: Anthology of M. N. Roy's Writings . Bombay: Nav Jagriti Samaj, 1987.

Ramendra, M. N. Roy's New Humanism and Materialism . Patna: Buddhiwadi Foundation, 2001.

Sibnarayan Ray, In Freedom's Quest: Life of M. N. Roy (Vol. 1: 1887–1922) . Calcutta: Minerva, 1998.

—No other volumes issued.

M. N. Roy: Philosopher-Revolutionary: A Symposium . Calcutta: Renaissance Publishers, 1959.

Dipti Kumar Roy, Leftist Politics in India: M. N. Roy and the Radical Democratic Party . Calcutta: Minerva, 1989.

Trade Union Movement in India: Role of M. N. Roy . Calcutta: Minerva, 1990.

Samaren Roy, The Restless Brahmin: Early Life of M. N. Roy . Bombay: Allied Publishers, 1970.

The Twice-Born Heretic: M. N. Roy and the Comintern . Calcutta: KLM Private, 1986.

B. S. Sharma, The Political Philosophy of M. N. Roy . Delhi, National Publishing House, 1965.

Sita Ram Sharma, Life and Works of M. N. Roy . Jaipur: Sublime Publications, 2010.

M. Shiviah, New Humanism and Democratic Politics: A Study of M. N. Roy's Theory of the State . Bombay: Popular Prakashan, 1977.

Reeta Sinha, Political Ideas of M. N. Roy . New Delh: National Book Organisation, 1991.

Sada Nand Talwar, Political Ideas of M. N. Roy . Delhi: Khosla Publishing House, 1978.

J. B. H. Wadia, M. N. Roy, The Man: An Incomplete Royana .  Bombay: Popular Prakashan, 1983.

Syamales Das, M. N. Roy, Biplabi, Rajnitik O Darshonik . Calcutta: Sribhumi Publishing Co., 1999.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to M. N. Roy .

Manbendra Nath Roy (1887—1954) at Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Manabendra Nath Roy Internet Archive , Marxists Internet Archive, www.marxists.org/ Roy on the cover of Ogonëk , 5 April 1925.

M. N. Roy materials in the South Asian American Digital Archive (SAADA) v t e Hindu–German Conspiracy Background Indian independence movement ( militant ) Shyamji Krishna Varma Bhikaiji Cama India House Anushilan Samiti Jugantar Alipore Bomb Case Delhi Conspiracy More Ghadar Hardayal Sohan Singh Pandurang Khankhoje Hindustan Ghadar Ghadar di gunj Ghadar Movement Tarak Nath Guran Ditt Baba Gurdit Singh Komagata Maru Bhagwan Singh Bhai Parmanand Ram Chandra Kartar Singh Vishnu Pingle Kanshi Ram Agnes Smedley More Berlin Committee Chatto Champak A. R. Pillai M. P. T. Acharya Barkatullah Bhupendranath Datta Abhinash Bhattacharya Mahendra Pratap Herambalal Gupta More Indian figures Bagha Jatin Rash Behari Sachin Sanyal Bhavabhushan Mitra M. N. Roy Pritam Singh Amarendranath Chatterjee Atulkrishna Ghosh Deobandi Mahmud al-Hasan Ubaidullah Sindhi Muhammad Mian Mansoor Ansari Sufi Amba Prasad More German figures Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg Zimmermann Intelligence Bureau for the East Max von Oppenheim Papen von Bernstorff George Rodiek Hentig Niedermayer More Conspiracy Annie Larsen SS Maverick February plot Singapore mutiny Lahore Conspiracy Case trial Christmas Day Plot Silk Letter Conspiracy Kabul Mission Provisional Government of India Hindu–German Conspiracy Trial More Counter-intelligence W. C. Hopkinson John Wallinger Indian Political Intelligence Basil Thomson MI5(g) Vernon Kell Robert Nathan Kirpal Singh Oren Vincent Kraft William Wiseman Charles Tegart Guy Gaunt W. Somerset Maugham East Persia Cordon Related topics Lawrence of Arabia Defence of India Act 1915 Ingress into India Ordinance Sidney Rowlatt Rowlatt Committee Jallianwala Bagh massacre Pan-Asianism Tōyama Mitsuru v t e Indian independence movement History Colonisation Porto Grande de Bengala Dutch Bengal East India Company British Raj French India Portuguese India Battle of Plassey Battle of Buxar Anglo-Mysore Wars First Second Third Fourth Anglo-Maratha Wars First Second Third Gwalior Polygar Wars Vellore Mutiny First Anglo-Sikh War Second Anglo-Sikh War Sannyasi rebellion Rebellion of 1857 Radcliffe Line more Philosophies and ideologies Ambedkarism Gandhism Hindu nationalism Indian nationalism Khilafat Movement Muslim nationalism in South Asia Satyagraha Socialism Swadeshi movement Swaraj Events and movements Partition of Bengal (1905) Partition of Bengal (1947) Revolutionaries Direct Action Day Delhi-Lahore Conspiracy The Indian Sociologist Singapore Mutiny Hindu–German Conspiracy Champaran Satyagraha Kheda Satyagraha Rowlatt Committee Rowlatt Bills Jallianwala Bagh massacre Noakhali riots Non-cooperation movement Christmas Day Plot Coolie-Begar movement Chauri Chaura incident, 1922 Kakori conspiracy Qissa Khwani massacre Flag Satyagraha Bardoli 1928 Protests Nehru Report Fourteen Points of Jinnah Purna Swaraj Salt March Dharasana Satyagraha Vedaranyam March Chittagong armoury raid Gandhi–Irwin Pact Round table conferences Act of 1935 Aundh Experiment Indian Legion Cripps Mission Quit India Bombay Mutiny Royal Air Force strikes Coup d'état of Yanaon Provisional Government of India Independence Day Praja Mandala movement Lucknow Pact Organisations All India Kisan Sabha All-India Muslim League Anushilan Samiti Arya Samaj Azad Hind Berlin Committee Ghadar Movement Hindustan Socialist Republican Association Indian National Congress India House Indian Home Rule movement Indian Independence League Indian National Army Jugantar Khaksar movement Khudai Khidmatgar Swaraj Party more Social reformers Ashfaqulla Khan A. Vaidyanatha Iyer Ayya Vaikundar Ayyankali B. R. Ambedkar Baba Amte Bal Gangadhar Tilak Dayananda Saraswati Dhondo Keshav Karve G. Subramania Iyer Gazulu Lakshminarasu Chetty Gopal Ganesh Agarkar Gopal Hari Deshmukh Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar J. B. Kripalani Jyotirao Phule Kandukuri Veeresalingam Mahadev Govind Ranade Mahatma Gandhi Muthulakshmi Reddy Narayana Guru Niralamba Swami Pandita Ramabai Periyar Ram Mohan Roy Rettamalai Srinivasan Sahajanand Saraswati Savitribai Phule Shahu Sister Nivedita Sri Aurobindo Syed Ahmad Khan Vakkom Moulavi Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Vinoba Bhave Vitthal Ramji Shinde Vivekananda Independence activists Abul Kalam Azad Accamma Cherian Achyut Patwardhan A. K. Fazlul Huq Alluri Sitarama Raju Annapurna Maharana Annie Besant Ashfaqulla Khan Babu Kunwar Singh Bagha Jatin Bahadur Shah II Bakht Khan Bal Gangadhar Tilak Basawon Singh Begum Hazrat Mahal Bhagat Singh Bharathidasan Bhavabhushan Mitra Bhikaiji Cama Bhupendra Kumar Datta Bidhan Chandra Roy Bipin Chandra Pal C. Rajagopalachari Chandra Shekhar Azad Chetram Jatav Chittaranjan Das Dadabhai Naoroji Dayananda Saraswati Dhan Singh Dukkipati Nageswara Rao Gopal Krishna Gokhale Govind Ballabh Pant Har Dayal Hemu Kalani Inayatullah Khan Mashriqi Jatindra Mohan Sengupta Jatindra Nath Das Jawaharlal Nehru K. Kamaraj Kanaiyalal Maneklal Munshi Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan Khudiram Bose Shri Krishna Singh Lala Lajpat Rai M. Bhaktavatsalam M. N. Roy Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi Mahadaji Shinde Mahatma Gandhi Mangal Pandey Mir Qasim Mithuben Petit Mohammad Ali Jauhar Muhammad Ali Jinnah Muhammad Mian Mansoor Ansari Nagnath Naikwadi Nana Fadnavis Nana Saheb P. Kakkan Prafulla Chaki Pritilata Waddedar Purushottam Das Tandon Rafi Ahmed Kidwai R. Venkataraman Rahul Sankrityayan Rajendra Prasad Ram Prasad Bismil Rani Lakshmibai Rash Behari Bose Sahajanand Saraswati Sangolli Rayanna Sarojini Naidu Satyapal Dang Shuja-ud-Daula Shyamji Krishna Varma Sibghatullah Shah Rashidi Siraj ud-Daulah Subhas Chandra Bose Subramania Bharati Subramaniya Siva Surya Sen Syama Prasad Mukherjee Tara Rani Srivastava Tarak Nath Das Tatya Tope Tiruppur Kumaran Ubaidullah Sindhi V. O. Chidamabaram V. K. Krishna Menon Vallabhbhai Patel Vanchinathan Veeran Sundaralingam Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Virendranath Chattopadhyaya Yashwantrao Holkar Yogendra Shukla more British leaders Wavell Canning Cornwallis Irwin Chelmsford Curzon Ripon Minto Dalhousie Bentinck Mountbatten Wellesley Lytton Clive Outram Cripps Linlithgow Hastings Independence Cabinet Mission Constitution Republic of India Indian annexation of Goa Indian Independence Act Partition of India Political integration Simla Conference Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Poland Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cnbjw
Cached time: 20250817044723
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.825 seconds
Real time usage: 1.075 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5192/1000000
Revision size: 45680/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 236783/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7365/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 110050/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.369/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8485370/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  753.563      1 -total
 21.19%  159.693      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 19.49%  146.863      1 Template:Infobox_person
 14.15%  106.648      1 Template:Reflist
 12.92%   97.355      1 Template:Indcom
 10.27%   77.358      2 Template:Cite_web
  8.50%   64.081      1 Template:Short_description
  8.07%   60.850      1 Template:Marxism
  7.98%   60.105      4 Template:Br_separated_entries
  6.38%   48.051      4 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1083737:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044723 and revision id 1302276331. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=M._N._Roy&oldid=1302276331 " Categories : 1887 births 1954 deaths 20th-century atheists 20th-century Indian essayists 20th-century Indian philosophers 20th-century Indian social scientists Anushilan Samiti Atheist philosophers Bengali Hindus Executive Committee of the Communist International Indian former Hindus Former Marxists Hindu–German Conspiracy Indian atheists Indian communists Indian expatriates in Mexico Indian humanists Indian male non-fiction writers 20th-century Indian male writers Indian Marxists Indian political philosophers Indian prisoners and detainees Indian revolutionaries Mexican people of Indian descent People from North 24 Parganas district Philosophers of culture Philosophers of history Philosophers of social science Prisoners and detainees of British India Revolutionaries of Bengal during British Rule Right Opposition Scholars from West Bengal Secular humanists Social philosophers Writers about activism and social change Indian independence activists from Bengal Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2018 Use Indian English from November 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 11:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents M. N. Roy 28 languages Add topic

