Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin and history 2 Festival sections Toggle Festival sections subsection 2.1 The Subversive Film Festival 2.2 The Subversive Forum 2.3 The Balkan Forum 3 Networks and influence 4 Notable guests 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Subversive Festival 1 language Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Festival in Zagreb, Croatia Subversive Festival Subversive Festival logo Location Zagreb , Croatia Founded 2008 Awards The Wild Dreamer Language English , Croatian Website http://www.subversivefestival.com/ The Subversive Festival is an annual international fortnight of political , activist , cultural , educational , literary and artistic events that takes place in Zagreb , Croatia every May.

[ 1 ] Its activities are divided into the Subversive Film Festival (which was the official name of the festival until 2011), the Subversive Forum, the Balkan Forum and the Subversive Book Fair. The cross-cutting activity is the Subversive Festival's Conference that includes major keynote lectures and round tables held in Cinema Europe.

Origin and history [ edit ] Audience at the Festival Year Topic 2008 Hommage to '68 2009 China 1949-2009 2010 Socialism 2011 Decolonization 2012 The Future of Europe 2013 The Utopia of Democracy 2014 Power & Freedom - in the time of control 2015 Spaces of Emancipation - Micropolitics and Rebellions 2016 Politics of Friendship 2017 The European Left Against the New World (Dis)order 2018 Struggle for Freedom and Poetic Justice 2019 Europe on the Edge 2020 Creative Disobedience 2021 A Post-COVID Democracy [ 2 ] The Festival was initially founded as the Subversive Film Festival in 2008 which celebrated the 40th anniversary of the protests of 1968 . The initial edition of the festival included screening of the films by Chris Marker and Jean-Luc Godard as well as public lectures by Slavoj Žižek , Ernesto Laclau , Chantal Mouffe and others. Each edition of the festival has an overarching theme that invites critical examination and public debates. In 2009 the Festival was dedicated to China , in the context of the 60th anniversary of the Communist Revolution , whereas in 2010 its theme was the history, present and future of the idea of socialism .

Following the " Arab Spring ", the 2011 edition was dedicated to decolonisation as well as to new social movements . The situation in the European Union prompted the organisers in 2012 to tackle "The Future of Europe", [ 3 ] whereas the major theme of 2013's "The Utopia of Democracy" responded to the rise of global movements demanding real democracy , participation and social justice .

[ 4 ] Che Guevara's daughter Aleida was one of the guests in 2013, as well as Alexis Tsipras , the head of Greece's leftist SYRIZA parliamentary group, both taking part in debates at the festival.

[ 5 ] In 2013 Srećko Horvat and Igor Štiks left the Subversive Festival together with other members of the program team, "due to differences in understanding the goals and direction of the activist platforms within Subversive Forum and, more generally, the general purpose of Subversive Festival".

[ 6 ] From 2014 onwards it has been run by a different team.

[ 7 ] In 2021, after the 2019 closure of the festival's primary venue Europe Cinema, the event moved to four venues and streamed online.

[ 2 ] Festival sections [ edit ] Subversive Festival has several sections.

The Subversive Film Festival [ edit ] Pre 2012 logo of the festival In 2011 the Subversive Film Festival, originally the core of the festival, became one of many festival sections.

The film festival consists of a selection of films according to their relation to the main theme of that year's Festival (e.g. 1968, China, Socialism, Decolonisation, Europa Incognita, Utopia of Democracy), retrospectives of acknowledged leftist film authors and panel discussions between film theoreticians and filmmakers .

The most notable film retrospectives so far include an overview of the revolutionary films of the 1960s and 1970s, a selection of Chinese film classics and contemporary films, a major retrospective of Yugoslav cinema ( curated by Sergio Germani Grmek) and a selection of contemporary Third World cinema.

Wild Dreamer Award The sixth edition of the Subversive Film Festival (in 2013) introduced competition categories for contemporary European and international films, selected by the artistic director Dragan Rubeša. The first Wild Dreamer Award for Lifetime Achievement was given to Oliver Stone , whose latest 10-hour-long series the Untold History of the United States was shown in the main film programme.

[ 8 ] The Wild Dreamer for Best Documentary Film went to Italian director Daniele Vicari for La nave dolce [ it ] .

The Land of Hope by Japanese director Shion Sono , a story about a family whose father refuses to evacuate his sick wife from a radiation affected area , won the Best Feature Award. French filmmaker Sylvain George's Vers Madrid (en.

The Burning Bright!

), which documents demonstrations of the 15-M grassroots protest movement in Spain, was voted Best Film by the audience .

The Subversive Forum [ edit ] The Subversive Forum is a leftist and progressive event that established itself as an open platform for different and even opposing positions. The Subversive Forum is not connected to any political party but it attracts individuals of various political stripes on the progressive left and is related to almost all significant Croatian, post-Yugoslav and Balkans social movements – from student movements , trade unions , feminist organisations , the Right to the City movements, green and LGBT activists etc. The Subversive Forum has been supported by the World Social Forum as an official event of the WSF. According to the organizers, the Subversive forum has become "one of the key European mobilisation points for activists and intellectuals from the region and the world, thinking jointly how to build better social systems" [ 5 ] The Balkan Forum [ edit ] The Balkan Forum was established in 2012 as the platform for cooperation for pan- Balkan social and political movements and organisations from 10 post-socialist countries ( Slovenia , Croatia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia , North Macedonia , Albania , Bulgaria , Romania , Montenegro , and with strong participation from Hungary ). The conclusions of the First Balkan Forum [ 9 ] highlighted a need for stronger cooperation among these movements as well as for joint action across the peninsula . A huge number of activists gathered in 2012 and 2013 to discuss topics relevant to the region, including neoliberal policies , rampant privatisation , the defense of the Commons , student and workers movements, sex and gender equality , social change , as well as the questions of democratisation and participation , the media and public sphere , and alternative economic models .

[ 10 ] The Balkan Forum includes both self-organised sessions by movements and organisations themselves as well as plenary sessions .

Networks and influence [ edit ] Slavoj Žižek , Alexis Tsipras and Oliver Stone at 2013 Subversive Festival The Subversive Festival established strong ties with the World Social Forum , The World Forum of Alternatives, Transform! Europe Network , Attac , Rosa Luxemburg Stiftung , Heinrich Böll Foundation [ 11 ] and similar international organisations.

The events at the Subversive Festival are usually reported by local and international media ( Al Jazeera , Croatian Television , Slovenian Television , Arte TV , etc.). The Festival benefits from special media support by media sharing its political vision such as le Monde Diplomatique , La Memoire des Luttes, [ 12 ] Transeuropeennes, Zarez , Critic Attac, etc.

The 6th edition of the Subversive Festival provoked special attention since it took place just before Croatia's accession to the EU . In this context, the visit of the head of the Greek opposition Syriza Alexis Tsipras and film director Oliver Stone was particularly followed both by local audience and international media. A joke made by Slavoj Žižek during the public debate with Tsipras provoked a controversy in Greece.

[ 13 ] Notable guests [ edit ] The Festival's conference attracts thousands of visitors from all over the world. Many prominent intellectuals have given keynote lectures and participated in public debates , including Slavoj Žižek , Oliver Stone , Alexis Tsipras , Tariq Ali , Aleida Guevara , Terry Eagleton , Gayatri Spivak , Michael Hardt , Antonio Negri , Saskia Sassen , Wang Hui , Minqi Li , Karl-Heinz Dellwo , David Harvey , Erik Olin Wright , Bernard Stiegler , Franco Berardi , Karl-Markus Gauss , Renata Salecl , Boris Buden , Dubravka Ugrešić , Želimir Žilnik , Aleš Debeljak , Samir Amin etc.

Stipe Mesić [ 14 ] Alexis Tsipras Oliver Stone David Harvey [ 15 ] Terry Eagleton [ 16 ] Antonio Negri [ 17 ] Slavoj Žižek [ 18 ] Zygmunt Bauman [ 19 ] Shyam Benegal [ 20 ] Michael Hardt Gianni Vattimo [ 21 ] Tariq Ali [ 21 ] Gayatri Spivak [ 21 ] Želimir Žilnik [ 22 ] Renata Salecl Stéphane Hessel [ 23 ] Saskia Sassen Yanis Varoufakis Aleida Guevara Samir Amin References [ edit ] ^ Hopkin, James (1 July 2013).

"Croatia: meet the new EU neighbours" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 July 2013 .

^ a b Kruljac, Ivor (28 September 2021).

"Zagreb Subversive Festival 2021: Progressive Films and Discussions in October" .

www.total-croatia-news.com . Retrieved 28 December 2021 .

^ Holdstock, Nick (24 October 2012).

"SUBVERSIVE FORUM: WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF EUROPE AND ITS CITIZENS?" .

Citizenship in Southeast Europe . Retrieved 9 July 2013 .

^ Malamud, Randy (15 July 2013).

"The Subversive Summit" .

In These Times . Retrieved 9 July 2013 .

^ a b Pavelic, Boris (3 May 2013).

"Oliver Stone, Alexis Tsipras Join Croatia 'Subversives' " .

Balkan Insight . Retrieved 9 July 2013 .

^ "7. Subversive Festival -" .

subversivefestival.com .

^ "7. Subversive Festival - Naslovnica" .

subversivefestival.com .

^ AFP (13 May 2013).

"Oliver Stone gets award at Croatian film festival" .

FRANCE 24 . Retrieved 9 July 2013 .

^ Subversive Festival (5 June 2012).

"The 1st Balkan Forum: "Another Balkans is Possible!" " .

Subversive Festival . Retrieved 9 July 2013 .

^ Rolandi, Francesca (21 June 2012).

"SUBVERSIVE FESTIVAL: OCCUPY MOVEMENT COMES TO ZAGREB" .

Café Babel . Retrieved 9 July 2013 .

^ Rüdriger, Rossig (21 May 2013).

"Utopie Demokratie" .

taz.de . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ "Au coeur des mouvements sociaux des Balkans, le Festival subversif de Zagreb" .

medelu.org .

^ Horvat, Srećko (25 May 2013).

"The Easiest way to Gulag is to joke about Gulag" . openDemocracy . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ M. P. (3 May 2010).

"Stjepan Mesić: Dobili smo šank-kapitaliste - tportal.hr /kultura/" . Tportal.hr . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ Gordan Duhaček (23 May 2011).

" 'Nije toliko strašno što je Horvatinčić pobijedio' - tportal.hr /kultura/" . Tportal.hr . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ Terry, Eagleton (21 May 2011).

"Mythologies of Marx" . SkriptaTV . Retrieved 10 July 2013 .

^ tportal.hr (19 May 2011).

"Pročitajte ulomak iz nove knjige Antonija Negrija - tportal.hr /kultura/" . Tportal.hr . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ Darko Polšek (19 May 2011).

"Skok nalijevo u Kinu Europa - tportal.hr /komentari/" . Tportal.hr . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ Gordan Duhaček (18 May 2011).

" 'Budućnost ljevice je u našim rukama' - tportal.hr /kultura/" . Tportal.hr . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ tportal.hr (27 August 2011).

"Otvoren Subversive Film Festival - tportal.hr /showtime/" . Tportal.hr . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ a b c M. P. (27 April 2011).

" 'Nove emancipacijske borbe' na ovogodišnjem Subversiveu - tportal.hr /kultura/" . Tportal.hr . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ I. T. (14 May 2010).

"Jugoslavenski filmski slučaj na Subversiveu - tportal.hr /showtime/" . Tportal.hr . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ Duhaček, Gordan (3 May 2012).

"Subversive privodi najveća imena svjetske kulturne scene" .

Tportal.hr . Retrieved 9 July 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Official web site Media related to Subversive Festival at Wikimedia Commons v t e Zagreb History v t e History of Zagreb Evolution Andautonia Kaptol Gradec Zagreb Novi Zagreb City of Zagreb Zagreb County Timeline Coat of arms of Zagreb Events Golden Bull of 1242 Great Zagreb earthquake Visit of Emperor Franz Joseph World War II 1974 Zagreb train disaster 1976 Zagreb mid-air collision 1987 Summer Universiade Eurovision Song Contest 1990 Bombing of the Banski Dvori Zagreb rocket attacks 2020 Earthquake Flash flood COVID-19 St. Mark's Square shooting Petrinja earthquake 2022 Tu-141 crash 2024 Protest School stabbing Structures Croatian Parliament Zagreb Cathedral St. Mark's Church Medvedgrad Ban Jelačić Square St. Mark's Square Pleso Airport Zagreb Fair Zagreb Stock Exchange Stone Gate Vatroslav Lisinski Concert Hall Mirogoj Cemetery Buildings Kallina House Esplanade Zagreb Hotel Manors of Kaptol National Home Palace Banski dvori Cibona Tower Zagrepčanka Vjesnik Building Neboder (Ilica 1) Chromos Tower Coat of arms of Zagreb Districts Brezovica Črnomerec Donja Dubrava Donji grad Gornja Dubrava Gornji Grad–Medveščak Maksimir Novi Zagreb-istok Novi Zagreb-zapad Peščenica-Žitnjak Podsljeme Podsused-Vrapče Sesvete Stenjevec Trešnjevka-jug Trešnjevka-sjever Trnje Buildings and landmarks 1 Ilica Street Banski dvori Cibona Tower Esplanade Zagreb Hotel General Post Office Kallina House Villa Kallina Lotrščak Tower Medvedgrad Meštrović Pavilion Mirogoj Cemetery National Home Palace Nine Views Old City Hall Rudolf barracks Stone Gate Sabor Palace Villa Rebar Vojković palace Zagrepčanka Sky Office Tower Adriatic Bridge Homeland Bridge HOTO Tower Eurotower Mamutica Squares and streets Ban Jelačić Square British Square Croatian Nobles Square Dolac Market Eugen Kvaternik Square Ilica Street Krvavi Most Lenuci Horseshoe Nova Ves Oktogon Republic of Croatia Square Nikola Šubić Zrinski Square St. Mark's Square Tkalčićeva Street Square of the Victims of Fascism Parks, gardens, and recreation Grmoščica Lenuci Horseshoe Nikola Šubić Zrinski Square Maksimir Park Botanical Garden Bundek Jarun Medvednica Veternica Zagreb Zoo Places of worship Zagreb Cathedral St. Mark's Church St. Catherine's Church Orthodox Cathedral Zagreb Mosque Zagreb Synagogue Evangelical Church Greek Catholic Co-cathedral Basilica of the Heart of Jesus St. Blaise's Church St. Anthony's Basilica Culture Croatian National Theatre Gavella Drama Theatre Mala Scena Theatre Vatroslav Lisinski Concert Hall National and University Library Zagreb Philharmonic Orchestra The Cravat Regiment Zagreb Film Zagreb school of animated films Galleries and museums Archaeological Museum Art Pavilion Croatian History Museum Croatian Museum of Naïve Art Croatian Natural History Museum Croatian Railway Museum Ethnographic Museum Glyptotheque Klovićevi Dvori Gallery Lauba Mimara Museum Modern Gallery Museum of Arts and Crafts Museum of Broken Relationships Museum of Contemporary Art Strossmayer Gallery Technical Museum Zagreb City Museum Education High schools in Zagreb Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts University of Zagreb Academies: Dramatic Art Fine Arts Music Faculties: Architecture Chemical Engineering Dental Medicine Economics and Business Electrical Engineering and Computing Geodesy Humanities and Social Sciences Medicine Science Teacher Education Sports venues Arena Zagreb Dom Sportova Dražen Petrović Basketball Hall Maksimir Stadium Kranjčevićeva Stadium ŠRC Sesvete Stadium NŠC Stjepan Spajić Stadium Transport Airport Bus Railway (main) Railway (west) Funicular Trams Commuter Rail Metro (proposed) Events Animafest Zagreb INmusic Festival Interliber Music Biennale Zagreb Zagreb Film Festival ZagrebDox Zagreb Fair Subversive Festival Sport events Golden Spin (ice skating) Hanžeković Memorial (track and field athletics) Snow Queen Trophy (skiing) Zagreb Indoors (tennis) Zagreb Marathon Media Jutarnji list Večernji list Sportske novosti Jabuka TV Z1 TV Zagreb TV Tower HRT Economy Zagreb Holding Category:Zagreb Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subversive_Festival&oldid=1300219443 " Categories : Festivals in Zagreb Spring (season) in Croatia 2008 establishments in Croatia Festivals established in 2008 Film festivals established in 2008 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 00:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Subversive Festival 1 language Add topic

