Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Basins 3 Ecology 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Levantine Sea 55 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Limburgs Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 34°N 34°E ﻿ / ﻿ 34°N 34°E ﻿ / 34; 34 ﻿ ( Levantine Sea ) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Easternmost part of the Mediterranean Sea Levantine Sea Map of the Levantine Sea The location of the Levantine Sea Location Mediterranean Coordinates 34°N 34°E ﻿ / ﻿ 34°N 34°E ﻿ / 34; 34 ﻿ ( Levantine Sea ) Type Sea Basin countries Turkey , Egypt , Syria , Lebanon , Israel , Cyprus Surface area 320,000 km 2 (120,000 sq mi) The Levantine Sea ( Arabic : بحر الشام , romanized : baḥr as-Shām ) is the easternmost part of the Mediterranean Sea .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Geography [ edit ] The Levantine Sea is bordered by Turkey in the north and north-east corner , Syria , Lebanon and Israel in the east, Egypt in the south, and the Aegean Sea in the northwest. Where it is used as a term its western border is amorphous, hence Mediterranean is more commonly used. The open western border to the next part of the Mediterranean (the Libyan Sea ) is defined as a line from headland Ras al-Helal in Libya to Gavdos , south of the western half of Crete .

The largest island in its subset of water is Cyprus . The greatest depth of 4,384 m (14,383 ft) is found in the Pliny Trench, about 80 km (50 mi) south of Crete. The Levantine Sea covers 320,000 km 2 (120,000 sq mi).

The northern part of the Levantine Sea between Cyprus and Turkey can be further specified as the Cilician Sea , a term more arcane. Also in the north are two large bays, the Gulf of İskenderun (to the northeast) and the Gulf of Antalya (to the northwest).

Basins [ edit ] Boundaries of the Levant Basin, or Levantine Basin (US EIA) The Leviathan gas field is quite central in the south-eastern corner, the Levantine Basin .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] To the west of the Levantine Deep Marine Basin is the Nile Delta Basin, followed by the Herodotus Basin , 130,000 km 2 (50,000 sq mi) large and up to 3,200 m (10,500 ft) deep, [ 5 ] which – at a possible age of 340 million years – is believed to be the oldest known ocean crust worldwide.

[ 6 ] Ecology [ edit ] Main articles: Mediterranean Sea , River Nile , Lake Nasser , and Lessepsian migration The Suez Canal was completed in 1869, linking the Levantine Sea to the Red Sea – and mainly for large vessels. The Red Sea sits a little higher than the Eastern Mediterranean , so the canal is an intermittent tidal strait discharging water into the Mediterranean. The Bitter Lakes – hypersaline natural lakes, interacting with the canal – were a bar to migration of Red Sea species northward for many decades, but as their salinity has virtually equalized with that of the Red Sea, the barrier to migration was removed, and plants and animals from the Red Sea have begun to colonize the eastern Mediterranean. This is the Lessepsian migration , after Ferdinand de Lesseps , the chief engineer of the canal.

Most of the river discharge is from the Nile . Since the Aswan High Dam sits across the river in the 1960s it has facilitated the multiplication of Egyptian agriculture and population. It has reduced, to the sea, the flow of freshwater , mountainous minerals in the silt , and the distance traveled by silt (before this, borne by floodwater). This makes the sea slightly saltier and nutrient -poorer than before. This has decimated the morning sardine litorine haul in nets but favored many Red Sea species.

See also [ edit ] Eastern Mediterranean Levant References [ edit ] ^ Gacic, Miroslav; Bensi, Manuel (2020-12-10).

Ocean Exchange and Circulation . MDPI. p. 7.

ISBN 978-3-03936-152-6 .

It is modified flowing eastward, passes the Sicily Channel and the Ionian Sea and enters the easternmost part of the Mediterranean, the Levantine Sea.

^ Ashwarya, Sujata (2019-05-03).

Israel's Mediterranean Gas: Domestic Governance, Economic Impact, and Strategic Implications . Taylor & Francis. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-429-53623-6 .

The Levantine Sea is the easternmost part of the Mediterranean that includes the territorial waters of Israel, Lebanon and Syria.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-17 . Retrieved 2011-07-17 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-18 . Retrieved 2011-02-12 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Hydrocarbon Potential in Herodotus Basin, Eastern Mediterranean , p. 2 ^ Ben-Gurion University of the Negev: Three Hundred Million Years Under the Sea Further reading [ edit ] Kubin, Elisabeth; Poulain, Pierre-Marie; Mauri, Elena; Menna, Milena; Notarstefano, Giulio. 2019. "Levantine Intermediate and Levantine Deep Water Formation: An Argo Float Study from 2001 to 2017" Water 11, no. 9: 1781.

https://doi.org/10.3390/w11091781 Özsoy, E. and H. Güngör (1993). The Northern Levantine Sea Circulation Based on Combined Analysis of CTD and ADCP Data, In: P. Brasseur (editor), Data Assimilation: Tools for Modelling the Ocean in a Global Change Perspective, NATO ASI Series, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Sur, H. İ., Özsoy, E., and Ü. Ünlüata, (1992). Simultaneous Deep and Intermediate Depth Convection in the Northern Levantine Sea, Winter 1992, Ocean.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Levantine Sea at Wikimedia Commons Study and Analysis of Water Masses Formation in the Levantine Sea Long Term Ecological Research v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e African seas Oceans and seas Alboran Sea Atlantic Ocean Indian Ocean Levantine Sea Mediterranean Sea Red Sea Southern Ocean Gulfs and bays Abu Qir Bay Acheïl Dakhlet Al Hoceima Bay Algiers Bay Algoa Bay Ambas Bay Ana Chaves Bay Angra de Cintra Antongil Bay Antsiranana Bay Arab's Gulf Baía Almeida Baía da Condúcia Baía da Corimba Baía de Mocambo Baía de Mossuril Baía de Namibe Baia de Porto Amboim Baía de Santa Marta Baía de Sucujaque Baía de Tombua Baía do Ambriz Baía do Bengo Baía do Dande Baía do Govuro Baía do Lúrio Baía do Nzeto Baía do Suto Baie de Gorée Baie de Sangareya Bandombaai Bay of Anfile Bay of Arguin Bay of Arzew Bay of Aseb Bay of Beylul Bay of Edd Bay of Hawakil Bay of Langarano Bay of Saint-Augustin Bay of Tangier Benguela Bay Bera’esoli Betty’s Bay Bight of Benin Bight of Biafra Bocock’s Bay Bombetoka Bay Bootbaai Bosluisbaai Cabinda Bay Cape Cross Bay Cape Negro Bay Chake-Chake Bay Chameis Bay Chwaka Bay Conception Bay Cuio Bay Dakhlet Nouadhibou Dalwakteah Bay Deurloopbaai Doringbaai Dungonab Bay Durissa Bay Elands Bay Enseada das Pombas Enseada de São Braz Enseada do Catumbo Enseada do Chalungo Enseada do Quicombo Enseada do Quitungo Enseada dos Três Irmãos Equimina Bay False Bay Farta Bay Fernao Veloso Bay Foul Bay Frederik se Baai Ghoubbet-el-Kharab Grosse Bucht Gulf of Aden Gulf of 'Agig Gulf of Gabès Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Hammamet Gulf of Sidra Gulf of Suez Gulf of Tadjoura Gulf of Tunis Gulf of Zula Hafun Bay South Hann Bay Harrison Cove Henties Bay Hirghīgo Bahir Selat’ē Horingbaai Hottentotsbaai Hurdiyo Hydra Bay Inhambane Bay Jammer Bucht John Owen Bay Kalawy Bay Kiwaiyu Bay Lambert Bay Lamu Bay Langbaai Loango Bay Lobito Bay Luanda Bay Lüderitz Bay McDougall Bay Manza Bay Maputo Bay Markusbaai Memba Bay Menai Bay Meob Bay Mietjie Frans se Baai Moraha Bahir Selat’ē Mossel Bay Möwebaai Noopbaai Oran Gulf Pemba Bay Pipas Bay Plaatjieskraalbaai Platbaai Plettenbergbaai Pointe-Noire Bay Porto Alexandre, Angola Prinzen Bucht Río de Oro Bay Rock Bay Roode Bay Rooiwalbaai Saint Francis Bay Saint Francis Bay (Eastern Cape) St Helena Bay Saint Sebastian Bay Saldanha Bay Sandwich Harbour Sierra Bay Skoonbergbaai Skurfbaai Slangbaai Sodwana Bay Sofala Bay Somnaasbaai Spencer Bay Spoegrivierbaai Struisbaai Swartstraat Table Bay Thysbaai Tietiesbaai Ungama Bay Walker Bay Walvis Bay (bay) Yawri Bay Yof Bay Straits Bab-el-Mandeb Bab Iskender Canal de Bolama Canal de Bolola Canal de Caió Canal de São Vicente Canal do Meio Guardafui Channel Mafia Channel Massawa Channel Mozambique Channel‎ Pemba Channel Shubuk Channel Strait of Gibraltar Strait of Sicily Straits of Tiran Tigres Strait Zanzibar Channel Historical seas Aethiopian Sea Erythraean Sea Sea of Zanj Africa portal Oceans portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Levantine_Sea&oldid=1300384495 " Categories : Marginal seas of the Mediterranean Seas of Turkey Bodies of water of Syria Bodies of water of Lebanon Bodies of water of Israel Bodies of water of Palestine Bodies of water of Egypt Bodies of water of Libya Ecoregions of Cyprus Ecoregions of Egypt Ecoregions of Greece Ecoregions of Israel Ecoregions of Lebanon Ecoregions of Palestine Ecoregions of Syria Ecoregions of Turkey Seas of Africa Seas of Asia European seas Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map Articles using infobox body of water without alt bathymetry Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 01:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Levantine Sea 55 languages Add topic

