Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beliefs 2 Relation to Aztec religion 3 Moral beliefs and aesthetics 4 How did the Aztecs regard "time"?

5 Texts 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Aztec philosophy 11 languages العربية Ελληνικά فارسی Français Galego Nederlands Português Русский Suomi Українська 文言 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School of philosophy that developed out of Aztec culture This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Aztec philosophy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Aztec civilization Aztec society Nahuatl language Religion Mythology Philosophy Calendar Medicine Use of entheogens Human sacrifice Tenochtitlan Templo Mayor Aztec history Aztlán Warfare Codices Aztec script Aztec Empire Tlaxcallan Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire Moctezuma II Fall of Tenochtitlan v t e Aztec philosophy was a school of philosophy that developed out of Aztec culture .

[ 1 ] Aztec cosmology was in some sense dualistic , but exhibited a less common form of it known as dialectical monism . Aztec philosophy also included ethics and aesthetics . It has been asserted that the central question in Aztec philosophy was how people can find stability and balance in an ephemeral world.

[ 2 ] Beliefs [ edit ] Aztec philosophy saw the concept of Ometeotl as a  unity that underlies the universe.  Ometeotl forms, shapes, and is all things. Even things in opposition—light, and dark, life and death—were seen as expressions of the same unity, Ometeotl.  The belief in a unity with dualistic expressions compares with similar dialectical monist ideas in both Western and Eastern philosophies.

[ 2 ] Relation to Aztec religion [ edit ] Aztec priests had a panentheistic view of religion but the popular Aztec religion maintained polytheism .  Priests saw the different gods as aspects of the singular and transcendent unity of Teotl but the masses were allowed to practice polytheism without understanding the true, unified nature of their Aztec gods.

[ 2 ] Moral beliefs and aesthetics [ edit ] Aztec philosophers focused on morality as establishing balance.  The world was seen as constantly shifting with the ever-changing teotl .  Morality focused on finding the path to living a balanced life, which would provide stability in the shifting world.

[ 2 ] Aztec philosophy saw the arts as a way to express the true nature of teotl.

[ 2 ] Art was considered to be good if it in some way brought about a better understanding of teotl.

[ 2 ] Aztec poetry was closely tied to philosophy and often used to express philosophic concepts.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Below is an example of such a poem, translated from the original Nahuatl : No one comes on this earth to stay Our bodies are like rose trees - They grow petals then wither and die.

But our hearts are like grass in the springtime, They live on and forever grow green again.

How did the Aztecs regard "time"?

[ edit ] James Maffie has explained that the Aztec concept of time (like that of the Mayas) was not one of 'uniform forward flow' whose passage could be accurately measured by a clock or some similar device.

[ 4 ] Specific events were regarded as separate, unique entities, only minimally related to those which had occurred immediately before them or to those which followed straight afterwards. Of paramount importance were the positions which they happened to occupy in the 260-day and 360+5-day calendar counts. Also significant were the 584-day Venusian cycle, and indeed the "age-growth cycles" of the people involved (which extended from birth through to old age).

Texts [ edit ] There is a dearth of material from which Aztec philosophy can be studied with a majority of extant texts written after conquest by either Spanish colonists and missionaries, or Christianised Spanish educated natives. The conquistadors burned most Aztec (and Mayan) texts. Pre-conquest sources include the Codex Borgia and the Codex Borbonicus (written about the time of conquest). Post-conquest texts include the Florentine Codex , Codex Mendoza and the Codex Magliabechiano , including others.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Tlacaelel Government of the Aztec Empire Indigenous American philosophy Mesoamerican literature References [ edit ] ^ Mann, Charles C.

1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus . New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2005. p, 121.

^ a b c d e f g James Maffie (2005).

"Aztec Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Mann, 122-123 ^ Maffie, James (2014). "Teotl as Time-Place; pp. 421, 457-459".

Aztec Philosophy, Understanding a world in Motion . University Press of Colorado.

ISBN 978-1-60732-222-1 .

^ "Aztec Philosophy - Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

www.iep.utm.edu . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

Sources [ edit ] Maffie, James; Aztec Philosophy: Understanding a World in Motion ; 2014: Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews .

Leon-Portilla, Miguel; Native Mesoamerican Spirituality ; Jun 27 2002.

Leon-Portilla, Miguel; Aztec Thought and Culture: A Study of the Ancient Nahuatl Mind ; 1990.

Leon-Portilla, Miguel; Fifteen Poets of the Aztec World ; October 15, 2000.

External links [ edit ] The Mesoamerican Philosophy Renaissance v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Spain Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aztec_philosophy&oldid=1251453715 " Categories : Aztec society Aztec science and technology Culture of Latin America Medieval philosophy History of Indigenous peoples of North America Mexican philosophy Aztec philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2017 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 16 October 2024, at 06:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aztec philosophy 11 languages Add topic

