Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses 2 Ancient history 3 Recent history 4 In specific areas Toggle In specific areas subsection 4.1 South America 4.2 Myanmar 4.3 Japan 4.4 Canary Islands 4.5 England 4.6 Israel 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Terrace (earthworks) 36 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 हिन्दी Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Taqbaylit Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Terrain formed by tiered platforms For other uses, see Terrace (disambiguation) .

Terraced fields in the Jabal Haraz region of Yemen .

Rice terraces in Sa Pa , Vietnam .

Rice terraces of the Hani people in Yunnan , China .

Rice terrace in the Fukuoka Prefecture , Japan .

A terrace in agriculture is a flat surface that has been cut into hills or mountains to provide areas for the cultivation for crops, as a method of more effective farming . Terrace agriculture or cultivation is when these platforms are created successively down the terrain in a pattern that resembles the steps of a staircase. As a type of landscaping , it is called terracing .

Terraced fields decrease both erosion and surface runoff , and may be used to support growing crops that require irrigation , such as rice . The Rice Terraces of the Philippine Cordilleras have been designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site because of the significance of this technique.

[ 1 ] Uses [ edit ] Farmers working on rice terraces ( Indonesia ) Terraced paddy fields are used widely in rice, wheat and barley farming in east , south , southwest , and southeast Asia , as well as the Mediterranean Basin , Africa, and South America. Drier-climate terrace farming is common throughout the Mediterranean Basin, where they are used for vineyards , olive trees, cork oak , and other crops.

[ citation needed ] Ancient history [ edit ] The Yemen Highlands are known for their terrace systems which were constructed at the beginning of Bronze Age in the 3rd millennium BC .

[ 2 ] Similar early terrace systems have been documented in the Levant, where archaeological and geomorphological evidence supports terrace farming as early as the 4th millennium BCE, with widespread implementation in the Bronze and Iron Ages across arid environments such as the Negev Desert and Petra region [ 3 ] .

Terracing is also used for sloping terrain; the Hanging Gardens of Babylon may have been built on an artificial mountain with stepped terraces, such as those on a ziggurat .

[ citation needed ] At the seaside Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum , the villa gardens of Julius Caesar 's father-in-law were designed in terraces to give pleasant and varied views of the Bay of Naples.

[ citation needed ] Archaeological evidence from the Kislovodsk basin in the northern Caucasus indicates the use of terrace agriculture from the beginning of the first millennium BC, associated with the Koban culture, and continuing into the first millennium AD with later adaptations by Alanic communities.

[ 4 ] In the Mediterranean region, Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) profiling and dating [ 5 ] has revealed a major intensification of terrace construction during the later Middle Ages (c. AD 1100–1600), indicating a significant investment of labor in landscape modification during this period.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Intensive terrace farming is believed to have been practiced before the early 15th century AD in West Africa .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Terraces were used by many groups, notably the Mafa , [ 10 ] Ngas , Gwoza , [ 11 ] and the Dogon .

[ 12 ] Recent history [ edit ] It was long held that steep mountain landscapes are not conducive to, or do not even permit, agricultural mechanization. In the 1970s in the European Alps , pasture farms began mechanizing the management of alpine pastures and harvesting of forage grasses through use of single axle two-wheel tractors (2WTs) and very low center of gravity articulated steering 4-wheel tractors. Their designs by various European manufacturers were initially quite simple but effective, allowing them to cross slopes approaching 20%.  In the 2000s new designs of wheels and tires, tracks, etc, and incorporation of electronics for better and safer control, allowed these machines to operate on slopes greater than 20% with various implements such as reaper-harvesters, rakes, balers, and transport trailers.

[ citation needed ] In Asian sub-tropical countries, a similar process has begun with the introduction of smaller, lower-tech and much lower-priced 2WTs in the 4-9 horsepower range that can be safely operated in the small, narrow terraces, and are light enough to be lifted and lowered from one terrace to the next. What is different from the Alpine use is that these 2WTs are being used for tillage and crop establishment of maize , wheat, and potato crops, and with their small 60-70cm-wide rotovators and special cage wheels are puddling the terraces for transplanted and broadcast rice. Farmers are also using the engines as stationary power sources for powering water pumps and threshers . Even more recently farmers are experimenting with use of small reaper -harvester attachments. In Nepal, the low costs of these mostly Chinese-made machines and the increased productivity they produce [ 13 ] have meant that this scale-appropriate machinery is spreading across Nepal's Himalaya Mountains and likely into the other countries of the Himalaya and Hindu Kush .

[ citation needed ] In specific areas [ edit ] South America [ edit ] Diagram showing Inca terrace engineering for agriculture.

In the South American Andes , farmers have used terraces, known as andenes , for over a thousand years to farm potatoes, maize, and other native crops. Terraced farming was developed by the Wari culture and other peoples of the south-central Andes before 1000 AD, centuries before they were used by the Inca , who adopted them. The terraces were built to make the most efficient use of shallow soil and to enable irrigation of crops by allowing runoff to occur through the outlet.

[ 14 ] The Inca people built on these, developing a system of canals , aqueducts , and puquios to direct water through dry land and increase fertility levels and growth.

[ 15 ] These terraced farms are found wherever mountain villages have existed in the Andes. They provided the food necessary to support the populations of great Inca cities and religious centres such as Machu Picchu .

[ citation needed ] Myanmar [ edit ] In mountainous areas of Myanmar , terrace farming is known locally as the staircase or ladder farming (in Myanmar: mm:‌လှေခါးထစ်‌တောင်ယာ ) ‌and the agriculture technique of that kind is known as လှေခါးထစ်စိုက်ပျိုးနည်း .

Japan [ edit ] In Japan , some of the 100 Selected Terraced Rice Fields (in Japanese : 日本の棚田百選一覧 ), from Iwate in the north to Kagoshima in the south, are slowly disappearing, but volunteers are helping the farmers both to maintain their traditional methods and for sightseeing purposes.

[ 16 ] Canary Islands [ edit ] Terraced fields in La Gomera , Canary Islands Terraced fields are common in islands with steep slopes. The Canary Islands present a complex system of terraces covering the landscape from the coastal irrigated plantations to the dry fields in the highlands. These terraces, which are named cadenas (chains), are built with stone walls of skillful design, which include attached stairs and channels.

[ 17 ] England [ edit ] In Old English , a terrace was also called a "lynch" ( lynchet ). An example of an ancient Lynch Mill is in Lyme Regis . The water is directed from a river by a duct along a terrace. This set-up was used in steep hilly areas in the UK.

[ 18 ] Israel [ edit ] Terraces near Ein Karem , Israel Ancient terraces are a common feature in the Jerusalem Mountains , often found in conjunction with ancient rock-cut agricultural structures including quarries, winepresses, olive oil presses, water holes, lime kilns, roads, and agricultural watchtowers .

[ 19 ] According to Zvi Ron's estimation, these terraces encompass approximately 56% of the open grounds in the area.

[ 20 ] Despite their prevalence, there is a lack of consensus among scholars regarding their construction date. Various theories have been proposed, with Zvi Ron suggesting that their origins date back to ancient times, Finkelstein proposing the Middle Bronze Age , and Feig, Stager, and Harel suggesting the Iron Age . Archaeologists Gibson and Edelstein conducted research on terrace systems in the Rephaim valley, proposing that the ones in Khirbet er-Ras were built during the Iron Age II, whereas those in Ein Yael were linked to the Second Temple and Roman periods. Seligman suggested that while some terraces were established in ancient times, the majority of them are more likely to have originated during the Roman and Byzantine periods.

[ 19 ] A 2014 research study on terraces near Ramat Rachel , using Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL), yielded dates ranging from the Hellenistic period to Mamluk and Ottoman times. The majority of the samples fell within the latter periods.

[ 21 ] However, the study's ability to precisely determine the original construction date remains uncertain, as the results could also reflect subsequent agricultural modifications that affected exposure to sunlight.

[ 19 ] Gallery [ edit ] Cultivation terraces, Walkerburn Rice terraces in Hoang Su Phi , Ha Giang , Vietnam .

Tetang Village terraced fields, Mustang District Terraced fields in the Upper Mustang region of Nepal Terraced field in Kabal Swat valley , Pakistan .

Terraced farmland in Peru, adopted by the Inca.

Terraced hay fields in the Upper Mississippi River basin during the 1930s.

Rice terrace in Bali Jatiluwih rice terrace in Bali , Indonesia.

The Batad Rice Terraces in Ifugao , Philippines.

The Banaue Rice Terraces in Ifugao , Philippines.

Rice cultivation, Lower Himalayas, Nepal .

See also [ edit ] Anden Honghe Hani Rice Terraces Yuanyang County, Yunnan Banaue Rice Terraces Rice Terraces of the Philippine Cordilleras Satoyama Terrace garden Terraced wall References [ edit ] ^ "World Heritage List" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 2012-09-22 .

they are Broad flat steps ^ "On Ancient Terraced Hills, Urbanism Sprouted With Crops" .

The New York Times . 2 September 1997.

^ Avni, Yoav (2022-10-14).

"The Emergence of Terrace Farming in the Arid Zone of the Levant—Past Perspectives and Future Implications" .

Land .

11 (10): 1798.

Bibcode : 2022Land...11.1798A .

doi : 10.3390/land11101798 .

ISSN 2073-445X .

^ Korobov, Dmitry S.; Borisov, Alexander V. (December 2013).

"The origins of terraced field agriculture in the Caucasus: new discoveries in the Kislovodsk basin" .

Antiquity .

87 (338): 1086– 1103.

doi : 10.1017/S0003598X00049887 .

ISSN 0003-598X .

^ Kinnaird, Tim; Bolòs, Jordi; Turner, Alex; Turner, Sam (2017-02-01).

"Optically-stimulated luminescence profiling and dating of historic agricultural terraces in Catalonia (Spain)" .

Journal of Archaeological Science .

78 : 66– 77.

Bibcode : 2017JArSc..78...66K .

doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2016.11.003 .

ISSN 0305-4403 .

^ Turner, Sam; Kinnaird, Tim; Varinlioğlu, Günder; Şerifoğlu, Tevfik Emre; Koparal, Elif; Demirciler, Volkan; Athanasoulis, Dimitris; Ødegård, Knut; Crow, Jim; Jackson, Mark; Bolòs, Jordi; Sánchez-Pardo, José Carlos; Carrer, Francesco; Sanderson, David; Turner, Alex (June 2021).

"Agricultural terraces in the Mediterranean: medieval intensification revealed by OSL profiling and dating" .

Antiquity .

95 (381): 773– 790.

doi : 10.15184/aqy.2020.187 .

ISSN 0003-598X .

^ Brandolini, Filippo; Kinnaird, Tim C.; Srivastava, Aayush; Costanzo, Stefano; Compostella, Chiara; Turner, Sam (2025-07-10).

"Geoarchaeology reveals development of terrace farming in the Northern Apennines during the Medieval Climate Anomaly" .

Scientific Reports .

15 (1): 24989.

doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-08396-2 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 12246183 .

PMID 40640315 .

^ Widgren, Mats (2009).

"Mapping precolonial African agricultural systems" . p. 5.

^ Genest, Serge; Muller-Kosack, Gerhard (2003).

"The Way of the Beer: Ritual Re-Enactment of History among the Mafa, Terrace Farmers of the Mandara Mountains (North Cameroon)" (PDF) .

Africa: Journal of the International African Institute .

73 (4): 642– 643.

doi : 10.2307/3556793 .

ISSN 0001-9720 .

JSTOR 3556793 .

^ Fred Zaal (1 April 2016).

Sustainable Land Management in the Tropics: Explaining the Miracle . Routledge. pp. 145–.

ISBN 978-1-317-04776-6 .

^ Gwimbe, Samuel Barde (2014). "Ancient Terraces on Highland Fringes South of the Chad Basin".

African Indigenous Knowledge and the Disciplines . Rotterdam: SensePublishers. pp.

45– 61.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-6209-770-4_6 .

ISBN 978-94-6209-770-4 .

^ Molefi Kete Asante; Ama Mazama (26 November 2008).

Encyclopedia of African Religion . SAGE Publications. p. 328.

ISBN 978-1-5063-1786-1 .

^ Paudel, G.P., A. McDonald, D.B. Rahut, D.B KC, and S. Justice 2019 Scale-appropriate mechanization impacts on productivity among smallholders: Evidence from rice systems in the mid-hills of Nepal. Land Use Policy 85(2019):104-113.

^ "Terrace cultivation | agriculture" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ "Farming Like the Incas" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 2015-09-20 .

^ An Agricultural Wonder: Japan’s Vanishing Terraced Rice Fields (Photos) (Nippon.com) ^ Martín, Lidia & González Morales, A & Ojeda, Antonio A.. (2016). Towards a new valuation of cultural terraced landscapes: The heritage of terraces in the Canary Islands (Spain). 26. 499-512. 10.19233/ASHS.2016.31.

^ Whittington, G. (1967-01-01). "Towards a Terminology for Strip Lynchets".

The Agricultural History Review .

15 (2): 103– 107.

JSTOR 40273237 .

^ a b c Rubin, Rehav (Buni) (2018).

Stories Told by the Mountains: Cultural Landscape Through Time (in Hebrew). Resling. pp.

176– 184.

^ Ron, Zvi (1977). "התפוצה של המדרגות החקלאיות בהרי ירושלים".

יהודה ושומרון: פרקים בגיאוגרפיה ישובית, מוקדש לזכרו של אברהם יעקב ברור [ Judea and Samaria: studies in settlement geography, in memory of Dr. Avraham Brawer ] (in Hebrew). Jerusalem: כנען. pp.

210– 229.

^ U. Davidovich et al., "Archeological Investigations and OSL Dating of Terraces at Ramat Rahel, Israel", Journal of Field Archaeology 37, 3 (2012): 192-208 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Agricultural terraces .

Terrace Fields around the World v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology v t e Agriculture Outline History Index Occupations Agriculturist Agricultural Engineer Farmer Farm worker Herder General Agribusiness Agricultural cooperative Agricultural supplies Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Agricultural technology Precision Biotechnology Agroforestry Agronomy Animal husbandry Animal-free agriculture Cash crop Cellular agriculture Cultural methods Contract farming Extensive farming Farm Farmhouse Feed ratio Free range Horticulture Intensive farming animals pigs crops Mechanised agriculture Organic farming Paludiculture Permaculture Plantation Polyculture Rice-duck farming Rice-fish system Sustainable agriculture Sustainable food system Universities and colleges Urban agriculture History West Asia Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Austronesia Agricultural science Agricultural History Review Arab Agricultural Revolution Argentina Canada China Chile Columbian exchange Green Revolution Indian subcontinent Mesoamerica Middle Ages Neolithic Revolution Organic farming Palestine Peru United Kingdom British Agricultural Revolution Cheshire Scotland United States African-American California Farming Types Agrivoltaic Aquaculture Cattle Cannabis cultivation Dairy farming Desert farming Dryland farming Fur farming Goat farming Grazing Convertible husbandry Rotational grazing Transhumance Hydroponics Insect farming Livestock Pasture Mixed Monoculture Paddy field Pastoral Bocage Pig farming Poultry farming Ranch Rainfed agriculture Orchards Subsistence agriculture Sheep farming Terrace Wildlife farming Environmental impact Agricultural expansion Agricultural pollution Agricultural wastewater Overgrazing Environmental impact of irrigation Overdrafting Climate change and agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Categories Agricultural machinery Agriculture by country Agriculture companies Biotechnology Cannabis cultivation History of agriculture Livestock Meat industry Poultry farming Agriculture and the environment Lists Agriculturist profession Agricultural machinery Food origins Government ministries Universities and colleges Category Portal Commons Wikiproject v t e Darjeeling related topics History and government Darjeeling district History of Sikkim History of Bengal History of Nepal British Raj Gorkha National Liberation Front Gorkhaland Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council Darjeeling Municipality Darjeeling (Lok Sabha constituency) Geography Kangchenjunga Darjeeling Himalayan hill region Jore Pokhri Wildlife Sanctuary Katapahar Jalapahar Observatory Hill Sivalik Hills Tiger Hill Darjeeling Sadar Mahananda Wildlife Sanctuary Padmaja Naidu Himalayan Zoological Park Manebhanjyang Phalut Sandakphu Rock Garden Senchal Wildlife Sanctuary Singalila National Park Demographics of Darjeeling Mahakal Temple Chowrasta (Darjeeling) Education University of North Bengal Mount Hermon School St. Joseph's School Loreto Convent St. Paul's School Goethals Memorial School Victoria Boys' School (Kurseong) Southfield (formerly Loreto) College Darjeeling Government College St. Joseph's College Himalayan Mountaineering Institute North Bengal Medical College and Hospital Economy and Transport Darjeeling tea Terrace fields Pattabong Tea Garden Happy Valley Tea Estate Tourism in India Economy of West Bengal Transport in Darjeeling Darjeeling Himalayan Railway Katihar–Siliguri line Bagdogra Airport Darjeeling Ropeway Culture Tamang Sherpa Rai Lepcha Bhutia Yolmo/Yamloo Miji/Damai Kamai Newar Limbu Gorkha Bengali Nepali Hinduism Buddhism Wai-wai Chhurpi Thukpa Momo Chhang Devil Dance Tendong Lho Rumfaat Maghe Sankranti Chotrul Duchen Tibetan Refugee Self Help Centre Ghum Monastery Bhutia Busty Monastery Mag-Dhog Yolmowa Monastery Peace Pagoda Mahakal Temple Chowrasta Community development blocks Darjeeling Sadar subdivision Darjeeling Pulbazar Jorebunglow Sukhiapokhri Rangli Rangliot Kurseong subdivision Mirik Kurseong Siliguri subdivision Matigara Naxalbari Phansidewa Kharibari Vidhan Sabha constituencies Kalimpong Darjeeling Kurseong Matigara-Naxalbari Siliguri Phansidewa Template Cities and towns in Darjeeling district Categories Darjeeling Cities and towns in Darjeeling district Himalayas Hill stations in India People from Darjeeling district Villages in Darjeeling district Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Terrace_(earthworks)&oldid=1301011011 " Categories : Agricultural terraces Agricultural terminology Artificial landforms Hidden categories: CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2011 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 16:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Terrace (earthworks) 36 languages Add topic

