Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Selected filmography 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Béla Balázs 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian film critic, aesthetician, writer and poet For other people with the same name, see Herbert Bauer .

The native form of this personal name is Balázs Béla . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Béla Balázs Béla Balázs c. 1910s Born Herbert Béla Bauer ( 1884-08-04 ) 4 August 1884 Szeged , Austria-Hungary (present-day Szeged, Hungary ) Died 17 May 1949 (1949-05-17) (aged 64) Jósefváros , Budapest , Second Hungarian Republic Resting place National Graveyard in Fiumei Street, Jósefváros , Budapest Nationality Hungarian Occupation(s) Film theorist , film critic , screenwriter Years active 1921–1947 Movement Formalist film theory Spouse(s) Edit Hajós (1913–1918) [ 1 ] Anna Schlamadinger (1919-his death) [ 2 ] Awards Kossuth Prize (1949) Béla Balázs ( Hungarian: [ˈbeːlɒ ˈbɒlaːʒ] ; 4 August 1884 – 17 May 1949), born Herbert Béla Bauer , was a Hungarian film critic , aesthetician , writer and poet of Jewish heritage. He was a proponent of formalist film theory .

Career [ edit ] Balázs was the son of Simon Bauer and Eugénia Léwy, adopting his nom de plume in newspaper articles written before his 1902 move to Budapest, where he studied Hungarian and German at the Eötvös Collegium. He was the brother of the biologist Ervin Bauer .

Balázs was a moving force in the Sonntagskreis or Sunday Circle, the intellectual discussion group which he founded in the autumn of 1915 together with Lajos Fülep , Arnold Hauser , György Lukács and Károly (Karl) Mannheim . Meetings were held at his flat on Sunday afternoons; already in December 1915 Balázs wrote in his diary of the success of the group.

[ 3 ] He is perhaps best remembered as the librettist of Bluebeard's Castle which he originally wrote for his roommate Zoltán Kodály , who in turn introduced him to the eventual composer of the opera, Béla Bartók . This collaboration continued with the scenario for the ballet The Wooden Prince .

The collapse of the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic under Béla Kun in 1919 began a long period of exile in Vienna and Germany and, from 1933 until 1945, the Soviet Union.  In 1922, Balázs published Mantel der Träume (translated and published in English as The Cloak of Dreams: Chinese Fairy Tales in 2010).  The book, lauded by Thomas Mann as a "beautiful book," is a collection of strange, sometimes chilling, fairy tales.

In Vienna he became a prolific writer of film reviews. His first book on film, Der sichtbare Mensch ( The Visible Man ) (1924), helped found the German "film as a language" theory, which also exerted an influence on Sergei Eisenstein and Vsevolod Pudovkin . A popular consultant, he wrote the screenplay for G. W. Pabst 's film of Die Dreigroschenoper (1931), which became the object of a scandal and lawsuit by Brecht (who admitted to not reading the script) during production.

Later, he co-wrote (with Carl Mayer ) and helped Leni Riefenstahl direct the film Das blaue Licht (1932).

[ 4 ] Riefenstahl later removed Balázs's and Mayer's names from the credits because they were Jewish .

[ 5 ] One of his best known films is Somewhere in Europe ( It Happened in Europe , 1947), directed by Géza von Radványi .

Bust of Béla Balázs in the Szeged Pantheon His last years were marked by increasing recognition in the German-speaking world. In 1949, he received the most distinguished prize in Hungary , the Kossuth Prize . Also in 1949, he finished Theory of the Film , published posthumously in English (London: Denis Dobson, 1952). In 1958, the Béla Balázs Award was founded and named for him as an award to recognize achievements in cinematography . The following year, the Balázs Béla Studio was also founded.

[ 6 ] Selected filmography [ edit ] Modern Marriages (1924) Madame Wants No Children (1926) One Plus One Equals Three (1927) The Girl with the Five Zeros (1927) Grand Hotel (1927) Doña Juana (1927) Sunday of Life (1931) See also [ edit ] Poetry portal Ballets by Béla Balázs Film semiotics References [ edit ] ^ Balázs, Béla (12 September 2010).

The Cloak of Dream: Chinese Fairy Tales (PDF) . Translated by Zipes, Jack. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-14711-6 .

^ "Béla Balázs - Monoskop" .

monoskop.org . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ Mary Gluck (1985) Georg Lukács and His Generation, 1900–1918 . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0674348664 . pp. 14–16 ^ 1931 „the blue light“ . walter-riml.at ^ Hanno Loewy: "Balazs' and Leni Riefenstahl's The blue Light. A martyr's story" Archived 30 April 2004 at the Wayback Machine . Uni-konstanz.de. Retrieved on 24 May 2015.

^ "Balázs Béla Studio (BBS)" .

The National Gallery of Art . Retrieved 7 December 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Béla Balázs .

Petri Liukkonen.

"Béla Balázs" .

Books and Writers .

Works by Béla Balázs at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Béla Balázs at the Internet Archive Works by Béla Balázs at Open Library Béla Balázs at IMDb Article on the relationship between Riefenstahl and Balazs Béla Balázs on Jewish.hu's list of famous Hungarian Jews Béla Balázs at Library of Congress , with 82  library catalogue records Béla Balázs at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz KulturNav FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Béla_Balázs&oldid=1270079773 " Categories : 1884 births 1949 deaths People from Szeged Hungarian male poets Ballet librettists Librettists from Austria-Hungary Film theorists Hungarian critics Hungarian film critics Philosophers of art Jewish Hungarian writers Burials at Kerepesi Cemetery 20th-century Hungarian poets 20th-century Hungarian male writers Hungarian people of German descent Hungarian Marxists 20th-century Hungarian journalists 20th-century Hungarian Jews Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2015 Pages using infobox person with multiple spouses Articles with hCards Pages with Hungarian IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Open Library ID different from Wikidata Articles with Open Library links This page was last edited on 17 January 2025, at 20:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Béla Balázs 23 languages Add topic

