Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Benefits 3 Adverse effects 4 Recent development 5 References Toggle the table of contents Financial integration 1 language Հայերեն Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Financial integration is a phenomenon in which financial markets in neighboring, regional and/or global economies are closely linked together. Various forms of actual financial integration include: Information sharing among financial institutions; sharing of best practices among financial institutions ; sharing of cutting edge technologies (through licensing ) among financial institutions ; firms borrow and raise funds directly in the international capital markets ; investors directly invest in the international capital markets ; newly engineered financial products are domestically innovated and originated then sold and bought in the international capital markets; rapid adaption/copycat of newly engineered financial products among financial institutions in different economies; cross-border capital flows ; and foreign participation in the domestic financial markets .

Because of financial market imperfections , financial integration in neighboring, regional and/or global economies is therefore imperfect.  For example, imperfect financial integration can stem from the inequality of the marginal rate of substitutions of different agents .  In addition to financial market imperfections , legal restrictions can also hinder financial integration.  Therefore, financial integration can also be achieved from the elimination of restrictions pertaining to cross-border financial operations to allow (a) financial institutions to operate freely, (b) permit businesses to directly raise funds or borrow and (c) equity and bond investors to invest across the state line with fewer [or without imposing any] restrictions. However, it is important to note that many of the legal restrictions exist because of the market imperfections that hinder financial integration.

Legal restrictions are sometimes second-best devices for dealing with the market imperfections that limit financial integration.  Consequently, removing the legal restrictions can make the world economy become worse off.
In addition, financial integration of neighboring, regional and/or global economies can take place through a formal international treaty which the governing bodies of these economies agree to cooperate to address regional and/or global financial disturbances through regulatory and policy responses. The extent to which financial integration is measured includes gross capital flows, stocks of foreign assets and liabilities, degree of co-movement of stock returns, degree of dispersion of worldwide real interest rates, and financial openness.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Also there are views that not gross capital flows (capital inflow plus capital outflow), but bilateral capital flows determine financial integration of a country, which disregards capital surplus and capital deficit amounts. For instance, a county with only capital inflow and no capital outflow will be considered not financially integrated.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Financial integration is believed to date back to the 1690s and was briefly interrupted at the start of the French Revolution (Neal, 1990 [ 4 ] ). At the end of the 17th century, the world’s dominant commercial empire was the Dutch Republic with the most important financial center located in Amsterdam where Banking, foreign exchange trading, stock trading and bullion trading were situated. And it was Amsterdam where Dutch investors directed funds abroad at the time. The Amsterdam Exchange had positioned itself as a world marketplace where many different types of securities and commodities were exchanged. It was also in this period that London and Amsterdam were closely integrated financially  (Eagly and Smith, 1976; [ 5 ] Neal, 1990 [ 4 ] ); Amsterdam assumed the role as the senior partner in acting as the stabilizing force for London during times of English financial crisis .

However, it was in the Classical Gold Standard Era (the period from the mid-1870s until the start of World War I ) that financial integration began to take shape in Europe. In these periods, for examples, the securities and foreign exchange markets were closely linked; stock and bond markets were internationally linked; international arbitrage activities were no strangers; and commercial and investment banks in major economies established a linkage (Jackson and Lothian, 1993; [ 6 ] Lothian, 2000.

[ 2 ] Eventually the 1980s and 1990s saw a significant increase in financial integration (Lothian, 2000 [ 2 ] ). For example, facing a sharp increase in real exchange rate volatility and the increased risk in these years, institutions surrounding international finance worked together to address these challenges. Regulatory restrictions on international capital mobility such as capital control, interest rate ceilings, etc. were weakened and removed because such regulatory framework was costly in the new market environment. To contain the adverse effects of exchange-rate volatility, new financial instruments and markets were developed.

Benefits [ edit ] Benefits of financial integration include efficient capital allocation, better governance , higher investment and growth, and risk-sharing. Levine [ 7 ] (2001) shows that financial integration helps strengthen the domestic financial sector allowing for more efficient capital allocation and greater investment and growth opportunities. As a result of financial integration, efficiency gains can also be generated among domestics firms because they have to compete directly with foreign rivals; this competition can lead to better corporate governance (Kose et al., 2006 [ 1 ] ). If having access to a broader base of capital is a major engine for economic growth , then financial integration is one of the solutions because it facilitates flows of capital from developed economies with rich capital to developing economies with limited capital. These capital inflows can significantly reduce the cost of capital in capital-poor economies leading to higher investment (Kose et al., 2006 [ 1 ] ). Likewise, financial integration can help capital-poor countries diversify away from their production bases that mostly depend on agricultural activities or extractions of natural resources; this diversification should reduce macroeconomic volatility (Kose et al., 2006 [ 1 ] ). Financial integration can also help predict consumption volatility because consumers are risk-averse who have a desire to use financial markets as the insurance for their income risk, so the impact of temporary idiosyncratic shocks to income growth on consumption growth can be softened. Stronger comovement of consumption growth across the globe can also be a result of financial integration (Kose et al., 2006). Furthermore, financial integration can also provide great benefits for international risk-sharing (Lewis, 1999; [ 8 ] Obstfeld, 1994; [ 9 ] van Wincoop, 1999 [ 10 ] ).

Adverse effects [ edit ] Financial integration can also have adverse effects . For example, a higher degree of financial integration can generate a severe financial contagion in neighboring, regional and/or global economies. In addition, Boyd and Smith [ 11 ] (1992) argue that capital outflows can journey from capital-poor countries with weak institutions and policies to capital-rich countries with higher institutional quality and sound policies. Consequently, financial integration actually hurts capital-scarce countries with poor institutional quality and lousy policies.

Recent development [ edit ] During the past two decades, there has been a significant increase in financial integration; this increased financial integration generates a great deal of cross-border capital flows among industrial nations and between industrial and developing countries. In addition, this increase in financial integration pulls global financial markets closer together and escalates the presence of foreign financial institutions across the globe. With rapid capital flows around the world, the currency and financial crises in the late 1980s and 1990s were inevitable. Consequently, developing countries that welcomed excessive capital flows were more vulnerable to these financial disturbances than industrial nations . It is widely believed that these developing economies were much more adversely impacted as well. Because of these recent financial crises, there has been a heated debate among both academics and practitioners concerning the costs and benefits of financial integration. This debate is ongoing.(Kose et al., 2006 [ 1 ] ) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Kose, M. Ayhan; Eswar Prasad; Kenneth Rogoff; Shang-Jin Wei (August 2006).

"Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal" (PDF) .

IMF Working Paper .

06 (189): 1.

doi : 10.5089/9781451864496.001 .

^ a b c Lothian, James (2000).

Capital Market Integration and Exchange Rate Regimes in Historical Perspective . New York: Elsevier Science, Inc.

^ Juraev, Q. Nosirjon (2012). "Financial Integration and Economic Growth".

MPRA Paper .

^ a b Neal, Larry (1990).

The rise of financial capitalism . Cambridge University Press.

^ Eargly, Robert; V. Kerry Smith (1976). "Domestic and International Integration of the London Money Market".

Journal of Economic History .

36 : 198– 212.

doi : 10.1017/s0022050700094638 .

S2CID 154583171 .

^ Jackson, Paul; James R. Lothian (December 1993). "The Behavior of Bond Yields Across Exchange-Rate Regimes and the Integration of Capital Markets".

Greek Economic Review : 1– 28.

^ Levine, Ross (1997). "Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda".

Journal of Economic Literature .

35 (2): 688– 725.

^ Lewis, Karen K. (June 1999). "Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption".

Journal of Economic Literature .

37 (2): 571– 608.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.201.3800 .

doi : 10.1257/jel.37.2.571 .

^ Obstfeld, Maurice (1994). "Risk-taking, Global Diversification, and Growth".

American Economic Review .

9 (4): 73– 96.

^ Van Wincoop, Eric (1999).

"How Big are Potential Welfare Gains from International Risk Sharing?" (PDF) .

Journal of International Economics .

47 (1): 109– 135.

doi : 10.1016/s0022-1996(98)00007-5 .

^ Boyd, J. H.; B. D. Smith (1992). "Intermediation and the Equilibrium Allocation of Investment Capital: Implications for Economic Development".

Journal of Monetary Economics .

30 (3): 409– 432.

doi : 10.1016/0304-3932(92)90004-l .

v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Financial_integration&oldid=1302102140 " Categories : Economic integration Financial markets This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 10:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Financial integration 1 language Add topic

