Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Early legal career (1961–1982) 3 U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit (1982–1986) 4 Nomination to the Supreme Court of the United States (1986) 5 Supreme Court Toggle Supreme Court subsection 5.1 Governmental structure and powers 5.1.1 Separation of powers 5.1.2 Detainee cases 5.1.3 Federalism 5.2 Individual rights 5.2.1 Abortion 5.2.2 Race, gender, and sexual orientation 5.2.3 Criminal law 5.2.4 Second Amendment 5.2.5 Litigation and standing 5.3 Other cases 6 Legal philosophy and approach Toggle Legal philosophy and approach subsection 6.1 Judicial performance 6.2 Textualism 6.3 Originalism 7 Public attention Toggle Public attention subsection 7.1 Requests for recusals 7.2 Religious views 7.3 1996 presidential election 8 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 8.1 Death and funeral 8.1.1 Conspiracy theories 9 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 9.1 Influence 9.2 In popular culture 9.3 Posthumous tributes 10 Succession 11 Selected works 12 See also 13 Footnotes 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Scholarly sources 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Antonin Scalia 42 languages Afrikaans العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Latina Lietuvių Lombard مصرى Minangkabau Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US Supreme Court justice from 1986 to 2016 "Scalia" redirects here. For the surname, see Scalia (surname) .

Antonin Scalia Official portrait, 2013 Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States In office September 26, 1986 – February 13, 2016 Nominated by Ronald Reagan Preceded by William Rehnquist Succeeded by Neil Gorsuch Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit In office August 17, 1982 – September 26, 1986 Nominated by Ronald Reagan Preceded by Roger Robb Succeeded by David Sentelle United States Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel In office August 22, 1974 – January 20, 1977 President Gerald Ford Preceded by Roger C. Cramton Succeeded by John Harmon Chair of the Administrative Conference of the United States In office September 1972 – August 1974 President Richard Nixon Preceded by Roger C. Cramton Succeeded by Robert Anthony Personal details Born Antonin Gregory Scalia ( 1936-03-11 ) March 11, 1936 Trenton, New Jersey , U.S.

Died February 13, 2016 (2016-02-13) (aged 79) Presidio County, Texas , U.S.

Resting place Fairfax Memorial Park Spouse Maureen McCarthy ​ ( m.

1960 ) ​ Children 9, including Eugene Education Georgetown University ( BA ) Harvard University ( LLB ) Awards Francis Boyer Award (1989) Scribes Lifetime-Achievement Award (2008) Presidential Medal of Freedom ( posthumous , 2018) Signature Antonin Scalia's voice Antonin Scalia delivers the opinion of the Court in United States v. Gonzalez-Lopez Recorded June 26, 2006 Antonin Gregory Scalia [ n 1 ] (March 11, 1936 – February 13, 2016) [ n 2 ] was an American jurist who served as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1986 until his death in 2016. He was described as the intellectual anchor for the originalist and textualist position in the U.S. Supreme Court 's conservative wing. For catalyzing an originalist and textualist movement in American law, he has been described as one of the most influential jurists of the twentieth century, [ 7 ] and one of the most important justices in the history of the Supreme Court.

[ 8 ] Scalia was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2018, and the Antonin Scalia Law School at George Mason University was named in his honor.

Scalia was born in Trenton, New Jersey . A devout Catholic , he attended the Jesuit Xavier High School before receiving his undergraduate degree from Georgetown University . Scalia went on to graduate from Harvard Law School and spent six years at Jones Day before becoming a law professor at the University of Virginia . In the early 1970s, he served in the Nixon and Ford administrations, eventually becoming an assistant attorney general under President Gerald Ford . He spent most of the Carter years teaching at the University of Chicago , where he became one of the first faculty advisers of the fledgling Federalist Society . In 1982, President Ronald Reagan appointed Scalia as a judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit . Four years later, Reagan appointed him to the Supreme Court, where Scalia became its first Italian-American justice following a unanimous confirmation by the U.S. Senate 98–0.

[ n 3 ] Scalia espoused a conservative jurisprudence and ideology, advocating textualism in statutory interpretation and originalism in constitutional interpretation . He peppered his colleagues with "Ninograms" (memos named for his nickname, " Nino ") intending to persuade them to his point of view. He was a strong defender of the powers of the executive branch and believed that the U.S. Constitution permitted the death penalty and did not guarantee the right to either abortion or same-sex marriage . Furthermore, Scalia viewed affirmative action and other policies that afforded special protected status to minority groups as unconstitutional. Such positions would earn him a reputation as one of the most conservative justices on the Court. He filed separate opinions in many cases, often castigating the Court's majority—sometimes scathingly so.

Scalia's most significant opinions include his lone dissent in Morrison v. Olson (arguing against the constitutionality of an Independent-Counsel law ), and his majority opinions in Crawford v. Washington (defining a criminal defendant's confrontation right under the Sixth Amendment ) and District of Columbia v. Heller (holding that the Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution guarantees an individual right to handgun ownership).

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Early life and education Scalia was born on March 11, 1936, in Trenton, New Jersey .

[ 9 ] He was the only child of Salvatore Eugenio "Eugene" Scalia (1903–1986), an Italian immigrant from Sommatino , Sicily . Salvatore graduated from Rutgers University and was a graduate student at Columbia University and clerk at the time of his son's birth.

[ 10 ] The elder Scalia would become a professor of Romance languages at Brooklyn College , where he was an adherent to the formalist New Criticism school of literary theory.

[ 11 ] Scalia's mother, Catherine Louise ( née Panaro ; 1905–1985), was born in Trenton to Italian immigrant parents and worked as an elementary school teacher.

[ 10 ] [ 12 ] In 1939, Scalia and his family moved to Elmhurst, Queens , where he attended P.S. 13 Clement C. Moore School.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] After completing eighth grade , [ 15 ] he obtained an academic scholarship to Xavier High School , a Jesuit military school in Manhattan , [ 16 ] from which he graduated ranked first in his class in 1953.

[ 17 ] Scalia achieved a 97.5 average at Xavier, earning decorations in Latin , Greek , and debate , among other subjects, in addition to being a distinguished member of its Glee club .

[ 18 ] He later reflected that he spent much of his time on schoolwork and admitted, "I was never cool." [ 19 ] While a youth, Scalia was also active as a Boy Scout and was part of the Scouts' national honor society, the Order of the Arrow .

[ 20 ] Classmate and future New York State official William Stern remembered Scalia in his high school days: "This kid was a conservative when he was 17 years old. An archconservative Catholic. He could have been a member of the Curia . He was the top student in the class. He was brilliant, way above everybody else." [ 9 ] [ 21 ] In 1953, Scalia enrolled at Georgetown University , where he majored in history. He became a champion collegiate debater in Georgetown's Philodemic Society and a critically praised thespian.

[ 22 ] He took his junior year abroad in Switzerland at the University of Fribourg .

[ 9 ] Scalia graduated from Georgetown in 1957 as class valedictorian with a Bachelor of Arts , summa cum laude .

[ 23 ] Scalia then went to Harvard Law School , where he was a notes editor for the Harvard Law Review .

[ 24 ] He graduated in 1960 with a Bachelor of Laws , magna cum laude , among the top of the class.

[ 23 ] During his time at Harvard, Scalia was awarded a Sheldon Fellowship, which allowed him to travel abroad in Europe during 1960 and 1961.

[ 25 ] Early legal career (1961–1982) Scalia began his legal career at the law firm Jones, Day, Cockley and Reavis (now Jones Day ) in Cleveland, Ohio , where he worked from 1961 to 1967.

[ 24 ] He was highly regarded at the law firm and would most likely have been made a partner but later said he had long intended to teach. He left Jones Day in 1967 to become a professor at the University of Virginia School of Law , moving his family to Charlottesville .

[ 26 ] After four years in Charlottesville, Scalia entered public service in 1971. President Richard Nixon appointed him general counsel for the Office of Telecommunications Policy , where one of his principal assignments was to formulate federal policy for the growth of cable television. From 1972 to 1974, he was chairman of the Administrative Conference of the United States , a small independent agency that sought to improve the functioning of the federal bureaucracy.

[ 25 ] In mid-1974, Nixon nominated him as Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel .

[ 25 ] After Nixon's resignation, the nomination was continued by President Gerald Ford , and Scalia was confirmed by the Senate on August 22, 1974.

[ 27 ] In the aftermath of Watergate , the Ford administration was engaged in a number of conflicts with Congress. Scalia repeatedly testified before congressional committees, defending Ford administration assertions of executive privilege regarding its refusal to turn over documents.

[ 28 ] Within the administration, Scalia advocated a presidential veto for a bill to amend the Freedom of Information Act , which would greatly increase the act's scope. Scalia's view prevailed, and Ford vetoed the bill, but Congress overrode it.

[ 29 ] In early 1976, Scalia argued his only case before the Supreme Court, Alfred Dunhill of London, Inc. v. Republic of Cuba . Scalia, on behalf of the U.S. government, argued in support of Dunhill, and that position was successful.

[ 30 ] Following Ford's defeat by President Jimmy Carter , Scalia worked for several months at the American Enterprise Institute .

[ 31 ] He then returned to academia, taking up residence at the University of Chicago Law School from 1977 to 1982, [ 32 ] though he spent one year as a visiting professor at Stanford Law School .

[ 33 ] During Scalia's time at Chicago, Peter H. Russell hired him on behalf of the Canadian government to write a report on how the United States was able to limit the activities of its secret services for the McDonald Commission , which was investigating abuses by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . The report—finished in 1979—encouraged the commission to recommend that a balance be struck between civil liberties and the essentially unchecked activities of the RCMP.

[ 34 ] In 1981, he became the first faculty adviser for the University of Chicago's chapter of the newly founded Federalist Society .

[ 32 ] U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit (1982–1986) When Ronald Reagan was elected president in November 1980, Scalia hoped for a major position in the new administration. He was interviewed for the position of solicitor general of the United States , but the position went to Rex E. Lee , to Scalia's great disappointment.

[ 35 ] Scalia was offered a judgeship on the Chicago-based U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in early 1982 but declined it, hoping to be appointed to the more influential U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit . Later that year, Reagan offered Scalia a seat on the D.C. Circuit, which he accepted.

[ 36 ] He was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on August 5, 1982, and was sworn in on August 17, 1982.

On the D.C. Circuit, Scalia built a conservative record while winning applause in legal circles for powerful, witty legal writing which was often critical of the Supreme Court precedents he felt bound as a lower-court judge to follow. Scalia's opinions drew the attention of Reagan administration officials, who, according to The New York Times , "liked virtually everything they saw and ... listed him as a leading Supreme Court prospect".

[ 37 ] Nomination to the Supreme Court of the United States (1986) Ronald Reagan and Scalia (his nominee) in the Oval Office , July 7, 1986 Judge and Mrs. Scalia (left) and President Reagan (right) watch as Chief Justice Warren Burger swears William Rehnquist in as the next Chief Justice, September 26, 1986.

In 1986, Chief Justice Warren Burger informed the White House of his intent to retire. Reagan first decided to nominate Associate Justice William Rehnquist to become Chief Justice. That choice meant that Reagan would also have to choose a nominee to fill Rehnquist's seat as associate justice.

[ 38 ] Attorney General Edwin Meese , who advised Reagan on the choice, seriously considered only Scalia and Robert Bork , a fellow judge on the DC Circuit.

[ 39 ] Feeling that this might well be Reagan's last opportunity to pick a Supreme Court justice, the president and his advisers chose Scalia over Bork. Many factors influenced the decision. Reagan wanted to appoint the first Italian-American justice.

[ 40 ] In addition, Scalia was nine years younger and would likely serve longer on the Court.

[ 38 ] Scalia also had the advantage of not having Bork's "paper trail"; [ 41 ] the elder judge had written controversial articles about individual rights.

[ 42 ] Scalia was called to the White House and accepted Reagan's nomination.

[ 38 ] When Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on Scalia's nomination opened in August 1986, he faced a committee that had just argued divisively over the Rehnquist nomination. Witnesses and Democratic senators contended that before becoming a judge, Rehnquist had engaged in activities designed to discourage minorities from voting. Committee members had little taste for a second battle over Scalia and were in any event reluctant to oppose the first Italian-American Supreme Court nominee.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] The judge was not pressed heavily on controversial issues such as abortion or civil rights.

[ 45 ] Scalia, who attended the hearing with his wife and nine children seated behind him, found time for a humorous exchange with Sen.

Howard Metzenbaum (D-OH), whom he had defeated in a tennis match in, as the nominee put it, "a case of my integrity overcoming my judgment".

[ 46 ] Scalia met no opposition from the committee. The Senate debated Scalia's nomination only briefly, confirming him 98–0 on September 17, thereby making him the Court's first Italian-American Justice. That vote followed Rehnquist's confirmation as Chief Justice by a vote of 65–33 on the same day. Scalia took his seat on September 26, 1986. One committee member, Senator and future President Joe Biden (D-DE), later stated that he regretted not having opposed Scalia "because he was so effective".

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Supreme Court Governmental structure and powers Separation of powers Justice Scalia testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee about separation of powers and checks and balances of the U.S. Government It was Scalia's view that clear lines of separation among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches follow directly from the Constitution, with no branch allowed to exercise powers granted to another branch.

[ 49 ] In his early days on the Court, he authored a powerful—and solitary—dissent in Morrison v. Olson (1988), in which the Court's majority upheld the Independent Counsel law . Scalia's thirty-page draft dissent surprised Justice Harry Blackmun for its emotional content; Blackmun felt "it could be cut down to ten pages if Scalia omitted the screaming".

[ 50 ] Scalia indicated that the law was an unwarranted encroachment on the executive branch by the legislative. He warned, "Frequently an issue of this sort will come before the Court clad, so to speak, in sheep's clothing ... But this wolf comes as a wolf".

[ 50 ] The 1989 case of Mistretta v. United States challenged the United States Sentencing Commission , an independent body within the judicial branch whose members (some of whom were federal judges) were removable only for good cause. The petitioner argued that the arrangement violated the separation of powers and that the United States Sentencing Guidelines promulgated by the commission were invalid. Eight justices joined in the majority opinion written by Blackmun, upholding the Guidelines as constitutional.

[ 51 ] Scalia dissented, stating that the issuance of the Guidelines was a lawmaking function that Congress could not delegate [ 52 ] and dubbed the Commission "a sort of junior-varsity Congress".

[ 50 ] In 1996, Congress passed the Line Item Veto Act , which allowed the president to cancel items from an appropriations bill (a bill authorizing spending) once passed into law. The statute was challenged the following year. The matter rapidly reached the Supreme Court, which struck down the law as violating the Presentment Clause of the Constitution, which governs what the president is permitted to do with a bill once it has passed both houses of Congress.

[ 53 ] Scalia dissented, seeing no Presentment Clause difficulties and feeling that the act did not violate the separation of powers. He argued that authorizing the president to cancel an appropriation was no different from allowing him to spend an appropriation at his discretion, which had long been accepted as constitutional.

[ 54 ] Detainee cases The 2009–2010 Court, with President Barack Obama , Vice President Joe Biden and retiring justice David Souter with Scalia fourth from right In 2004, in Rasul v. Bush , the Court held that federal courts had jurisdiction to hear habeas corpus petitions brought by detainees at the Guantanamo Bay detainment camp . Scalia accused the majority of "spring[ing] a trap on the Executive" by ruling that it could hear cases involving persons at Guantanamo when no federal court had ever ruled that it had the authority to hear cases involving people there.

[ 55 ] Scalia, joined by Justice John Paul Stevens , also dissented in the 2004 case of Hamdi v. Rumsfeld , involving Yaser Hamdi , an American citizen detained in the United States on the allegation he was an enemy combatant . The Court held that although Congress had authorized Hamdi's detention, Fifth Amendment due process guarantees giving a citizen such as Hamdi held in the United States as an enemy combatant the right to contest that detention before a neutral decision maker. Scalia opined that the AUMF (Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists) could not be read to suspend habeas corpus and that the Court, faced with legislation by Congress that did not grant the president power to detain Hamdi, was trying to "Make Everything Come Out Right".

[ 56 ] In March 2006, Scalia gave a talk at the University of Fribourg in Switzerland. When asked about detainee rights, he responded: "Give me a break ... I had a son on that battlefield and they were shooting at my son, and I'm not about to give this man who was captured in a war a full jury trial. I mean it's crazy".

[ 57 ] Although Scalia was not referring to any particular individual, the Supreme Court was about to consider the case of Salim Ahmed Hamdan , supposed driver to Osama bin Laden , who was challenging the military commissions at Guantanamo Bay.

[ 57 ] A group of retired military officers that supported Hamdan's position asked Scalia to recuse himself, or step aside from hearing the case, which he declined to do.

[ 58 ] The Court held 5–3 in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld that the federal courts had jurisdiction to consider Hamdan's claims; Scalia, in dissent, contended that any Court authority to consider Hamdan's petition had been eliminated by the jurisdiction-stripping Detainee Treatment Act of 2005.

[ 59 ] Federalism Scalia (left) at the University of Virginia School of Law , 2010 In federalism cases pitting the powers of the federal government against those of the states, Scalia often took the states' positions. In 1997, the Supreme Court considered the case of Printz v. United States , a challenge to certain provisions of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act , which required chief law enforcement officers of localities in states to perform certain duties. In Printz , Scalia wrote the Court's majority decision. The Supreme Court ruled unconstitutional the provision that imposed those duties as violating the Tenth Amendment , which reserves to the states and to the people those powers not granted to the federal government.

[ 60 ] In 2005, Scalia concurred in Gonzales v. Raich , which read the Commerce Clause to hold that Congress could ban the use of marijuana even when states approve its use for medicinal purposes . Scalia opined that the Commerce Clause, together with the Necessary and Proper Clause , permitted the regulation. In addition, Scalia felt that Congress may regulate intrastate activities if doing so is a necessary part of a more general regulation of interstate commerce.

[ 61 ] He based that decision on Wickard v. Filburn , which he now wrote "expanded the Commerce Clause beyond all reason".

[ 62 ] Scalia rejected the existence of the negative Commerce Clause doctrine, [ 63 ] [ 64 ] calling it "a judicial fraud".

[ 65 ] Scalia took a broad view of the Eleventh Amendment , which bars certain lawsuits against states in the federal courts. In his 1989 dissent in Pennsylvania v.

Union Gas Co.

, Scalia stated that there was no intent on the part of the framers to have the states surrender any sovereign immunity and that the case that provoked the Eleventh Amendment, Chisholm v. Georgia , came as a surprise to them. Professor Ralph Rossum, who wrote a survey of Scalia's constitutional views, suggests that the justice's view of the Eleventh Amendment was actually contradictory to the language of the Amendment.

[ 66 ] Individual rights Abortion Scalia argued that there is no constitutional right to abortion and that if the people desire legalized abortion, a law should be passed to accomplish it.

[ 19 ] In his dissenting opinion in the 1992 case of Planned Parenthood v. Casey , Scalia wrote: The States may, if they wish, permit abortion on demand, but the Constitution does not require them to do so. The permissibility of abortion, and the limitations upon it, are to be resolved like most important questions in our democracy: by citizens trying to persuade one another and then voting.

[ 67 ] "We can now look forward to at least another Term with carts full of mail from the public, and streets full of demonstrators, urging us — their unelected and life-tenured judges who have been awarded those extraordinary, undemocratic characteristics precisely in order that we might follow the law despite the popular will — to follow the popular will." — Scalia, concurring in Webster v. Reproductive Health Services Scalia repeatedly called upon his colleagues to strike down Roe v. Wade . Scalia hoped to find five votes to strike down Roe in the 1989 case of Webster v. Reproductive Health Services but was not successful in doing so. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor cast the deciding vote, allowing the abortion regulations at issue in the case to stand but not overruling Roe . Scalia concurred only in part, [ 68 ] writing, "Justice O'Connor's assertion, that a 'fundamental rule of judicial restraint' requires us to avoid reconsidering Roe cannot be taken seriously".

[ 69 ] He noted, "We can now look forward to at least another Term of carts full of mail from the public, and the streets full of demonstrators".

[ 70 ] The Court returned to the issue of abortion in the 2000 case of Stenberg v. Carhart , in which it invalidated a Nebraska statute outlawing partial-birth abortion . Justice Stephen Breyer wrote for the Court that the law was unconstitutional because it did not allow an exception for the health of the woman. Scalia dissented, comparing the Stenberg case to two of the most reviled cases in Supreme Court history: "I am optimistic enough to believe that, one day, Stenberg v. Carhart will be assigned its rightful place in the history of this Court's jurisprudence beside Korematsu and Dred Scott . The method of killing a human child ... proscribed by this statute is so horrible that the most clinical description of it evokes a shudder of revulsion".

[ 71 ] In 2007, the Court upheld a federal statute banning partial-birth abortion in Gonzales v. Carhart .

[ 72 ] University of Chicago law professor Geoffrey R. Stone , a former colleague of Scalia's, criticized Gonzales , stating that religion had influenced the outcome because all five justices in the majority were Catholic, whereas the dissenters were Protestant or Jewish.

[ 73 ] This angered Scalia to such an extent that he stated he would not speak at the University of Chicago as long as Stone was there.

[ 74 ] Race, gender, and sexual orientation Scalia generally voted to strike down laws that make distinctions by race, gender, or sexual orientation. In 1989, he concurred with the Court's judgment in City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co.

, in which the Court applied strict scrutiny to a city program requiring a certain percentage of contracts to go to minorities, and struck down the program. Scalia did not join the majority opinion, however. He disagreed with O'Connor's opinion for the Court, holding that states and localities could institute race-based programs if they identified past discrimination and if the programs were designed to remedy the past racism.

[ 75 ] Five years later, in Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña , he concurred in the Court's judgment and in part with the opinion that extended strict scrutiny to federal programs. Scalia noted in that matter his view that government can never have a compelling interest in making up for past discrimination by racial preferences: To pursue the concept of racial entitlement—even for the most admirable and benign of purposes—is to reinforce and preserve for future mischief the way of thinking that produced race slavery, race privilege and race hatred. In the eyes of government, we are just one race here. It is American.

[ 76 ] In the 2003 case of Grutter v. Bollinger , involving racial preferences in the University of Michigan 's law school, Scalia mocked the Court majority's finding that the school was entitled to continue using race as a factor in admissions to promote diversity and to increase "cross-racial understanding". Scalia noted: This is not, of course, an "educational benefit" on which students will be graded on their Law School transcript (Works and Plays Well with Others: B+) or tested by the bar examiners (Q: Describe in 500 words or less your cross-racial understanding). For it is a lesson of life rather than law—essentially the same lesson taught to (or rather learned by, for it cannot be "taught" in the usual sense) people three feet shorter and twenty years younger than the full-grown adults at the University of Michigan Law School, in institutions ranging from Boy Scout troops to public-school kindergartens.

[ 77 ] Opening page of Scalia's dissent in Lawrence v. Texas Scalia argued that laws that make distinctions between genders should be subjected to intermediate scrutiny , requiring that the gender classification be substantially related to important government objectives.

[ 78 ] When, in 1996, the Court upheld a suit brought by a woman who wished to enter the Virginia Military Institute in the case of United States v. Virginia , Scalia filed a lone, lengthy dissent. Scalia said that the Court, in requiring Virginia to show an "extremely persuasive justification" for the single-sex admission policy, had redefined intermediate scrutiny in such a way "that makes it indistinguishable from strict scrutiny".

[ 79 ] In one of the final decisions of the Burger Court, the Court ruled in 1986 in Bowers v. Hardwick that "homosexual sodomy" [ 80 ] was not protected by the right of privacy and could be criminally prosecuted by the states.

[ 81 ] In 1995, however, that ruling was effectively gutted by Romer v. Evans , which struck down a Colorado state constitutional amendment, passed by popular vote, that forbade antidiscrimination laws' being extended to sexual orientation.

[ 82 ] Scalia dissented from the opinion by Justice Kennedy, believing that Bowers had protected the right of the states to pass such measures and that the Colorado amendment was not discriminatory but merely prevented homosexuals from gaining favored status under Colorado law.

[ 83 ] Scalia later said of Romer , "And the Supreme Court said, 'Yes, it is unconstitutional.' On the basis of—I don't know, the Sexual Preference Clause of the Bill of Rights, presumably. And the liberals loved it, and the conservatives gnashed their teeth".

[ 84 ] In 2003, Bowers was formally overruled by Lawrence v. Texas , from which Scalia dissented. According to Mark V. Tushnet in his survey of the Rehnquist Court, during the oral argument in the case, Scalia seemed so intent on making the state's argument for it that the Chief Justice intervened.

[ 85 ] According to his biographer, Joan Biskupic , Scalia "ridiculed" the majority in his dissent for being so ready to cast aside Bowers when many of the same justices had refused to overturn Roe in Planned Parenthood v. Casey .

[ 86 ] In March 2009, openly gay Congressman Barney Frank described him as a "homophobe".

[ 87 ] Maureen Dowd described Scalia in a 2003 column as " Archie Bunker in a high-backed chair".

[ 88 ] In an op-ed for The New York Times , federal appeals judge Richard Posner and Georgia State University law professor Eric Segall called Scalia's positions on homosexuality radical and characterized Scalia's "political ideal as verg[ing] on majoritarian theocracy ".

[ 89 ] Former Scalia clerk Ed Whelan called this "a smear and a distraction." [ 90 ] Professor John O. McGinnis responded as well, [ 91 ] leading to further exchanges.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] In the 2013 case of Hollingsworth v. Perry , which involved a California ballot initiative known as Proposition 8 that amended the California State Constitution to ban same-sex marriage, Scalia voted with the majority to uphold a lower court decision overturning the ban. The decision was based on the appellants' lack of standing to appeal and not on the substantive issue of the constitutionality of Proposition 8.

[ 94 ] Also in 2013, Scalia dissented from the majority opinion in United States v. Windsor . In Windsor , the Court held Section Three of the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) (which—for federal government purposes—defined the terms "marriage" and "spouse" as applicable only to opposite-sex unions) unconstitutional under the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment .

[ 95 ] Scalia's dissent, which was joined in full by Justice Thomas and in part by Chief Justice Roberts, [ 96 ] opened: This case is about power in several respects. It is about the power of our people to govern themselves, and the power of this Court to pronounce the law. Today's opinion aggrandizes the latter, with the predictable consequence of diminishing the former. We have no power to decide this case. And even if we did, we have no power under the Constitution to invalidate this democratically adopted legislation.

Scalia argued that the judgment effectively characterized opponents of same-sex marriage as "enemies of the human race": [ 97 ] [ 98 ] He argued that the Court's ruling would affect state bans on same-sex marriage as well: As far as this Court is concerned, no one should be fooled; it is just a matter of listening and waiting for the other shoe.
By formally declaring anyone opposed to same-sex marriage an enemy of human decency, the majority arms well every challenger to a state law restricting marriage to its traditional definition.

[ 99 ] Scalia concluded by saying that the Supreme Court "has cheated both sides, robbing the winners of an honest victory, and the losers of the peace that comes from a fair defeat." [ 95 ] Demonstrations outside the Supreme Court awaiting the decision in Obergefell v. Hodges In 2015, Scalia dissented from the majority opinion in Obergefell v. Hodges , in which the Court ruled that the fundamental right to marry was guaranteed to same-sex couples by both the Due Process Clause and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In his dissent, Scalia stated that the Court's decision effectively robbed the people of "the freedom to govern themselves", noting that a rigorous debate on same-sex marriage had been taking place and that—by deciding the issue nationwide—the democratic process had been halted.

[ 100 ] Addressing the claimed Fourteenth Amendment violation, Scalia asserted that because a same-sex marriage ban would not have been considered unconstitutional at the time of the Fourteenth Amendment's adoption, such bans are not unconstitutional in 2015.

[ 101 ] He claimed there was "no basis" for the Court to strike down legislation that the Fourteenth Amendment did not expressly forbid, and directly attacked the majority opinion for "lacking even a thin veneer of law".

[ 101 ] Lastly, Scalia faulted the actual writing in the opinion for "diminish[ing] this Court's reputation for clear thinking and sober analysis" and for "descend[ing] from the disciplined legal reasoning of John Marshall and Joseph Story to the mystical aphorisms of the fortune cookie." [ 102 ] Criminal law Scalia (right) at Harvard Law School on November 30, 2006 Scalia believed the death penalty to be constitutional.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] He dissented in decisions that hold the death penalty unconstitutional as applied to certain groups, such as those who were under the age of 18 at the time of offense. In Thompson v. Oklahoma (1988), he dissented from the Court's ruling that the death penalty could not be applied to those aged 15 at the time of the offense, and the following year authored the Court's opinion in Stanford v. Kentucky , sustaining the death penalty for those who killed at age 16. However, in 2005, the Court overturned Stanford in Roper v. Simmons , and Scalia again dissented, mocking the majority's claims that a national consensus had emerged against the execution of those who killed while underage , noting that less than half of the states that permitted the death penalty prohibited it for underage killers. He castigated the majority for including in their count states that had abolished the death penalty entirely, stating that doing so was "rather like including old-order Amishmen in a consumer-preference poll on the electric car. Of course they don't like it, but that sheds no light whatever on the point at issue".

[ 105 ] In 2002, in Atkins v. Virginia , the Court ruled the death penalty unconstitutional as applied to mentally retarded people. Scalia dissented, stating that it would not have been considered cruel or unusual to execute mildly mentally retarded people at the time of the 1791 adoption of the Bill of Rights and that the Court had failed to show that a national consensus had formed against the practice.

[ 106 ] Scalia strongly disfavored the Court's ruling in Miranda v. Arizona , which held that a confession by an arrested suspect who had not been advised of their rights was inadmissible in court, and he voted to overrule Miranda in the 2000 case of Dickerson v. United States but was in a minority of two with Justice Clarence Thomas . Calling the Miranda decision a "milestone of judicial overreaching", Scalia stated that the Court should not fear to correct its mistakes.

[ 107 ] Although, in many areas, Scalia's approach was unfavorable to criminal defendants, he took the side of defendants in matters involving the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment , which guarantees defendants the right to confront their accusers. In multiple cases, Scalia wrote against laws that allowed alleged victims of child abuse to testify behind screens or by closed-circuit television.

[ 108 ] In a 2009 case, Scalia wrote the majority opinion in Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts , holding that defendants must have the opportunity to confront lab technicians in drug cases and that a certificate of analysis is not enough to prove a substance was a drug.

[ 109 ] Scalia maintained that every element of an offense that helps determine the sentence must be either admitted by the defendant or found by a jury under the Sixth Amendment's jury guarantee. In the 2000 case of Apprendi v. New Jersey , Scalia wrote a concurrence to the Court's majority opinion that struck down a state statute that allowed the trial judge to increase the sentence if the judge found the offense was a hate crime . Scalia found the procedure impermissible because whether it was a hate crime had not been decided by the jury.

[ 110 ] In 2004, he wrote for the Court in Blakely v. Washington , striking down Washington state's sentencing guidelines on similar grounds. The dissenters in Blakely foresaw that Scalia would use the case to attack the federal sentencing guidelines (which he had failed to strike down in Mistretta ), and they proved correct, as Scalia led a five-member majority in United States v. Booker , which made those guidelines no longer mandatory for federal judges to follow (they remained advisory).

[ 110 ] In the 2001 case of Kyllo v. United States , Scalia wrote the Court's opinion in a 5–4 decision that cut across ideological lines.

[ n 4 ] That decision found thermal imaging of a home to be an unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment . The Court struck down a conviction for marijuana manufacture based on a search warrant issued after such scans were conducted, which showed that the garage was considerably hotter than the rest of the house because of indoor growing lights.

[ 111 ] Applying that Fourth Amendment prohibition on unreasonable search and seizure to arrest, Scalia dissented from the Court's 1991 decision in County of Riverside v. McLaughlin , allowing a 48-hour delay before a person arrested without a warrant is taken before a magistrate, on the ground that at the time of the adoption of the Fourth Amendment, an arrested person was to be taken before a magistrate as quickly as practicable.

[ 112 ] In a 1990 First Amendment case, R.A.V. v. St. Paul , Scalia wrote the Court's opinion striking down a St. Paul, Minnesota , hate speech ordinance in a prosecution for burning a cross.

[ 113 ] Scalia noted, "Let there be no mistake about our belief that burning a cross in someone's front yard is reprehensible. But St. Paul has sufficient means at its disposal to prevent such behavior without adding the First Amendment to the fire".

[ 114 ] Second Amendment "Undoubtedly some think that the Second Amendment is outmoded in a society where our standing army is the pride of our Nation, where well-trained police forces provide personal security, and where gun violence is a serious problem. That is perhaps debatable, but what is not debatable is that it is not the role of this Court to pronounce the Second Amendment extinct." — Scalia, writing for the majority in District of Columbia v. Heller In 2008, the Court considered a challenge to the gun laws in the District of Columbia . Scalia wrote the majority opinion in District of Columbia v. Heller , which found an individual right to own a firearm under the Second Amendment . Scalia traced the word "militia", found in the Second Amendment, as it would have been understood at the time of its ratification, stating that it then meant "the body of all citizens".

[ 115 ] The Court upheld Heller's claim to own a firearm in the District.

[ 115 ] Scalia's opinion for the Heller Court was criticized by liberals and applauded by conservatives.

[ 116 ] Seventh Circuit judge Richard Posner disagreed with Scalia's opinion, stating that the Second Amendment "creates no right to the private possession of guns". Posner called Scalia's opinion "faux originalism" and a "historicizing glaze on personal values and policy preferences".

[ 117 ] In October 2008, Scalia stated that the court's originalists needed to show only that at the time the Second Amendment was ratified, the right to bear arms did not have an exclusively military context and that they were successful in so showing.

[ 118 ] Litigation and standing Following the death of Scalia, Paul Barrett, writing for Bloomberg Businessweek , reported that: "Translating into liberal argot: Scalia changed the rules for who could sue". The issue elevated the recognition of Scalia as a notable influence on establishing and determining the conditions under which cases could be brought to trial and for litigation—and by whom such litigation could take place.

[ 119 ] David Rivkin, from the conservative standpoint, said, "He (Scalia) did more to clarify and limit the bounds and scope of judicial power than any Supreme Court Justice in history, particularly in the area of standing and class actions". Scalia indicated his long-held position from the time of his 1983 law review article titled "The Doctrine of Standing as an Essential Element of the Separation of Powers". As summarized by Barrett, "He (Scalia) wrote that courts had misappropriated authority from other branches of government by allowing too many people to sue corporations and government agencies, especially in environmental cases". In a practical sense, Scalia brought to the attention of the Court the authority to restrict "standing" in class action suits in which the litigants may be defined in descriptive terms rather than as well-defined and unambiguous litigants.

[ 120 ] Other cases Scalia concurred in the 1990 case of Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health , in which the family of a woman in a vegetative state sought to have her feeding tube removed so she would die, believing that to have been her wish. The Court found for the State of Missouri, requiring clear and convincing evidence of such a desire. Scalia stated that the Court should have remained away from the dispute and that the issues "are [not] better known to the nine Justices of this Court any better than they are known to nine people picked at random from the Kansas City telephone directory".

[ 115 ] Scalia joined the majority per curiam opinion in the 2000 case of Bush v. Gore , which effectively ended recounts of ballots in Florida following the 2000 US presidential election , and also both concurred separately and joined Rehnquist's concurrence.

[ 121 ] In 2007, he said of the case, "I and my court owe no apology whatever for Bush v. Gore . We did the right thing. So there! ... get over it. It's so old by now".

[ 122 ] During an interview on the Charlie Rose show , he defended the Court's action: The decision was not close, it was 7–2 on the principal issue of whether there had been a constitutional violation ... But what if it was unconstitutional to have that recount? You're going to let it continue and come to a conclusion? And then overturn it? The reason to stop it sooner was not, "Ooh, we're worried that it's going to come out the wrong way"...  you forget what was going on at the time. We were the laughingstock of the world. The world's greatest democracy that couldn't conduct an election. We didn't know who our next president was going to be. The lengthy transition that has become standard when you change from one president to another could not begin because you didn't know who the new president was going to be. It was becoming a very serious problem. The issue before the United States Supreme Court is: having decided the case, having decided this is unconstitutional, should we nonetheless let the election go on? Or is it time cut it off and let's move on?

[ 123 ] Legal philosophy and approach Judicial performance Scalia in 2010 During oral argument before the Court, Scalia asked more questions and made more comments than any other justice.

[ 124 ] A 2005 study found that he provoked laughter more often than any of his colleagues did.

[ 125 ] His goal during oral arguments was to get across his position to the other justices.

[ 126 ] University of Kansas social psychologist Lawrence Wrightsman wrote that Scalia communicated "a sense of urgency on the bench" and had a style that was "forever forceful".

[ 124 ] After Chief Justice John Roberts joined the Court in 2005, he took to quizzing lawyers in a manner similar to Scalia's; sometimes the two questioned counsel in seeming coordination.

[ 126 ] Dahlia Lithwick of Slate described Scalia's technique as follows: Scalia doesn't come into oral argument all secretive and sphinxlike, feigning indecision on the nuances of the case before him. He comes in like a medieval knight, girded for battle. He knows what the law is. He knows what the opinion should say. And he uses the hour allocated for argument to bludgeon his brethren into agreement.

[ 127 ] Scalia wrote numerous opinions from the start of his career on the Supreme Court. During his tenure, he wrote more concurring opinions than any other justice. Only two other justices have written more dissents .

[ 128 ] According to Kevin Ring, who compiled a book of Scalia's dissenting and concurring opinions: "His opinions are ... highly readable. His entertaining writing style can make even the most mundane areas of the law interesting".

[ 129 ] Conor Clarke of Slate comments on Scalia's written opinions, especially his dissents: His writing style is best described as equal parts anger, confidence, and pageantry. Scalia has a taste for garish analogies and offbeat allusions—often very funny ones—and he speaks in no uncertain terms. He is highly accessible and tries not to get bogged down in abstruse legal jargon. But most of all, Scalia's opinions read like they're about to catch fire for pure outrage. He does not, in short, write like a happy man.

[ 130 ] Scalia speaks at the US mission within Geneva in 2011 At the Supreme Court, justices meet after the case is briefed and argued and vote on the result. The task of writing the opinion is assigned by the Chief Justice or—if the Chief Justice is in the minority or is not participating—by the senior justice in the majority. After the assignment, the justices generally communicate about a case by sending notes and draft opinions to each other's chambers.

[ 131 ] In the give-and-take of opinion-writing, Scalia did not compromise his views in order to attract five votes for a majority (unlike the late Justice William J. Brennan, Jr.

, who would accept less than what he wanted in order to gain a partial victory).

[ 132 ] Scalia attempted to influence his colleagues by sending them "Ninograms"—short memoranda aimed at persuading them of the correctness of his views.

[ 128 ] [ 133 ] In an October 2013 issue of New York magazine, Scalia revealed that he scanned The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Times , obtained most of his news from talk radio, and did not read The New York Times or The Washington Post .

He described The Washington Post as " shrilly liberal".

[ 134 ] Textualism Scalia was a textualist in statutory interpretation , believing that the ordinary meaning of a statute should govern.

[ 135 ] In interpreting statutes, Scalia did not look to legislative history . In the 2006 case of Zedner v. United States , he joined the majority opinion written by Justice Samuel Alito —all except one paragraph of the opinion, in which Alito cited legislative history. In a concurring opinion in that case, Scalia noted, "The use of legislative history is illegitimate and ill advised in the interpretation of any statute".

[ 136 ] His dislike of legislative history may have been a reason that other justices have become more cautious in its use.

[ 137 ] Gregory Maggs wrote in the Public Interest Law Review in 1995 that by the early 1990s, legislative history was being cited in only about forty percent of Supreme Court cases involving the interpretation of statutes and that no case of that era used legislative history as an essential reason for the outcome. Maggs suggested: With Justice Scalia breathing down the necks of anyone who peeks into the Congressional Record or Senate reports, the other members of the Court may have concluded that the benefit of citing legislative history does not outweigh its costs. It is likely for this reason that the percentage of cases citing it has decreased dramatically. No one likes an unnecessary fight, especially not one with as formidable an opponent as Justice Scalia.

[ 137 ] Originalism Scalia's official Supreme Court portrait by Nelson Shanks In 1998, Scalia vociferously opposed the idea of a living constitution , or the power of the judiciary to modify the meaning of constitutional provisions to adapt them to changing times.

[ 19 ] Scalia warned that if one accepted that constitutional standards should evolve with a maturing society, "the risk of assessing evolving standards is that it is all too easy to believe that evolution has culminated in one's own views".

[ 138 ] He compared the Constitution to statutes he contended were not understood to change their meaning through time.

[ 24 ] Scalia described himself as an originalist , meaning that he interpreted the United States Constitution as it would have been understood when it was adopted. According to Scalia in 2008, "It's what did the words mean to the people who ratified the Bill of Rights or who ratified the Constitution".

[ 19 ] Constitutional amendments, such as the 1868 Fourteenth Amendment , according to Scalia, were to be interpreted based on their meaning at the time of ratification.

[ 139 ] Scalia was often asked how that approach justified the result in the 1954 case of Brown v. Board of Education , which held that segregated schools were unconstitutional and which relied on the Fourteenth Amendment for the result.

[ 140 ] Scalia responded to this argument in two ways. He noted research by Michael McConell that "persuasively establishes that this was the original understanding of the post Civil War Amendments." However, Scalia continues by arguing that even if non-originalist methods occasionally produce better results than originalism, "It is in no way remarkable... that taking power from the people and placing it instead with a judicial aristocracy can produce some creditable results that democracy might not achieve. The same can be said of monarchy and totalitarianism. But once a nation has decided that democracy... is the best system of government, the crucial question becomes which theory of textual interpretation is compatible with democracy. Originalism unquestionably is. Non-originalism, by contrast, imposes on society statutory prescriptions that were never democratically adopted. When applied to the Constitution, nonoriginalism limits the democratic process itself, prohibiting... acts... that 'We The People' never, ever, voted to outlaw".

[ 141 ] In a 2009 public conversation, Justice Stephen Breyer questioned Scalia, indicating that those who ratified the Fourteenth Amendment did not intend to end school segregation. Scalia called this argument " waving the bloody shirt of Brown " and indicated that he would have joined the first Justice Harlan's solitary dissent in Plessy v. Ferguson , the 1896 case that Brown overruled.

[ 142 ] Scalia's originalist approach came under attack from critics, who viewed it as "a cover for what they see as Scalia's real intention: to turn back some pivotal court decisions of the 1960s and 70s" reached by the Warren and Burger Courts.

[ 19 ] Ralph Nader argued in 2008 that Scalia's originalist philosophy was inconsistent with the justice's acceptance of the extension of certain constitutional rights to corporations when at the time of the Fourteenth Amendment's ratification, corporations were not commonly understood to possess constitutional rights.

[ 143 ] Nader's view preceded the Court's 2010 decision in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission . Scalia, in his concurrence in that case, traced his understanding of the rights of groups of individuals at the time of the adoption of the Bill of Rights. His argument was based on the lack of an exception for groups such as corporations in the free speech guarantee in the Bill of Rights and on several examples of corporate political speech from the time of the adoption of the Bill of Rights.

[ 144 ] Professor Thomas Colby of George Washington University National Law Center argued that Scalia's votes in Establishment Clause cases do not stem from originalist views but simply from conservative political convictions.

[ 145 ] Scalia responded to his critics that his originalism "has occasionally led him to decisions he deplores, like his upholding the constitutionality of flag burning ", which according to Scalia was protected by the First Amendment.

[ 19 ] In 2006, before George W. Bush appointees Roberts and Alito had had time to make an impact, Rossum wrote that Scalia had failed to win converts among his conservative colleagues for his use of originalism , [ 146 ] whereas Roberts and Alito, as younger men with an originalist approach, greatly admired Scalia battling for what he believed in.

[ 147 ] Following the appointments of Roberts and Alito, subsequent appointees Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh are identified in their judicial temperament as being originalists with Kavanaugh referred to as "a stalwart originalist" in the tradition of Scalia.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] Public attention Requests for recusals Scalia (right) works on a book with lexicographer Bryan A. Garner Scalia recused himself from Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow (2004), a case brought by atheist Michael Newdow alleging that recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance (including the words "under God") in school classrooms violated the rights of his daughter, who he said was also an atheist. Shortly after the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled in Newdow's favor but before the case came before the Supreme Court, Scalia spoke at a Knights of Columbus event in Fredericksburg, Virginia , stating that the Ninth Circuit decision was an example of how the courts were trying to excise God from public life. The school district requested that the Supreme Court review the case, and Newdow asked that Scalia recuse himself because of this prior statement, which he did without comment.

[ 150 ] Scalia declined to recuse himself from Cheney v. United States District Court for the District of Columbia (2005), a case concerning whether Vice President Dick Cheney could keep secret the membership of an advisory task force on energy policy. Scalia was asked to recuse himself because he had gone on a hunting trip with various persons including Cheney, during which he traveled one way on Air Force Two . Scalia issued a lengthy in-chambers opinion refusing to recuse himself, stating that though Cheney was a longtime friend, he was being sued merely in his official capacity and that were justices to step aside in the cases of officials who are parties because of official capacity, the Supreme Court would cease to function. Scalia indicated that it was far from unusual for justices to socialize with other government officials, recalling that the late Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson played poker with President Harry Truman and that Justice Byron White went skiing with Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy . Scalia stated that he was never alone with Cheney during the trip, the two had not discussed the case, and the justice had saved no money because he had bought round-trip tickets, the cheapest available.

[ 151 ] Scalia was part of the 7–2 majority once the case was heard, a decision that generally upheld Cheney's position.

[ 152 ] Scalia later described his refusal to recuse himself as his "most heroic opinion" because it had exposed him to a great deal of criticism.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] Judge Gilbert S. Merritt Jr.

of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals called for Scalia's recusal in Bush v. Gore at the time.

[ 155 ] Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, writing in Law and Philosophy , later chronicled such calls and contended that "There were many ways for Justice Scalia's sons to benefit from a decision in favor of Bush. Together these benefits could be substantial. Hence, [the law] required recusal".

[ 156 ] Republicans dismissed such calls as partisan, noting that Merritt was a close friend of the Gores and a rumored Gore Supreme Court nominee.

[ 155 ] Religious views Scalia's official portrait, 2005 Scalia was a devout traditionalist Catholic , and his son Paul entered the priesthood. Uncomfortable with the changes brought about following Vatican II , Scalia drove long distances to parishes he felt were more in accord with his beliefs, including parishes that celebrated the Tridentine Latin Mass in Chicago and Washington, [ 157 ] and one celebrating the Latin version [ 158 ] of the Mass of Paul VI at St. Catherine of Siena in Great Falls, Virginia .

[ 159 ] In a 2013 interview with Jennifer Senior for New York , Scalia was asked whether his beliefs extended to the Devil, and he stated, "Of course! Yeah, he's a real person. Hey, c'mon, that's standard Catholic doctrine! Every Catholic believes that." When asked whether he had seen recent evidence of the Devil, Scalia replied: "You know, it is curious. In the Gospels, the Devil is doing all sorts of things. He's making pigs run off cliffs, he's possessing people and whatnot ... What he's doing now is getting people not to believe in him or in God. He's much more successful that way." [ 134 ] In another 2013 interview to the Houston Chronicle , Scalia said, "In order for capitalism to work, in order for it to produce a good and stable society, traditional Christian virtues are essential." [ 160 ] In 2006, upon leaving church, Scalia was asked by a reporter whether being a traditionalist Catholic had caused problems for him, and he responded by asking, "You know what I say to those people?" and with a gesture, cupping his hand under his chin and flicking his fingers out. The gesture, which got captured by a photographer, was initially reported by the Boston Herald as obscene. Scalia responded to the reports with a letter to the editor, accusing the news staff of watching too many episodes of The Sopranos and stating that the gesture was a strong brush-off. Roger Axtell, an expert on body language, described the gesture as possibly meaning "I've had enough, go away" and noted, "It's a fairly strong gesture".

[ 161 ] The gesture was parodied by comedian Stephen Colbert during his performance at the White House Correspondents' Association Dinner later that year, with the justice in attendance; cameras showed that, unlike most of the butts of Colbert's jokes that evening, Scalia was laughing.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] 1996 presidential election According to John Boehner , as chairman of the House Republican Conference , he sought to persuade Scalia to run for election as vice president with Bob Dole in 1996. As related by Boehner, Scalia listened to the proposal and dictated the same reply Justice Charles Evans Hughes had once given to a similar query: "The possibility is too remote to comment upon, given my position". Dole did put Scalia on his list of potential running mates but eventually decided upon Jack Kemp .

[ 164 ] Personal life Scalia ( left ) at the swearing-in of his son, Eugene Scalia , as Solicitor of Labor on February 25, 2002 On September 10, 1960, Scalia married Maureen McCarthy at St. Pius X church in Yarmouth, Massachusetts .

[ 165 ] The two had met on a blind date while he was at Harvard Law School. Maureen was  an undergraduate student at Radcliffe College when they met; she subsequently obtained a degree in English from the school.

[ 166 ] The Scalias had five sons and four daughters.

[ 167 ] Two of their sons, Eugene Scalia and John Scalia, became attorneys, [ 168 ] with Eugene later becoming Secretary of Labor in the first Trump administration .

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] Paul Scalia became a Catholic priest, Matthew Scalia had a military career, and Christopher Scalia became a writer. All four Scalia daughters—Catherine, Ann, Margaret, and Mary—have families. According to Scalia, Maureen raised all nine children "with very little assistance from me".

[ 168 ] The family resided in McLean, Virginia , a suburb of Washington, D.C.

[ 171 ] Scalia enjoyed a warm friendship with fellow justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg , considered a member of the court's liberal wing, with the two attending the opera together and appearing together onstage as supernumeraries in Washington National Opera 's 1994 production of Ariadne auf Naxos .

[ 124 ] Ginsburg was a colleague of Scalia on the D.C. Circuit, and the Scalias and Ginsburgs had dinner together every New Year's Eve.

[ 172 ] Scalia also enjoyed a friendship with fellow Justice Elena Kagan , also considered a member of the court's liberal wing. When Justice David Souter retired, Scalia told David Axelrod , an adviser to then-President Barack Obama , that he hoped that Obama would nominate Kagan to replace him. While Obama nominated Sonia Sotomayor instead, a year later when Justice John Paul Stevens retired, Obama nominated Kagan.

[ 173 ] An avid hunter, Scalia taught Justice Kagan how to hunt; the two hunted ducks, birds, deer and antelope together.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] Death and funeral Scalia's gravesite at Fairfax Memorial Park Scalia died in his sleep [ 1 ] at age 79. His body was discovered on the morning of February 13, 2016, in his room [ 6 ] at Cibolo Creek Ranch , near Shafter, Texas in Presidio County, Texas .

[ 176 ] He had gone quail hunting the afternoon before, and then dined as the guest of John B. Poindexter , owner of the ranch.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] After Poindexter discovered the body, he called the Presidio County sheriff's department to ask for the number of the U.S. Marshals Service to report a death.  Poindexter was reluctant to say who had died to Sheriff Danny Dominguez. Dominguez had the Marshal's Service call the ranch owner, and both the marshals and the sheriff went to the ranch, where they were shown Scalia's body. Dominguez instructed his office to call local justice of the peace Juanita Bishop, but she was out of town.

[ 179 ] County judge Cinderela Guevara pronounced Scalia dead of natural causes .

[ 180 ] She did not see the body, which under Texas law is not required, nor did she order an autopsy.

[ 6 ] Bishop, as well as David Beebe, another justice of the peace, later disagreed with the decision not to order an autopsy for Scalia. Guevara, who conferred by telephone with Scalia's physician, stated that she made the determination to pronounce Scalia dead from natural causes after being told by county sheriff Dominguez on the scene that "there were no signs of foul play" and that Scalia "was having health issues".

[ 6 ] [ 181 ] Scalia's physician, Rear Admiral Brian P. Monahan , told her Scalia had a history of heart trouble, including high blood pressure, and was recently deemed too weak to undergo surgery for a torn rotator cuff .

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] According to Sunset Funeral Home director Chris Lujan, Scalia's family also declined to have an autopsy performed after his body was transferred to his El Paso funeral home, prior to its return to Fairfax, Virginia .

[ 184 ] Kansas v. Carr (2016) was the last majority opinion written by Justice Scalia before his death in February 2016, though his last dissenting opinion was in FERC v. Electric Power Supply Association (2016).

[ 185 ] Following his death, Scalia lay in repose in the Great Hall of the United States Supreme Court Building on February 19, 2016.

[ 186 ] Scalia's son, Father Paul Scalia, celebrated a Catholic funeral Mass and delivered the homily on February 20, 2016, at the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, D.C.

[ 187 ] The Obama administration was represented at the funeral by Vice President Joe Biden ; President Barack Obama did not attend.

[ 188 ] Scalia's remains were interred at a private ceremony at Fairfax Memorial Park in Fairfax, Virginia .

[ 187 ] [ 189 ] Conspiracy theories The circumstances surrounding Scalia's death prompted conspiracy theories alleging that he may have been murdered.

[ 190 ] These conspiracy theories were stimulated by Guevara's decision not to conduct an autopsy and her pronouncement of Scalia's death by a phone call, as well as by Scalia's refusal of a United States Marshals Service security detail, uncertainty over the precise cause of Scalia's death, and Poindexter's initial assertion that he found Scalia in bed with a pillow over his head. Poindexter later clarified that the pillow was in between Scalia's head and the bed's headboard, not over his face.

[ 191 ] The conspiracy theory was promoted by William Ritchie, a former head of criminal investigations for the Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia , and by Alex Jones , a far-right talk show host.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] [ 194 ] Donald Trump , then a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, referenced the homicide allegations on Michael Savage 's radio show The Savage Nation , saying that "they say they found a pillow on his face, which is a pretty unusual place to find a pillow." [ 190 ] Eugene Scalia rejected the theories, saying that "our family just has no doubt that he was taken from us by natural causes." [ 195 ] Legacy The Roberts Court (October 2010 – February 2016). Front row: Clarence Thomas , Antonin Scalia, John Roberts ( Chief ), Anthony Kennedy , Ruth Bader Ginsburg . Back row: Sonia Sotomayor , Stephen Breyer , Samuel Alito , Elena Kagan Influence Writing in The Jewish Daily Forward in 2009, J. J. Goldberg described Scalia as "the intellectual anchor of the court's conservative majority".

[ 196 ] [ 197 ] Scalia traveled to the nation's law schools, giving talks on law and democracy.

[ 128 ] His appearances on college campuses were often standing room only .

[ 198 ] Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg indicated that Scalia was "very much in tune with the current generation of law students ... Students now put ' Federalist Society ' on their resumes".

[ 199 ] John Paul Stevens , who served throughout Scalia's tenure until his 2010 retirement, said of Scalia's influence, "He's made a huge difference. Some of it constructive, some of it unfortunate".

[ 199 ] Of the nine sitting justices, Scalia was most often the subject of law review articles.

[ 198 ] In 2009, after nearly a quarter century on the Court, Scalia characterized his victories as "damn few".

[ 200 ] Writing in the American Spectator , Adam Carrington noted that: Since his death in February of 2016, Scalia's influence of course continues through his three decades of judicial opinions. But he still exerts great influence in another, less-discussed way. In 2012, he co-authored the book Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts with Bryan A. Garner. This work describes numerous "canons," or rules regarding how to interpret legal documents ...  A mere seven years since its publication, Reading Law has been cited in over 1,000 state and federal cases. Just this spring, for instance, Supreme Court justices referenced the work in 10 cases.

[ 201 ] Scalia accepts the Semper Fidelis Award, 2013 Scalia's promotion of textualism and originalism on the high court led to a shift in the American judiciary's approach to textual interpretation, with greater attention paid to the text itself. The liberal political philosopher Ronald Dworkin said that because of Scalia, "we are all originalists now." For this reason, he is often described as one of the most influential jurists of the twentieth century.

[ 7 ] The statement by Ronald Dorker was made earlier by Elena Kagan , for Elena Kagan said during her 2010 Senate confirmation hearings that "we are all originalists." [ 202 ] [ 203 ] [ 204 ] Kagan declared in a 2015 interview at Harvard Law School honoring her then-colleague Scalia that " we are all textualists now.

" [ 202 ] [ 205 ] In 2017, Harvard University established an endowed professorship at its law school dedicated in honor of Scalia; as of July 1, 2021, it is occupied by Stephen E. Sachs .

[ 8 ] [ 206 ] In popular culture Derrick Wang's opera Scalia/Ginsburg depicts the friendship of Scalia and Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, both known for their shared love of opera.

[ 207 ] [ 208 ] [ 209 ] The opera was introduced before Scalia and Ginsburg at the Supreme Court in 2013, [ 210 ] premiered at the Castleton Festival in 2015, [ 211 ] [ 212 ] and was revised after Scalia's death, [ 213 ] with the revised version broadcast on national radio on November 7, 2020.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] Scalia and Ginsburg both wrote forewords to the libretto, [ 216 ] and Ginsburg cited the opera in her statement on Scalia's death [ 217 ] and in her foreword to the book Scalia Speaks .

[ 218 ] John Strand 's play The Originalist was performed in Washington, DC in 2015; it received a positive review from The New York Times . The play depicted Justice Scalia's interaction with a (fictional) liberal court clerk and their mutual criticism and eventual support of each other. The play had a cross-country tour from Washington, D.C. to the Pasadena Playhouse .

[ 219 ] The play aired on PBS in 2017.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] Posthumous tributes According to NBC News, tributes to "larger-than-life Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia poured in [from] both sides of the political aisle" following his death.

[ 222 ] President Barack Obama called Scalia "one of the towering legal figures of our time" and former president George W. Bush described Scalia as "a brilliant jurist".

[ 222 ] U.S. attorney general Loretta Lynch called Scalia "one of the most influential and eloquent justices to ever serve on the U.S. Supreme Court".

[ 222 ] President Trump presents Scalia's Medal of Freedom posthumously to his widow, Maureen In May 2016, George Mason University renamed its law school the " Antonin Scalia Law School " after an anonymous donor pledged $20 million to the school, with an additional $10 million donated by the Charles Koch Foundation , contingent upon the name change in Scalia's honor.

[ 223 ] [ 224 ] The dedication ceremony occurred on October 6, 2016, and was attended by Supreme Court justices. At the ceremony, Justice Elena Kagan called Scalia "one of the most important Supreme Court justices ever, and also one of the greatest".

[ 8 ] In October 2016, the Italy–USA Foundation posthumously awarded Scalia its America Award. The ceremony was conducted in front of the Italian parliament in Rome.

[ 225 ] In 2018, President Donald Trump posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Scalia.

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] Writing for the plurality in Borden v. United States , Justice Kagan referenced Scalia, writing "Indeed, the Court has made a similar point before, in an opinion by one of its great wordsmiths." [ 228 ] In a concurring opinion in Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo , Justice Neil Gorsuch praised Scalia for his willingness to reconsider his earlier views, writing that "rather than cling to the pride of personal precedent, the Justice began to express doubts over the very project that he had worked to build... If Chevron's ascent is a testament to the Justice's ingenuity, its demise is an even greater tribute to his humility" [ 229 ] Succession Merrick Garland with Barack Obama following the announcement that he is Obama's nominee to succeed Scalia (March 16, 2016) Main articles: Merrick Garland Supreme Court nomination and Neil Gorsuch Supreme Court nomination Scalia's death—only the second death of a serving justice in a span of sixty years [ 230 ] —left eight justices remaining on the Supreme Court, split 4–4 between fairly conservative and fairly liberal, during a presidential election year .

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] Cases that were pending before the Court at Scalia's death were decided by the remaining eight members.

[ 233 ] A 4–4 deadlock would result in the ruling of the lower court being upheld, but no precedent being set, and the justices would not publish written opinions on the merits of the case.

[ 233 ] [ 234 ] In a 2012 interview, Scalia had said he would prefer Judge Frank H. Easterbrook of the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals as his successor.

[ 235 ] On March 16, 2016, President Barack Obama , a Democrat, nominated Merrick Garland , Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit , to fill Scalia's seat, [ 236 ] but the Republican-controlled Senate declined to take any action on the nomination; the nomination expired with the end of the 114th Congress on January 3, 2017.

[ 237 ] On January 31, 2017, Republican President Donald Trump announced the nomination of Judge Neil Gorsuch of the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals to succeed Scalia.

[ 238 ] Gorsuch was confirmed by the Senate on April 7, 2017.

[ 239 ] Selected works Books Scalia, Antonin (1997), Gutmann, Amy (ed.), A Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law , Princeton N.J.: Princeton University Press , ISBN 0-691-00400-5 —; Garner, Bryan A.

(2008), Making Your Case: The Art of Persuading Judges , St. Paul: Thomson West, ISBN 978-0-314-18471-9 —; Garner, Bryan A.

(2012), Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts , St. Paul: Thomson West, ISBN 978-0-314-27555-4 —; Scalia, Christopher J.; Whelan, Edward (2017).

Scalia Speaks: Reflections on Law, Faith, and Life Well Lived .

Crown Publishing Group .

ISBN 9780525573326 .

Articles Scalia, Antonin (1983). "The Doctrine of Standing As an Essential Element of the Separation of Powers".

Suffolk University Law Review .

17 : 881– 99.

— (1988). "Originalism: The Lesser Evil".

University of Cincinnati Law Review .

57 : 849– 65.

— (1989).

"Judicial Deference to Administrative Interpretations of Law" .

Duke Law Journal .

38 (1): 511– 21.

doi : 10.2307/1372576 .

JSTOR 1372576 .

See also List of federal judges appointed by Ronald Reagan List of United States Supreme Court justices by time in office The Originalist by John Strand Nine Black Robes by Joan Biskupic Scalia/Ginsburg Footnotes ^ Pronounced / ˈ æ n t ən ɪ n s k ə ˈ l iː ə / ⓘ AN -tən-in skə- LEE -ə , Italian: [skaˈliːa] .

^ Journalistic sources were divided as to whether Scalia died on the night of February 12, 2016, or on the morning of February 13, 2016.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] ^ Senators Barry Goldwater and Jake Garn were not present for the confirmation.

^ Scalia was joined by Justices Thomas, Souter, Breyer, and Ginsburg.

References ^ a b Liptak, Adam (February 13, 2016), "Justice Antonin Scalia, Who Led a Conservative Renaissance on the Supreme Court, Is Dead at 79" , The New York Times , archived from the original on February 18, 2016 , retrieved February 13, 2016 ^ Hunt, Darren (February 13, 2016), Supreme Court Justice Scalia dies during hunting trip near Marfa , KVIA-TV , archived from the original on February 13, 2016 , retrieved February 13, 2016 ^ Smith, David (February 13, 2016), "Antonin Scalia obituary: conservative supreme court justice dies aged 79" , The Guardian , archived from the original on February 14, 2016 , retrieved February 14, 2016 ^ Whitely, Jason (February 14, 2016).

"Official: Scalia died of heart attack" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2016 . Retrieved February 14, 2016 .

^ Bobic, Igor (February 14, 2016).

"Antonin Scalia Died Of A Heart Attack: Report" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2016 . Retrieved February 14, 2016 .

^ a b c d Straub, Lana; Moravec, Eva Ruth; Horwitz, Sari; Markon, Jerry (February 14, 2016).

"The death of Antonin Scalia: Chaos, confusion and conflicting reports" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2016 . Retrieved February 14, 2016 .

^ a b Rosen, Jeffrey (February 15, 2016).

"What Made Antonin Scalia Great" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on July 13, 2019 . Retrieved July 24, 2019 .

^ a b c de Vogue, Ariane (October 6, 2016).

"Antonin Scalia law school dedicated in Virginia" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on May 31, 2020 . Retrieved October 7, 2016 .

^ a b c Molotski, Irwin (June 18, 1986).

"The Supreme Court: Man in the News; Judge with tenacity and charm: Antonin Scalia" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 11, 2014 . Retrieved January 12, 2010 .

^ a b Biskupic 2009 , pp. 11–15 ^ Talbot, Margaret (March 28, 2005), "Supreme confidence: The jurisprudence of Antonin Scalia" , The New Yorker , archived from the original on February 15, 2016 , retrieved February 15, 2016 ^ "Antonin Scalia Fast Facts" . CNN. March 8, 2013.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2016 . Retrieved February 14, 2016 .

^ Murphy 2014 , p. 10.

^ Barker, Kim (February 14, 2016).

"In Queens, Antonin Scalia Took Pride in Melting Pot and Confrontation" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2016 . Retrieved February 15, 2016 .

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 17–19.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 21.

^ Marcus, Ruth (June 22, 1986), "Scalia tenacious after staking out a position" , The Washington Post , archived from the original on September 9, 2013 , retrieved January 12, 2010 ^ "Two From Diocese Win 22 Honors at Xavier" .

The Tablet . July 4, 1953. p. 9 . Retrieved March 25, 2023 .

^ a b c d e f "Justice Scalia on the record" , CBS , August 24, 2008, archived from the original on January 4, 2010 , retrieved January 13, 2010 ^ Wendell, Bryan (February 16, 2016).

"Before he served on the Supreme Court, Antonin Scalia was a Boy Scout" .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2016 . Retrieved February 18, 2016 .

^ Staab 2006 , p. 3.

^ Murphy 2014 , pp. 22–27.

^ a b Dorsen 2017 , p. 7.

^ a b c "Scalia Speaks in Ames, Scolds Aggressive Student" , Harvard Law Record , December 7, 2006, archived from the original on April 10, 2010 , retrieved January 12, 2010 ^ a b c Fox, John, Biographies of the Robes: Antonin Gregory Scalia , PBS, archived from the original on September 6, 2017 , retrieved January 12, 2010 ^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 37–38.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 40.

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 49–53.

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 45–47.

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 63, 374.

^ Staab 2006 , pp. 13–14.

^ a b Shipp, E. R.

(July 26, 1986), "Scalia's Midwestern colleagues cite his love of debate, poker, and piano" , The New York Times , archived from the original on December 30, 2019 , retrieved January 13, 2010 ^ Staab 2006 , p. 19.

^ Fine, Sean (January 13, 2017).

"The untold story of how a young Antonin Scalia's 'gift to Canada' shaped our spy services" .

The Globe and Mail .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2020 . Retrieved January 13, 2017 .

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 73–74.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 80.

^ Taylor, Stuart (June 19, 1986), "Scalia's views, stylishly expressed, line up with Reagan's" , The New York Times , archived from the original on May 12, 2011 , retrieved January 13, 2010 ^ a b c Biskupic 2009 , pp. 104–09. Bork was nominated for the Supreme Court the following year, but his nomination was rejected by the Senate.

^ Toobin 2008 , p. 21.

^ Wallison, Peter (2004), "Of loyalty, leaks, and the White House staff", in Wallison, Peter (ed.), Ronald Reagan: the power of conviction and the success of his Presidency , Basic Books, p. 151, ISBN 9780813390475 .

^ Staab 2006 , p. 24.

^ Biskupic, Joan (December 22, 2008), "Timing and luck crucial for seat on high court" , USA Today , archived from the original on May 6, 2009 , retrieved February 9, 2010 ^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 100, 109–10.

^ Dorsen 2017 , p. 11.

^ "Scalia hearings muted" , The Milwaukee Journal , August 5, 1986 , retrieved August 9, 2016 [ permanent dead link ] ^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 109.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 121.

^ "Senate" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

132 (17) (Bound ed.).

U.S. Government Printing Office : 23813. September 17, 1986 . Retrieved July 8, 2025 .

^ Ring 2004 , pp. 44–45.

^ a b c Biskupic 2009 , pp. 136–38.

^ Staab 2006 , pp. 74–75.

^ Staab 2006 , p. 76.

^ Staab 2006 , pp. 78–79.

^ Staab 2006 , pp. 80–82.

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 328–29.

^ Rossum 2006 , pp. 84–85.

^ a b "Judge 'rejects Guantanamo rights' " , BBC News , March 27, 2006, archived from the original on August 19, 2010 , retrieved January 29, 2010 ^ "U.S. justices cast doubt on tribunal" , The New York Times , March 28, 2006, archived from the original on February 29, 2016 , retrieved January 27, 2010 ^ Greenhouse, Linda (June 30, 2006b), "The ruling on tribunals; the overview; Justices, 5–3, broadly reject Bush plan to try detainees" , The New York Times , archived from the original on May 5, 2011 , retrieved January 27, 2010 ^ Rossum 2006 , pp. 61–63.

^ Mazzone, Jason (December 13, 2010), " Virginia v. Sebelius : Judge Hudson & Justice Scalia" , Balkinization , archived from the original on January 7, 2011 , retrieved December 14, 2010 ^ Campos, Paul (June 24, 2012).

"Scalia's scary thinking" .

Salon .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2012 . Retrieved June 24, 2012 .

^ Dorf, Michael (May 20, 2015), Is the Dormant Commerce Clause a 'Judicial Fraud'?

, Justia, archived from the original on November 23, 2015 , retrieved November 23, 2015 ^ Friedman, Richard D. (June 1991).

"Putting the Dormancy Doctrine out of its misery" .

Cardozo Law Review .

12 (6).

Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law : 1745– 61.

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved November 8, 2021 .

Pdf via University of Michigan Law School Scholarship Repository.

Archived March 8, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ Scalia, Antonin, Comptroller of the Treasury of Maryland, petitioner v. Brian Wynne et ux.

(PDF) , p. 33, archived (PDF) from the original on June 15, 2017 , retrieved June 27, 2017 , The fundamental problem with our negative Commerce Clause cases is that the Constitution does not contain a negative Commerce Clause... The clearest sign that the negative Commerce Clause is a judicial fraud is the utterly illogical holding that congressional consent enables States to enact laws that would otherwise constitute impermissible burdens upon interstate commerce.

^ Rossum 2006 , pp. 110–12.

^ Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 979 (Scalia, J., dissenting) , United States Supreme Court, June 29, 1992, archived from the original on January 7, 2010 , retrieved January 13, 2010 – via FindLaw ^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 193–95.

^ Ring 2004 , p. 108.

^ Ring 2004 , p. 109.

^ Ring 2004 , pp. 137–38.

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 202–03.

^ Stone, Geoffrey (April 20, 2007), "Our Faith-Based Justices" , The Huffington Post , archived from the original on November 5, 2017 , retrieved February 18, 2020 ^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 203–04.

^ Ring 2004 , pp. 87–88.

^ Ring 2004 , pp. 56–57.

^ Rossum 2006 , pp. 159–60.

^ Ring 2004 , p. 194.

^ Ring 2004 , p. 195.

^ "Bowers v. Hardwick" . Law.cornell.edu.

Archived from the original on November 4, 2013 . Retrieved September 25, 2016 .

^ Ring 2004 , pp. 279–80.

^ Tushnet 2005 , pp. 167–69.

^ Ring 2004 , pp. 280–81.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 283. There is no such clause in the Bill of Rights.

^ Tushnet 2005 , pp. 170–72.

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 225–27.

^ " "Rep. Frank calls Scalia a 'homophobe' in interview" " , ABC News , Associated Press, March 23, 2009, archived from the original on March 27, 2009 , retrieved February 18, 2010 ^ Dowd, Maureen (June 29, 2003), "Nino's Opéra Bouffe" , The New York Times , archived from the original on September 25, 2010 , retrieved February 18, 2010 ^ "Justice Scalia's Majoritarian Theocracy" , The New York Times , December 2, 2015, archived from the original on February 16, 2017 , retrieved February 5, 2017 ^ "Puerile Posner" .

National Review . December 3, 2015.

Archived from the original on August 8, 2020 . Retrieved January 29, 2020 .

^ "Posner's Unjustified Attack on Scalia" .

Law & Liberty . December 3, 2015.

Archived from the original on January 29, 2020 . Retrieved January 29, 2020 .

^ Segall, Eric (December 7, 2015).

"More on Justice Scalia: A Reply to Two Critics" .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2020 . Retrieved January 29, 2020 .

^ "Feeble Posner/Segall Response" .

National Review . December 7, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 12, 2021 . Retrieved January 29, 2020 .

^ Supreme Court of the United States (June 26, 2013).

"Hollingsworth v. Perry, 570 U.S. ___" (PDF) .

Supreme Court of the United States .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 5, 2019 . Retrieved January 12, 2019 .

^ a b United States v. Windsor , No.

12-307 , 570 U.S.

___ (June 26, 2013). Retrieved June 26, 2013.

^ Windsor , No.

12-307 , 570 U.S.

___ (2013)  (Scalia, J., dissenting slip op.).

^ Tim Grieve (June 26, 2013).

"Scalia: 'High-Handed' Kennedy Has Declared Us 'Enemies of the Human Race' " .

National Journal .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2015 . Retrieved June 26, 2013 .

^ Tim Grieve (June 26, 2013).

"Scalia's Blistering Dissent on DOMA" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2013 . Retrieved June 26, 2013 .

^ Gerstein, Josh (June 26, 2013).

"The DOMA decision ripple effect" . Politico.com.

Archived from the original on June 30, 2013 . Retrieved July 2, 2013 .

^ Obergefell v. Hodges , No. 14-556, slip op.

Archived October 2, 2019, at the Wayback Machine at 2 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (Scalia, J., dissenting).

^ a b Obergefell , slip op.

Archived October 2, 2019, at the Wayback Machine at 4 (Scalia, J., dissenting).

^ Obergefell , slip op.

Archived October 2, 2019, at the Wayback Machine at 9, 8 n.22 (Scalia, J., dissenting).

^ Ring 2004 , p. 144.

^ Brisbin, Richard (1998).

Justice Antonin Scalia and the Conservative Revival . JHU Press. p. 488.

ISBN 9780801860942 .

^ Rossum 2006 , pp. 192–93.

^ Ring 2004 , p. 148.

^ Toobin 2008 , p. 146.

^ Rossum 2006 , pp. 182–84.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 354.

^ a b Rossum 2006 , pp. 184–86.

^ Kyllo v. United States , 533 U.S. 27 , United States Supreme Court, June 11, 2001, archived from the original on July 18, 2011 , retrieved January 24, 2010 – via FindLaw ^ Rossum 2006 , p. 175.

^ Tushnet 2005 , pp. 140–42.

^ Rossum 2006 , p. 2.

^ a b c Biskupic 2009 , pp. 135–36.

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 347–51.

^ Posner, Richard (August 27, 2008), "In defense of looseness" , The New Republic , archived from the original on November 15, 2015 , retrieved February 13, 2014 ^ McArdle, Elaine (October 3, 2008), In inaugural Vaughan Lecture, Scalia defends the "methodology of originalism" , Harvard Law School, archived from the original on January 29, 2010 , retrieved January 14, 2010 ^ "How Scalia Kept the Little Guys Out of Court" .

Bloomberg.com . February 16, 2016.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved January 30, 2017 – via www.bloomberg.com.

^ Paul Barrett, "Justice for the Big Guys," Bloomberg News Weekly , February 15, 2016, p. 13.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 243.

^ "Justice Scalia on the record" , CBS News , September 14, 2007, archived from the original on February 5, 2010 , retrieved January 31, 2010 ^ "A Conversation with Justice Antonin Scalia" , Charlie Rose , June 20, 2008, archived from the original (video) on July 5, 2009 , retrieved January 31, 2010 ^ a b c Biskupic 2009 , pp. 304–05.

^ Liptak, Adam (December 31, 2005), "So, guy walks up to a bar and Scalia says ..." , The New York Times , archived from the original on October 13, 2010 , retrieved January 30, 2010 ^ a b Biskupic 2009 , pp. 307–08.

^ Lithwick, Dahlia (January 15, 2003), "Scalia hogs the ball" , Slate , archived from the original on June 5, 2011 , retrieved September 8, 2011 ^ a b c Staab 2006 , p. 27.

^ Ring 2004 , p. xi.

^ Clarke, Conor (July 5, 2006), "How Scalia lost his mojo" , Slate , archived from the original on February 14, 2009 , retrieved January 30, 2010 ^ Tushnet 2005 , pp. 64–65.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 132.

^ Ward, Artemus (February 2007).

"Book review: The Political Thought of Justice Antonin Scalia: A Hamiltonian of the Supreme Court by James B. Stabb" .

Law & Politics Book Review .

17 (2).

American Political Science Association : 96– 100.

Archived from the original on February 23, 2016 . Retrieved February 14, 2016 .

^ a b Senior, Jennifer (October 14, 2013), "In conversation: Antonin Scalia" , New York , p. 26, archived from the original on February 20, 2020 , retrieved February 18, 2020 ^ Rossum, Ralph, The textualist jurisprudence of Justice Scalia , Claremont McKenna College, archived from the original on January 25, 2010 , retrieved January 14, 2010 ^ Greenhouse, Linda (June 6, 2006a), "Court to weigh race as factor in school rolls" , The New York Times , archived from the original on December 6, 2011 , retrieved January 13, 2010 ^ a b Rossum 2006 , p. 44.

^ Thompson v. Oklahoma , 487 U.S. 815, 865 (Scalia, J., dissenting) , United States Supreme Court, June 29, 1988, archived from the original on May 15, 2011 , retrieved January 13, 2010 – via FindLaw ^ Greenhouse, Linda (May 31, 1990), "Washington talk: High Court still groping to define due process" , The New York Times , archived from the original on May 25, 2015 , retrieved February 12, 2010 ^ Talbot, Margaret (March 28, 2005), "Supreme confidence: The jurisprudence of Antonin Scalia" , The New Yorker , archived from the original on September 1, 2014 , retrieved February 12, 2010 ^ Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts Archived April 7, 2019, at the Wayback Machine pp. 87–88 ^ Liptak, Adam (November 9, 2009), "Sidebar: From 19th Century view, desegregation is a test" , The New York Times , archived from the original on October 5, 2013 , retrieved February 12, 2010 ^ Nader, Ralph; Weissman, Robert (November 13, 2008), Letter to the Editor: Ralph Nader on Scalia's "originalism" , Harvard Law Record, archived from the original on April 30, 2014 , retrieved April 29, 2014 ^ Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (Scalia, J., concurring) , United States Supreme Court, January 21, 2010, archived from the original on January 27, 2010 , retrieved January 27, 2010 – via FindLaw ^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 208.

^ Rossum 2006 , p. 198.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 275.

^ Alana Abramson. "President Trump Names New Supreme Court Justice".

Time . July 10, 2018.

[1] .

^ Brian Bennett. "Trump's Justice".

Time .  July 23, 2018, p. 22.

[2] .

^ Greenhouse, Linda (October 14, 2003), "Justices take case on Pledge of Allegiance's reference to God" , The New York Times , archived from the original on February 5, 2012 , retrieved January 29, 2010 ^ Janofsky, Michael (March 19, 2004), "Scalia refuses to take himself off Cheney case" , The New York Times , archived from the original on November 9, 2012 , retrieved January 29, 2010 ^ Greenhouse, Linda (June 25, 2004), "Justices' ruling postpones resolution of Cheney case" , The New York Times , archived from the original on December 21, 2019 , retrieved January 29, 2010 ^ "Scalia Defends Involvement in Cheney Case" .

The Washington Post . AP. April 13, 2006.

Archived from the original on November 13, 2016 . Retrieved August 24, 2017 .

^ Senior, Jennifer (October 6, 2013).

"In Conversation: Antonin Scalia" .

NYMag.com .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2019 . Retrieved February 18, 2020 .

^ a b Sinnot-Armstrong, Walter (2002).

"Recusal and Bush v. Gore" (PDF) .

Law and Philosophy .

21 (2). Kluwer Academic Publishers: 221.

ISSN 1573-0522 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved July 14, 2019 .

^ Sinnot-Armstrong, Walter (2002).

"Recusal and Bush v. Gore" (PDF) .

Law and Philosophy .

21 (2). Kluwer Academic Publishers: 201, 238.

ISSN 1573-0522 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved July 14, 2019 .

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 185.

^ Collins, Katie (October 27, 2010).

"Parish Profile: Great Falls St. Catherine of Siena" .

Arlington Catholic Herald .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2016 . Retrieved January 5, 2016 .

^ Havill, Adrian (November 18, 2002).

"Mondays are for dead drops" .

The Spy Who Stayed Out in the Cold: The Secret Life of FBI Double Agent Robert Hanssen . Macmillan. p. 120.

ISBN 9780312986292 .

Archived from the original on April 27, 2016 . Retrieved January 5, 2016 – via Google Books.

^ Slevin, Jeremy (September 11, 2013).

"Elizabeth Warren slams "pro-corporate" Supremes" .

NOW with Alex Wagner . MSNBC.

Archived from the original on April 16, 2014 . Retrieved November 18, 2013 .

^ Brand, Madeline (March 30, 2006).

"Justice Scalia's under-the-chin gesture" . Roger Axtell (guest). NPR.

Archived from the original on October 21, 2013 . Retrieved November 18, 2013 .

^ Patterson, Tray (May 2, 2006).

"Dinner Theater: Why Stephen Colbert didn't bomb in D.C." Slate . Archived from the original on October 23, 2010.

^ "Stephen's Tribute To Antonin Scalia" .

The Late Show with Stephen Colbert . February 15, 2016. CBS.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2016 . Retrieved May 8, 2016 .

^ Boehner, John.

"The Time I Tried To Persuade Antonin Scalia To Run For Vice President" .

Independent Journal . Archived from the original on February 18, 2016 . Retrieved February 16, 2016 .

^ Driscoll, Sean F. (February 14, 2016).

"Scalia wed on Cape in 1960" . The Cape Cod Times.

Archived from the original on February 16, 2016 . Retrieved February 15, 2016 .

^ Biskupic 2009 , pp. 30–31.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 361.

^ a b Melissa Chan (February 16, 2016).

"Antonin Scalia: Growing Up With The Supreme Court Justice" .

Time .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2016 . Retrieved February 19, 2016 .

^ "Senate confirms Eugene Scalia as labor secretary, succeeding Alex Acosta who resigned in July amid outcry over Epstein plea deal" .

The Washington Post . September 26, 2019.

Archived from the original on September 26, 2019 . Retrieved September 26, 2019 .

^ "Senate Confirms Eugene Scalia as Labor Secretary" .

The Wall Street Journal . September 26, 2019.

Archived from the original on September 26, 2019 . Retrieved September 26, 2019 .

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 211.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 88.

^ Axelrod, David (February 14, 2016).

"David Axelrod: A surprise request from Justice Scalia" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 17, 2020 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ Schwartz, Allan B. (March 8, 2019).

"Medical mystery: Could Supreme Court justice's death have been prevented?" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2021 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ Eaton, Elizabeth S (August 31, 2016).

"Justice Elena Kagan talks about her warm relationship with her late colleague Antonin Scalia" .

AZCentral .

Franke-Ruta, Garance (June 30, 2013).

"Justice Kagan and Justice Scalia Are Hunting Buddies – Really" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2018 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ Sherman, Mark (February 13, 2016).

"Justice Antonin Scalia dead at 79" .

Associated Press . Retrieved September 8, 2024 .

A gray hearse was seen at the entrance to the Cibolo Creek Ranch, near Shafter ^ Abramson, Ben; Bacon, John (February 14, 2016).

"Cibolo Creek Ranch: Wildlife, movie sets, luxury" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2016 . Retrieved February 14, 2016 .

^ Berman, Mark; Markon, Jerry (February 17, 2016), "Why Justice Scalia was staying for free at a Texas resort" , The Washington Post , archived from the original on June 24, 2017 , retrieved September 20, 2019 ^ "Presidio County Sheriff's Office Report on Justice Antonin Scalia's death" .

The Washington Post . February 23, 2016.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2020 . Retrieved September 20, 2019 .

^ "Texas judge disclosed details about Scalia's health" .

The Big Story . February 15, 2016.

Archived from the original on September 20, 2019 . Retrieved September 20, 2019 .

^ Michael, Tom (February 14, 2016).

"The Trials Of Pronouncing Antonin Scalia Dead In West Texas" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2019 . Retrieved September 20, 2019 .

^ Hananel, Sam; Warren, David (February 15, 2016).

"Texas Judge Disclosed Details About Scalia's Health" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2019 . Retrieved September 20, 2019 .

^ Warren, Brian (February 23, 2016).

"Scalia suffered from many health problems" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2019 . Retrieved September 20, 2019 .

^ Hennessy-Fiske, Molly (February 14, 2016).

"Scalia's last moments on a Texas ranch – quail hunting to being found in 'perfect repose' " .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2016 . Retrieved September 20, 2019 .

^ Walsh, Mark (February 22, 2016).

"A "view" from the Courtroom: The Justices return to a black and gray bench" .

SCOTUSblog . Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved March 27, 2022 .

^ Chappell, Bill (February 19, 2016).

"Antonin Scalia Lies In Repose As Mourners Pay Respects At Supreme Court" .

National Public Radio .

Archived from the original on October 5, 2020 . Retrieved September 25, 2020 .

^ a b Phelps, Jordyn (February 20, 2016).

"Thousands Attend Funeral Mass for Late Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2016 . Retrieved May 24, 2016 .

^ Hurley, Lawrence (February 20, 2016).

"Obama, justices pay respects to Scalia" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on May 5, 2019 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 – via www.reuters.com.

^ Dickinson, Tim (December 21, 2024).

"New Senate Report Decries Conflicts and Corruption at Supreme Court" .

Rolling Stone .

^ a b Krieg, Gregory (February 16, 2016).

"Skipping Scalia autopsy spawns conspiracy theories | CNN Politics" .

CNN .

^ Hackman, Michelle (February 15, 2016).

"Why nutty conspiracy theories on Antonin Scalia's death are already surfacing" .

Vox . Retrieved April 12, 2022 .

^ "Justice Antonin Scalia's Death Attracts Conspiracy Theorists" .

Time . Retrieved April 12, 2022 .

^ "Conspiracy theories swirl around the death of Antonin Scalia" .

Washington Post . Retrieved April 12, 2022 .

^ Garrett, R. Kelly (February 22, 2016).

"Making sense of the Scalia conspiracy theory" .

The Conversation . Retrieved April 12, 2022 .

^ Shutt, Jennifer (February 17, 2016).

"Scalia's son rejects conspiracy theories about father's death" .

POLITICO . Retrieved April 12, 2022 .

^ Goldberg, J.J. (October 23, 2009), "Antonin Scalia's uncivil religion" , The Jewish Daily Forward , archived from the original on October 21, 2009 , retrieved February 12, 2010 ^ "Book Page – Tabbed" .

Penguin Random House Secondary Education .

Archived from the original on October 8, 2020 . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ a b Biskupic 2009 , p. 276.

^ a b Biskupic 2009 , p. 362.

^ Biskupic 2009 , p. 363.

^ "Reading Law: Justice Scalia's Other Legacy | The American Spectator | Politics Is Too Important To Be Taken Seriously" .

The American Spectator . July 14, 2019.

Archived from the original on July 16, 2019 . Retrieved July 16, 2019 .

^ a b Peter H. Schwartz (December 29, 2022).

"Peter H. Schwartz: Antonin Scalia and the uncertain future of legal conservatism" . Archived from the original on June 12, 2024 . Retrieved June 12, 2024 .

^ "Kagan: 'We Are All Originalists' " . Kagan: 'We Are All Originalists' - The BLT: The Blog of Legal Times. June 29, 2010. Archived from the original on June 12, 2024 . Retrieved June 12, 2024 .

^ "Clip Of Kagan Confirmation Hearing, Day 2, Part 1 - User Clip: We are all originalists" . C-SPAN. September 26, 2020. Archived from the original on June 12, 2024 . Retrieved June 12, 2024 .

^ "The 2015 Scalia Lecture: A Dialogue with Justice Elena Kagan on the Reading of Statutes. For Kagan's remark "we are all textualists now." see at around 8 minutes and 22 seconds" .

Youtube . Harvard Law School. November 25, 2015. Archived from the original on March 27, 2024 . Retrieved June 12, 2024 .

^ "Stephen E. Sachs" .

Duke University School of Law . January 2021 . Retrieved August 11, 2023 .

^ Rubenstein, David (July 17, 2020).

"Justice Ginsburg Explains the 'Scalia/Ginsburg' Opera" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on November 3, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2020 .

^ Edgers, Geoff (July 8, 2015).

"From 'rage aria' to 'lovely duet,' opera does justice to court, Ginsburg says" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on November 4, 2020 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

^ Apel, Susan B. (October 2, 2018).

"Opera Preview: 'Scalia/Ginsburg'—Mining (and Minding) the Political Gap" .

The Arts Fuse .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2020 . Retrieved April 1, 2019 .

^ "Scalia V. Ginsburg: Supreme Court Sparring, Put To Music" .

NPR.org .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2020 .

^ Heil, Emily.

" 'Scalia/Ginsburg' opera draws VIPs of the legal world" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 23, 2015 . Retrieved November 1, 2020 .

^ Gallagher, Nicholas M. (August 6, 2015).

"Opera Dicta" .

The American Interest .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2020 .

^ "Composing the Law: An Interview with Derrick Wang, Creator of the Scalia/Ginsburg Opera" .

www.americanbar.org .

Archived from the original on October 29, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2020 .

^ "OD Radio broadcasts | Trial by Jury & Scalia/Ginsburg" .

OperaDelaware .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2020 .

^ Dobrin, Peter (September 22, 2020).

"Philadelphia's opera community pours its love for Ruth Bader Ginsburg" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer .

Archived from the original on October 17, 2020 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

^ Scalia, Antonin; Ginsburg, Ruth Bader (2015).

"Prefaces to Scalia/Ginsburg: A (Gentle) Parody of Operatic Proportions" .

The Columbia Journal of Law & the Arts .

38 (2): 237.

doi : 10.7916/jla.v38i2.2118 .

ISSN 2161-9271 .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2020 .

^ "Read Justice Ginsburg's Touching Tribute to Scalia: 'We Were Best Buddies' " .

NBC News . February 14, 2016.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2020 .

^ Scalia, Antonin (2017).

Scalia Speaks: Reflections on Law, Faith, and Life Well Lived . Scalia, Christopher J.; Whelan, Edward (1st ed.). New York: Crown Publishing Group. pp.

x– xi.

ISBN 978-0-525-57332-6 .

OCLC 993996596 .

^ Liptak, Adam (March 11, 2015).

" 'The Originalist,' a New Play About Justice Antonin Scalia by John Strand" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on July 4, 2017.

^ McPhee, Ryan (March 6, 2017).

"Arena Stage's The Originalist Will Air on PBS' Theater Close-Up" .

Playbill .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2017.

^ "Antonin Scalia Stage Drama the Originalist Now Available to Stream | Playbill" . Archived from the original on November 13, 2022.

^ a b c "Tributes Pour in for Justice Scalia From Both Sides of Aisle" .

NBC News . February 14, 2016.

Archived from the original on November 28, 2020 . Retrieved May 23, 2019 .

^ Svrluga, Susan (March 31, 2016).

"George Mason law school to be renamed the Antonin Scalia School of Law" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on September 10, 2016 . Retrieved April 1, 2016 .

^ Svrluga, Susan (May 17, 2016).

"It's official: George Mason's law school is named in honor of Antonin Scalia" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on May 19, 2016 . Retrieved October 7, 2016 .

^ "Premio America – Edizione 2016" . Italy-USA Foundation. October 6, 2016.

Archived from the original on October 10, 2016 . Retrieved October 9, 2016 .

^ Stracqualursi, Veronica (November 10, 2018).

"Trump to award Medal of Freedom to Elvis, Babe Ruth, among others" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2018 . Retrieved November 11, 2018 .

^ " 'Very busy': Trump jests about Scalia widow at Medal of Freedom event for having 9 kids" .

NBC News . November 16, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 4, 2019 . Retrieved January 3, 2019 .

^ https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/20pdf/19-5410_8nj9.pdf Archived June 10, 2021, at the Wayback Machine Page 10 ^ https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/23pdf/22-451_7m58.pdf Page 76 ^ Gresko, Jessica (February 14, 2016).

"Scalia's death in office a rarity for modern Supreme Court" .

Associated Press . Archived from the original on February 16, 2016 . Retrieved February 15, 2016 .

^ "Scalia's death shifts balance of high court, creates major election issue" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2016 . Retrieved February 14, 2016 .

^ Chon, Gina (February 14, 2016), "Antonin Scalia's death challenges U.S. leadership." , Reuters , archived from the original on February 15, 2016 , retrieved February 14, 2016 ^ a b Goldstein, Tom (February 13, 2016).

"What happens to this Term's close cases? (Updated)" .

SCOTUSblog .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2016 . Retrieved February 18, 2016 .

^ Farias, Cristian (February 14, 2016).

"Justice Scalia Left Undecided High-Stakes Cases That Could Change The Nation" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2016 . Retrieved February 18, 2016 .

^ "Scalia Once Suggested a Name for His Successor" .

C-SPAN . Archived from the original on February 24, 2016 . Retrieved February 19, 2016 .

^ Shear, Michael D.; Harris, Gardiner (March 16, 2016).

"Obama Chooses Merrick Garland for Supreme Court" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 16, 2016 . Retrieved March 16, 2016 .

^ Bravin, Jess (January 3, 2017).

"President Obama's Supreme Court Nomination of Merrick Garland expires" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on March 10, 2017 . Retrieved January 3, 2017 .

^ Hirschfeld Davis, Julie; Landler, Mark (January 31, 2017).

"Trump Nominates Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2017 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ Liptak, Adam; Flegenheimer, Matt (April 7, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch Confirmed by Senate as Supreme Court Justice" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2019 . Retrieved April 8, 2017 .

Scholarly sources External videos After Words interview with Biskupic on American Original , December 12, 2009 , C-SPAN Biskupic, Joan (2009).

American original: the life and constitution of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia . New York: Sarah Crichton Books/Farrar, Straus And Giroux.

ISBN 9780374202897 .

Dorsen, David M. (February 6, 2017).

The Unexpected Scalia: A Conservative Justice's Liberal Opinions .

Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/9781316875407 .

ISBN 978-1107184107 .

Murphy, Bruce Allen (2014).

Scalia: a court of one . New York: Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 9780743296496 .

Nemacheck, Christine L. (May 21, 2008).

Strategic Selection: Presidential Nomination of Supreme Court Justices from Herbert Hoover through George W. Bush . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press . pp.

120– 121.

ISBN 978-0813927435 . Retrieved February 21, 2016 .

Scalia, Antonin (2004). Ring, Kevin (ed.).

Scalia dissents: writings of the Supreme Court's wittiest, most outspoken justice . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing, Inc.

ISBN 9780895260536 .

Rossum, Ralph A. (2006).

Antonin Scalia's jurisprudence: text and tradition . Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas .

ISBN 9780700614479 .

Staab, James (2006).

The political thought of Justice Antonin Scalia: a Hamiltonian on the Supreme Court . Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 9780742543119 .

Toobin, Jeffrey (2008).

The nine: inside the secret world of the Supreme Court (revised ed.). New York: Anchor Books .

ISBN 9781400096794 .

Toobin, Jeffrey (2012), "Lawyers, guns, and money", in Toobin, Jeffrey (ed.), The Oath: the Obama White House and the Supreme Court (Hardcover ed.), New York: Doubleday , pp.

111–112 , ISBN 9780385527200 .

Details.

Archived February 22, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Tushnet, Mark (2005).

A Court divided: the Rehnquist court and the future of constitutional law (revised ed.). New York: W.W. Norton Co.

ISBN 9780393058680 .

External links Antonin Scalia at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Antonin Scalia at Ballotpedia Antonin Scalia at the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges , a publication of the Federal Judicial Center .

Issue positions and quotes at OnTheIssues Appearances on C-SPAN Supreme Court Associate Justice Nomination Hearings on Antonin Gregory Scalia in August 1986 United States Government Publishing Office Legal offices Preceded by Roger C. Cramton Chairman of the Administrative Conference of the United States 1972–1974 Succeeded by Robert Anthony Preceded by Roger C. Cramton United States Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel 1974–1977 Succeeded by John Harmon Preceded by Roger Robb Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit 1982–1986 Succeeded by David Sentelle Preceded by William Rehnquist Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States 1986–2016 Succeeded by Neil Gorsuch v t e Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States Chief justices John Jay ( 1789–1795 , cases ) John Rutledge ( 1795 , cases ) Oliver Ellsworth ( 1796–1800 , cases ) John Marshall ( 1801–1835 , cases ) Roger B. Taney ( 1836–1864 , cases ) Salmon P. Chase ( 1864–1873 , cases ) Morrison Waite ( 1874–1888 , cases ) Melville Fuller ( 1888–1910 , cases ) Edward Douglass White ( 1910–1921 , cases ) William Howard Taft ( 1921–1930 , cases ) Charles Evans Hughes ( 1930–1941 , cases ) Harlan F. Stone ( 1941–1946 , cases ) Fred M. Vinson ( 1946–1953 , cases ) Earl Warren ( 1953–1969 , cases ) Warren E. Burger ( 1969–1986 , cases ) William Rehnquist ( 1986–2005 , cases ) John Roberts ( 2005–present , cases ) Associate justices J. Rutledge * (1790–1791) Cushing (1790–1810) Wilson (1789–1798) Blair (1790–1795) Iredell (1790–1799) T. Johnson (1792–1793) Paterson (1793–1806) S. Chase (1796–1811) Washington (1798–1829) Moore (1800–1804) W. Johnson (1804–1834) Livingston (1807–1823) Todd (1807–1826) Duvall (1811–1835) Story (1812–1845) Thompson (1823–1843) Trimble (1826–1828) McLean (1829–1861) Baldwin (1830–1844) Wayne (1835–1867) Barbour (1836–1841) Catron (1837–1865) McKinley (1838–1852) Daniel (1842–1860) Nelson (1845–1872) Woodbury (1845–1851) Grier (1846–1870) Curtis (1851–1857) Campbell (1853–1861) Clifford (1858–1881) Swayne (1862–1881) Miller (1862–1890) Davis (1862–1877) Field (1863–1897) Strong (1870–1880) Bradley (1870–1892) Hunt (1873–1882) J. M. Harlan (1877–1911) Woods (1881–1887) Matthews (1881–1889) Gray (1882–1902) Blatchford (1882–1893) L. Lamar (1888–1893) Brewer (1890–1910) Brown (1891–1906) Shiras (1892–1903) H. Jackson (1893–1895) E. White * (1894–1910) Peckham (1896–1909) McKenna (1898–1925) Holmes (1902–1932) Day (1903–1922) Moody (1906–1910) Lurton (1910–1914) Hughes * (1910–1916) Van Devanter (1911–1937) J. Lamar (1911–1916) Pitney (1912–1922) McReynolds (1914–1941) Brandeis (1916–1939) Clarke (1916–1922) Sutherland (1922–1938) Butler (1923–1939) Sanford (1923–1930) Stone * (1925–1941) O. Roberts (1930–1945) Cardozo (1932–1938) Black (1937–1971) Reed (1938–1957) Frankfurter (1939–1962) Douglas (1939–1975) Murphy (1940–1949) Byrnes (1941–1942) R. Jackson (1941–1954) W. Rutledge (1943–1949) Burton (1945–1958) Clark (1949–1967) Minton (1949–1956) J. M. Harlan II (1955–1971) Brennan (1956–1990) Whittaker (1957–1962) Stewart (1958–1981) B. White (1962–1993) Goldberg (1962–1965) Fortas (1965–1969) T. Marshall (1967–1991) Blackmun (1970–1994) Powell (1972–1987) Rehnquist * (1972–1986) Stevens (1975–2010) O'Connor (1981–2006) Scalia (1986–2016) Kennedy (1988–2018) Souter (1990–2009) Thomas (1991–present) Ginsburg (1993–2020) Breyer (1994–2022) Alito (2006–present) Sotomayor (2009–present) Kagan (2010–present) Gorsuch (2017–present) Kavanaugh (2018–present) Barrett (2020–present) K. Jackson (2022–present) * Also served as chief justice of the United States v t e Judicial opinions of Antonin Scalia U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit (August 17, 1982 – September 26, 1986); by calendar year 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 Supreme Court of the United States (September 26, 1986 – February 13, 2016); by term 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 v t e Individuals lain in state , in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay (1852) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) Stevens (1868) Sumner (1874) Wilson (1875) Garfield (1881) Logan (1886) McKinley (1901) L'Enfant (1909) Dewey (1917) Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921) Harding (1923) W. H. Taft (1930) Pershing (1948) R. A. Taft (1953) Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) MacArthur (1964) H. Hoover (1964) Eisenhower (1969) Dirksen (1969) J. E. Hoover (1972) Johnson (1973) Humphrey (1978) Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984) Pepper (1989) Reagan (2004, funeral ) Ford (2006–07, funeral ) Inouye (2012) McCain (2018) Bush (2018, funeral ) Lewis (2020) Dole (2021) Reid (2022) Carter (2024–25, funeral ) National Statuary Hall Cummings (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) Young (2022) House Chamber Hooper (1875) Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown (1996) Old Senate Chamber Chase (1873) Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson (1998) Parks (2005) Graham (2018) Sicknick (2021) Evans (2021) Williams (2022) Lain in repose East Room Harrison (1841) Taylor (1850) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) McKinley (1901) Harding (1923) Roosevelt (1945) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren (1974) Marshall (1993) Burger (1995) Brennan (1997) Blackmun (1999) Rehnquist (2005) Scalia (2016) Stevens (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) O'Connor (2023) Senate Chamber Byrd (2010) Lautenberg (2013) Bold : Presidents and chief justices Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antonin_Scalia&oldid=1305469587 " Categories : 1936 births 2016 deaths 20th-century Roman Catholics 21st-century American judges 21st-century Roman Catholics American people of Italian descent American legal scholars American traditionalist Catholics Catholics from New Jersey Catholics from New York (state) Catholics from Virginia Georgetown University alumni Georgetown University College of Arts & Sciences alumni Georgetown University Law Center faculty Harvard Law School alumni Jones Day people Judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States Ohio lawyers People from Elmhurst, Queens People from McLean, Virginia People from Trenton, New Jersey People of Sicilian descent Philodemic Society members Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Stanford University faculty Tulane University Law School faculty United States assistant attorneys general for the Office of Legal Counsel United States court of appeals judges appointed by Ronald Reagan United States federal judges appointed by Ronald Reagan University of Chicago faculty University of Chicago Law School faculty University of Fribourg alumni University of Virginia School of Law faculty Xavier High School (New York City) alumni Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages including recorded pronunciations Pages with Italian IPA All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Featured articles Use American English from March 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2024 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata FJC Bio template with ID same as Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges People appearing on C-SPAN Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 07:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antonin Scalia 42 languages Add topic

