Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Institutional accreditation Toggle Institutional accreditation subsection 1.1 Regional and national accreditation 1.2 Recognized institutional accreditors 1.3 Formerly recognized accreditors 2 Programmatic accreditation Toggle Programmatic accreditation subsection 2.1 Other recognized accreditors 3 Religious accreditors 4 Use of .edu top-level Internet domain 5 Criticism 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Higher education accreditation in the United States 2 languages Hrvatski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia University accreditation in the U.S., a peer-review process This article is part of a series on Education in the United States Summary By state and in insular areas By subject area History California Chicago Kentucky Massachusetts Dedham Missouri New York City Southern United States Texas Curriculum topics Literacy Normal schools Apprenticeship degrees Art education Civic education Music education Legal education Law school Medical education Medical school Nursing degrees Environmental education Language education Mathematics education Sex education Vocational education Education policy issues Accreditation Primary and secondary Post-secondary Financing Educational attainment Post-secondary issues Bubble Cost and financing Credentialism Elite overproduction Graduate unemployment Student financial aid Student loans Public school funding Reform Charter schools Inequality Achievement gaps Racial achievement gap Desegregation busing Gender achievement gap Head Start School choice Racial diversity School segregation Standards-based reform School corporal punishment School meals School violence Sexual harassment Qatari involvement Special education Apprenticeship School-to-work transition Community colleges For-profit higher education For-profit colleges Research universities Community school Full-service community schools Levels of education Early childhood K–12 Primary Secondary Post-secondary Organizations Education portal United States portal v t e Higher education accreditation in the United States is a peer review process by which the validity of degrees and credits awarded by higher education institutions is assured . It is coordinated by accreditation commissions made up of member institutions. It was first undertaken in the late 19th century by cooperating educational institutions, on a regional basis.

The federal government began to play a limited role in higher education accreditation in 1952 with reauthorization of the G.I. Bill for veterans of the Korean War . The original GI Bill legislation had stimulated establishment of new colleges and universities to accommodate the influx of new students, but some of these new institutions were of dubious quality. The 1952 legislation designated the existing peer review process as the basis for measuring institutional quality; GI Bill eligibility was limited to students enrolled at accredited institutions included on a list of federally recognized accredited institutions published by the U.S. Commissioner of Education .

[ 1 ] The U.S. Department of Education and the Council for Higher Education Accreditation (CHEA) (a non-governmental organization ) both recognize reputable accrediting bodies for institutions of higher education and provide guidelines as well as resources and relevant data regarding these accreditors. Neither the U.S. Department of Education nor CHEA accredit individual institutions.

[ 2 ] With the creation of the U.S. Department of Education and under the terms of the Higher Education Act of 1965 , as amended, the U.S. secretary of education is required by law to publish a list of nationally recognized accrediting agencies that the secretary has determined to be reliable authorities on the quality of education or training provided by the institutions of higher education and the higher education programs they accredit.

[ 3 ] Professional schools, which are often graduate schools, have separate organizations for accreditation, e.g. American Board of Higher Education (ABHEC).

Institutional accreditation [ edit ] Institutional accreditation applies to the entire institution, specific programs, and distance education within an institution.

[ 4 ] Regional and national accreditation [ edit ] Prior to 2020, there were regional and national accrediting agencies, both of which were accountable to the Department of Education . Regional bodies historically accredited institutions in a particular region of the country. National bodies were established to accredit institutions across the country, and sometimes beyond it. Within American higher education, regional bodies were considered more prestigious. (The regional bodies were older, and included the most well established institutions.) [ 5 ] In February 2020, the Department of Education eliminated the distinction between regional and national accrediting agencies, creating one unified set of institutional accreditors.

[ 6 ] The department claimed that the change was intended to encourage cooperation between accredited schools to improve student experiences, uphold quality standards, and reduce the cost of higher education by encouraging transparent transfer of credits and mutual recognition of degrees between schools with common standards. It also claimed that the change was intended to allow students to be able to access the best school for their needs no matter what region they reside in.

[ 7 ] Four months after this change was made, the WASC Senior College and University Commission became the first accreditor to formally change its membership rules and requirements to allow institutions outside its historical geographic region to apply for membership and accreditation.

[ 8 ] Historically, educational accreditation activities in the United States were overseen by seven regional accrediting agencies established in the late 19th and early 20th century to foster articulation between secondary schools and higher education institutions, particularly evaluation of prospective students by colleges and universities.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] These seven agencies were membership organizations of educational institutions within their geographic regions. Initially, the main focus of the organizations was to accredit secondary schools and to establish uniform college entrance requirements.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Accreditation of colleges and universities followed later, with each of the accrediting agencies splitting into separate organizations with one or more of those organizations focused exclusively on accrediting colleges and universities.

[ 10 ] The higher education institutions holding regional accreditation were primarily non-profit institutions, with significant exceptions, as the largest US for-profit universities (e.g., University of Phoenix , Grand Canyon University ) achieved regional accreditation.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Regionally accredited schools were usually academically oriented and most were non-profit. Nationally accredited schools, a large number of which are for-profit , typically offered specific vocational, career, or technical programs. Regionally accredited institutions employed large numbers of full-time faculty, and the faculty set the academic policies. Regionally-accredited schools were required to have adequate library facilities. Except for some specific subject areas such as nursing, nationally accredited schools did not hire many full-time faculty, usually hiring faculty by the course, without benefits and with no influence on the school's academic policies, which were determined by non-academic administrators, and ultimately investors. Their library facilities, if they existed at all, were far inferior to those of regionally-accredited schools. While there were some legitimate and well-intentioned nationally accredited schools, similar to for-profit institutions with regional accreditation, some institutions existed with little educational rigor. Some critics considered national accreditation to be not as reputable as regional accreditation.

[ 5 ] Schools accredited by the Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges, a national accreditor, were occasionally sued for leading prospective students to believe, incorrectly, that they would have no problem transferring their credits to a regionally accredited school.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] In the early 2020s, conservative state legislators and governors in several states moved beyond criticizing institutional accreditors to begin passing legislation attacking accreditors' independence and authority. In 2022, after the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) questioned the candidacy of Richard Corcoran as he campaigned to become president of Florida State University , the state passed a law requiring every public college and university to change institutional accreditors every time their accreditation is due to be renewed. The following year, North Carolina passed a similar law. In subsequent years, SACSCOC also posed questions as several states began to pass laws and create policies and practices dismantling diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) work at colleges and universities. In June 2025, Florida governor Ron DeSantis announced that six public university system in southern states—the State University System of Florida , Texas A&M University System , University System of Georgia , University of North Carolina System , University of South Carolina System , and University of Tennessee System —were collaborating to form a new institutional accreditor, the Commission for Public Higher Education.

[ 17 ] Recognized institutional accreditors [ edit ] The U.S. Department of Education recognizes the following organizations as institutional accreditors: [ 18 ] Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, Accreditation Council for Education in Nutrition and Dietetics Accrediting Bureau of Health Education Schools Accreditation Commission for Acupuncture and Herbal Medicine Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges Accrediting Council for Continuing Education and Training American Bar Association American Board of Funeral Service Education American Osteopathic Association American Podiatric Medical Association Association for Biblical Higher Education Association of Advanced Rabbinical and Talmudic Schools Association of Institutions of Jewish Studies Association of Theological Schools Commission on English Language Program Accreditation Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Educational Programs Council on Chiropractic Education Distance Education Accrediting Commission Higher Learning Commission Joint Review Committee on Education in Radiologic Technology Middle States Commission on Higher Education Middle States Commission on Secondary Schools Midwifery Education Accreditation Council Montessori Accreditation Council for Teacher Education National Accrediting Commission of Career Arts and Sciences National Association of Schools of Art and Design National Association of Schools of Dance National Association of Schools of Music National Association of Schools of Theatre New England Commission of Higher Education New York State Board of Regents , and the Commissioner of Education Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools WASC Accrediting Commission for Community and Junior Colleges WASC Senior College and University Commission Formerly recognized accreditors [ edit ] Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools American Academy for Liberal Education Programmatic accreditation [ edit ] These accreditors typically cover a specific program of professional education or training, but in some cases they cover the whole institution. Best practices are shared and developed through affiliation with the Association of Professional and Specialized Accreditors.

[ 19 ] Both the US Department of Education [ 20 ] and CHEA [ 21 ] maintain lists of recognized US programmatic accreditors: Organization Acronym CHEA Recognized?

USDE Recognized?

Note Accreditation Commission for Acupuncture and Herbal Medicine ACAOM No Yes Accreditation Commission for Audiology Education ACAE Yes No Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing ACEN Yes Yes Accreditation Commission for Midwifery Education ACME No Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs ACBSP Yes No Accreditation Council for Education in Nutrition and Dietetics , Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ACEND No Yes Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education ACPE Yes Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Accreditation Council on Optometric Education ACOE Yes Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant ARC-PA Yes No Accrediting Bureau of Health Education Schools ABHES No Yes Accrediting Council on Education in Journalism and Mass Communications ACEJMC Yes No American Academy of Forensic Sciences Forensic Science Education Programs Accreditation Commission AAFS-FEPAC Yes No American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences , Council for Accreditation AAFCS-CFA Yes No American Board of Funeral Service Education , Committee on Accreditation ABFSE Yes Yes American Council for Construction Education ACCE Yes No American Culinary Federation Education Foundation , Accrediting Commission ACFEF-AC Yes No American Library Association , Committee on Accreditation ALA-CoA Yes No American Occupational Therapy Association , Accreditation Council for Occupational Therapy Education AOTA-ACOTE Yes Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding American Osteopathic Association , Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditation AOA-COCA No Yes American Physical Therapy Association , Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education APTA-CAPTE Yes Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding American Podiatric Medical Association , Council on Podiatric Medical Education APMA-CPME Yes Yes American Psychological Association , Commission on Accreditation APA-CoA Yes Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding American Veterinary Medical Association , Council on Education AVMA-COE Yes Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Association for Advancing Quality in Educator Preparation AAQEP Yes No Association for Behavior Analysis International Accreditation Board ABAI Yes No Association for Biblical Higher Education Commission on Accreditation ABHE Yes Yes Association for Clinical Pastoral Education , Accreditation Commission ACPE Inc No Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Association of Technology, Management, and Applied Engineering ATMAE Yes No Aviation Accreditation Board International AABI Yes No Commission on Accreditation for Health Informatics and Information Management Education CAHIIM Yes No American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy COAMFTE-AAMFT Yes No Commission on Accreditation for Respiratory Care CoARC Yes No Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs CAAHEP Yes No Commission on Accreditation of Athletic Training Education CAATE Yes No Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Management Education CAHME Yes No Commission on Accreditation of Medical Physics Education Programs CAMPEP Yes No Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education CCNE No Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding American Dental Association CODA No Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Commission on English Language Program Accreditation CEA No Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation COMTA No Yes Commission on Opticianry Accreditation COA-OP Yes No Commission on Sport Management Accreditation COSMA Yes No Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs CACREP Yes No Council for Interior Design Accreditation CIDA Yes No Council for Standards in Human Service Education CSHSE Yes No Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation CAEP Yes No American Bar Association ABA No Yes American Speech-Language-Hearing Association CAA-ASHA Yes Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Educational Programs COA Yes Yes Council on Accreditation of Parks, Recreation, Tourism and Related Professions COAPRT Yes No Council on Chiropractic Education CCE Yes Yes Council on Education for Public Health CEPH No Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Council on Naturopathic Medical Education CNME No Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Council on Social Work Education , Commission on Accreditation CSWE-COA Yes No International Accreditation Council for Business Education IACBE Yes No International Fire Service Accreditation Congress - Degree Assembly IFSAC-DA Yes No Joint Review Committee on Education in Radiologic Technology JRCERT Yes Yes Joint Review Committee on Educational Programs in Nuclear Medicine Technology JRCNMT Yes No American Society of Landscape Architects LAAB-ASLA Yes No Liaison Committee on Medical Education LCME No Yes Not eligible for Title IV funding Masters in Psychology and Counseling Accreditation Council MPCAC Yes No Midwifery Education Accreditation Council MEAC No Yes Montessori Accreditation Council for Teacher Education MACTE No Yes National Accrediting Agency for Clinical Laboratory Sciences NAACLS Yes No National Association for the Education of Young Children NAEYC Yes No National Association of Schools of Art and Design Commission on Accreditation NASAD No Yes National Association of Schools of Dance Commission on Accreditation NASD No Yes National Association of Schools of Music Commission on Accreditation NASM No Yes National Association of Schools of Theatre Commission on Accreditation NAST No Yes National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education NCATE Yes Yes Network of Schools of Public Policy, Affairs, and Administration , Commission on Peer Review and Accreditation NASPAA-COPRA Yes No Planning Accreditation Board PAB Yes No Psychological Clinical Science Accreditation System PCSAS Yes No Teacher Education Accreditation Council TEAC Yes Yes Other recognized accreditors [ edit ] The State Bar of California Committee of Bar Examiners accredits law schools in California and is not recognized by the U.S. Department of Education or CHEA.

[ 22 ] Religious accreditors [ edit ] Although many schools related to religious organizations hold regional accreditation or secular national accreditation, there are four different agencies that specialize in accreditation of religious schools: Association of Advanced Rabbinical and Talmudic Schools (AARTS) Association of Theological Schools in the United States and Canada (ATS) Association for Biblical Higher Education (ABHE) Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools (TRACS) These groups specialize in accrediting theological and religious schools including seminaries and graduate schools of theology, as well as broader-scope universities that teach from a religious viewpoint and may require students and/or faculty to subscribe to a statement of faith.

[ citation needed ] Additionally, as of 2009, 20 U.S. states and Puerto Rico had some form of exemption provision under which religious institutions can grant religious degrees without accreditation or government oversight.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Use of .edu top-level Internet domain [ edit ] Main article: .edu Since 2001, the use of the top-level internet domain , .edu has been restricted to accredited institutions, but non-qualifying institutions can still use .edu domain names obtained before the current rules came into force.

[ 25 ] A prominent example of such a domain name registered before the current rules came into force is Academia.edu , a for-profit social networking site for academics.

Criticism [ edit ] Various commenters have written about the role and effectiveness of the American accreditation system. It has drawn particular interest since the rise of e-learning classes and institutions. A frequent point of discussion and criticism is that the traditional system is limited to measuring "input" factors, such as instructional time for course credit , adequate facilities and properly credentialed faculty, rather than learning outcomes .

[ 26 ] In his 1996 book Crisis in the Academy , Christopher J. Lucas criticized the accreditation system as too expensive, onerously complicated, incestuous in its organization, and not properly tied to quality.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Similarly, a 2002 report by George C. Leef and Roxana D. Burris of the American Council of Trustees and Alumni (ACTA) argued that the system does not ensure or protect educational quality, while still imposing significant costs.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] In a 2006 "issue paper", Robert C. Dickeson wrote that a lack of transparency, low and lax standards, and outdated regionalization were among the problems with regional accreditation.

[ 31 ] Others, such as Edward M. Elmendorf of the American Association of State Colleges and Universities , reject these claims, arguing that they are "picking around the edges" of a proven and necessary system for upholding standards.

[ 27 ] [ 32 ] Thomas C. Reeves notes that some schools unable or unwilling to meet the standards of traditional, regional accrediting bodies are closely involved in creating national accrediting agencies with significantly lower standards.

[ 33 ] At various times the U.S. government has investigated changes to the accreditation system. In 2002, the House of Representatives Subcommittee on 21st Century Competitiveness criticized the system.

[ 32 ] Accreditation was a major topic of the Spellings Commission , which released its report on September 26, 2006.

[ 34 ] The Council for Higher Education Accreditation recognizes that there are criticisms, [ 35 ] but has opposed these calls for reform, with President Judith S. Eaton arguing that the system is successful and needs to remain flexible to accommodate differences between schools and disciplines.

[ 32 ] In 2013, President Barack Obama proposed changes in the accreditation system to hold "colleges accountable for cost, value, and quality".

[ 36 ] He requested Congress change the Higher Education Act so that affordability and value are considered in determining which institutions are accredited and allow students access to federal financial aid; his criticism was directed at for-profit institutions.

[ 37 ] See also [ edit ] List of recognized higher education accreditation organizations List of unrecognized higher education accreditation organizations Accreditation mill References [ edit ] ^ "Recognition of Accreditation Organizations: A Comparison of Policy & Practice of Voluntary Accreditation and The United States Department of Education" (PDF) . CHEA. January 1998. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 15, 2010 . Retrieved November 6, 2009 .

^ U.S. Department of Education, Accreditation in the United States ^ College Review Journal, Complete List of National Accrediting Agencies Archived 2011-06-16 at the Wayback Machine .

^ U.S. Department of Education , Accreditation in the United States ^ a b Aasen, Adam (November 18, 2008).

"Battle rages on accreditation, college money" .

The Florida Times-Union . Retrieved June 3, 2011 .

^ 2020 February USDoEd Final Accreditation and State Authorization Regulations [1] ^ Judith Eaton, CHEA President Expresses Pros and Cons for Regionals going National https://www.chea.org/will-regional-accreditation-go-national-0 ^ Lederman, Doug (February 27, 2020).

"Go East (or North), Regional Accreditor" .

Inside Higher Ed . Retrieved April 23, 2022 .

^ a b Fred F. Harcleroad and Judith S. Eaton (2005), "The Hidden Hand: External Constituencies and their Impact," Chapter 9 in Philip G. Altbach, Robert Oliver Berdahl, and Patricia J. Gumport, editors, American higher education in the twenty-first century: social, political, and economic challenges . Page 263. JHU Press.

ISBN 0-8018-8035-1 , ISBN 978-0-8018-8035-3 .

^ a b c History of the North Central Association ^ Judith S. Eaton, Accreditation and Recognition in the United States Archived 2012-03-07 at the Wayback Machine , CHEA, 2008.

^ Geteducated.com.

"Regional Accreditation vs National Accreditation for Online Colleges" . Retrieved March 20, 2018 .

^ Lechuga, Vicente (2005).

The Changing Landscape of the Academic Profession . Routledge. p. 48.

ISBN 9781135508678 .

Regional accreditation is considered more prestigious than national accreditation.

^ Heffter, Emily; Perry, Nick (February 24, 2006).

"Student Takes on College and Wins" .

Seattle Times . Retrieved June 1, 2010 – via nwsource.com.

^ Billman, Jeffrey C. (April 14, 2005).

"Bad Education" . Orlandoweekly.com . Retrieved June 1, 2010 .

^ Hechinger, John (October 3, 2005).

"A Battle Over Standards At For-Profit Colleges" .

Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on December 4, 2008 . Retrieved June 1, 2010 – via Collegejournal.com.

^ Schwartz, Natalie (June 26, 2025).

"6 public university systems unveil plans to launch new accrediting agency" .

Higher Ed Dive . Retrieved July 2, 2025 .

^ "Institutional Accrediting Agencies" .

U.S. Department of Education . 2021 . Retrieved May 25, 2021 .

^ "Association of Professional and Specialized Accreditors" .

ASPA-USA.org . March 31, 2003 . Retrieved June 1, 2010 .

^ "Accreditation in the United States: Programmatic Accrediting Agencies" .

U.S. Department of Education . June 28, 2021 . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ "Programmatic Accrediting Organizations" .

Council for Higher Education Accreditation . 2021 . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ The Committee of Bar Examiners, State Bar of California (August 28, 2009).

Guidelines for Accredited Law School Rules . Retrieved October 4, 2010 .

^ Religious Exempt Schools Archived 2011-02-21 at the Wayback Machine , Oregon Student Assistance Commission Office of Degree Authorization website, accessed March 21, 2011 ^ Exemptions from the higher education licensing process for religious colleges Archived 2018-03-21 at the Wayback Machine , Connecticut General Assembly website, accessed March 21, 2018 ^ ".edu Internet Addresses".

Diploma Mills and Accreditation – Diploma Mills .

United States Department of Education . December 23, 2009 . Retrieved February 19, 2010 .

^ Reeves, Thomas C. (2003). "Storm Clouds on the Digital Education Horizon".

Journal of Computing in Higher Education .

15 (1): 12– 13.

doi : 10.1007/BF02940850 .

S2CID 15523346 .

^ a b Reeves, Thomas C. (2003). "Storm Clouds on the Digital Education Horizon".

Journal of Computing in Higher Education .

15 (1): 14.

doi : 10.1007/BF02940850 .

S2CID 15523346 .

^ Lucas, Christopher J. (1996).

Crisis in the Academy: Rethinking Higher Education in America . New York: St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 9780312129361 .

^ Leef, George C.; Burris, Roxana D. (2002).

"Can college accreditation live up to its promise?" (PDF) .

American Council of Trustees and Alumni . Retrieved September 7, 2012 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Reeves, Thomas C. (2003). "Storm Clouds on the Digital Education Horizon".

Journal of Computing in Higher Education .

15 (1): 13– 14.

doi : 10.1007/BF02940850 .

S2CID 15523346 .

^ Doug Lederman (March 31, 2006).

"Dropping a Bomb on Accreditation" .

Inside Higher Ed . Retrieved May 17, 2013 .

^ a b c Richard Morgan (October 11, 2002).

"Lawmakers Call for More Accountability From Accreditation System" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Retrieved September 7, 2012 .

^ Reeves, Thomas C. (2003). "Storm Clouds on the Digital Education Horizon".

Journal of Computing in Higher Education .

15 (1): 12, 14– 15.

doi : 10.1007/BF02940850 .

S2CID 15523346 .

^ Spellings Commission (2006).

A Test of Leadership: Charting the Future of U.S. Higher Education (PDF) . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. p. 5.

Accreditation, along with federal and state regulation, can impede creative new approaches as well.

^ Eaton, Judith S. (June 28–29, 2001).

"Taking a look at ourselves, accreditation" . Letter from the President.

Council for Higher Education Accreditation . Archived from the original on March 22, 2013 . Retrieved April 12, 2013 .

U.S. accreditation, then, is a robust, complex and unwieldy and sometimes controversial enterprise. These are the first things that we see when we 'take a look at ourselves, accreditation...' ^ Eric Kelderman (February 13, 2013).

"Obama's Accreditation Proposals Surprise Higher-Education Leaders" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Retrieved April 12, 2013 .

^ Chris Parr (February 21, 2013).

"Obama wants cost to feature in accreditation scheme" .

Times Higher Education . Retrieved April 19, 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Accreditation: Postsecondary Education Institutions – U.S. Department of Education v t e Postsecondary institutional accreditors recognized by the U.S. Department of Education Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, Accreditation Council for Education in Nutrition and Dietetics Accrediting Bureau of Health Education Schools Accreditation Commission for Acupuncture and Herbal Medicine Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges Accrediting Council for Continuing Education and Training American Bar Association American Board of Funeral Service Education American Osteopathic Association American Podiatric Medical Association Association for Biblical Higher Education Association of Advanced Rabbinical and Talmudic Schools Association of Institutions of Jewish Studies Association of Theological Schools Commission on English Language Program Accreditation Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Educational Programs Council on Chiropractic Education Council on Occupational Education Distance Education Accrediting Commission Higher Learning Commission Joint Review Committee on Education in Radiologic Technology Middle States Commission on Higher Education Middle States Commission on Secondary Schools Midwifery Education Accreditation Council Montessori Accreditation Council for Teacher Education National Accrediting Commission of Career Arts and Sciences National Association of Schools of Art and Design National Association of Schools of Dance National Association of Schools of Music National Association of Schools of Theatre New England Commission of Higher Education Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools WASC Accrediting Commission for Community and Junior Colleges WASC Senior College and University Commission Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Higher_education_accreditation_in_the_United_States&oldid=1303120188 " Categories : Higher education accreditation Higher education in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 05:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Higher education accreditation in the United States 2 languages Add topic

