Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Agreement types Toggle Agreement types subsection 1.1 Members 1.2 Affiliates 1.3 Others 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Voting 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization 20 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français Galego Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Standards organization Members Affiliates CENELEC ( French : Comité Européen de Normalisation Électrotechnique ; English: European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization ) is responsible for European standardization in the area of electrical engineering . Together with ETSI ( telecommunications ) and CEN (other technical areas), it forms the European system for technical standardization. Standards harmonised by these agencies are regularly adopted in many countries outside Europe which follow European technical standards. Although CENELEC works closely with the European Union , it is not an EU institution. Nevertheless, its standards are "EN" EU (and EEA ) standards, thanks to EU Regulation 1025/2012.

CENELEC was founded in 1973. Before that two organizations were responsible for electrotechnical standardization: CENELCOM and CENEL. CENELEC is a non-profit organization under Belgian law, based in Brussels . The members are the national electrotechnical standardization bodies of most European countries.

Agreement types [ edit ] Members [ edit ] The current members of CENELEC are: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Spain, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the United Kingdom.

[ 1 ] Affiliates [ edit ] Albania, Belarus, Bosnia/Herzegovina, Egypt, Georgia, Israel, Jordan, Libya, Moldova, Montenegro, Morocco, Tunisia and Ukraine are currently "affiliate members" [ 2 ] with a view to becoming full members.

Others [ edit ] CENELEC has cooperation agreements with: Canada, China, Japan, South Korea, Russia and an informal agreement with the USA.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] After the Dresden Agreement (1996), CENELEC coordinates standard development activities with IEC . Older IEC standards were converted in 1997 by adding 60000, for example IEC 27 became IEC 60027 and the same standards are also published in the EN 60000 series to indicate adoption by CENELEC as a European standard; for example IEC 60034 is also available as EN 60034. Regional European standards issued by CENELEC, which are not adopted IEC standards, are numbered in the EN 50000 series.

As of 2017 [update] , more than 90% of the standards passed by CENELEC used the Dresden Agreement process.

[ 4 ] The alternative process in which a member National Committee proposes a standard is called the Vilamoura process (or procedure).

The Dresden Agreement was updated with the Frankfurt Agreement in October 2016, [ 5 ] and decisions are detailed in CENELEC Guide 13 (2016). Following the publication of this guide, IEC standards adopted by CENELEC shall be referenced as "EN IEC 6xxxx".

Voting [ edit ] As of 2001 [update] , a weighted voting system was in place, with member countries having the following number of votes: France, Germany, Italy, and UK: 10 votes (each) Spain: 8 votes Belgium, Greece, Netherlands, Portugal, and Switzerland: 5 votes Austria and Sweden: 4 votes Denmark, Finland, Ireland and Norway: 3 votes Luxembourg: 2 votes Iceland: 1 vote For a proposal to pass, 71% of members need be in favor (according to weighted system above) or 71% of EEA members need be in favor (excluding Switzerland).

[ 6 ] As of 2017 [update] this system was updated as follows: France, Germany, Italy, UK (non-EU), Turkey (non-EU): 29 votes (each) Poland and Spain: 27 votes Romania: 14 votes Netherlands: 13 votes Belgium, Czechia, Greece, Hungary, and Portugal: 12 votes Austria, Bulgaria, Sweden, and (non-EU) Switzerland: 10 votes Croatia, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Lithuania, Slovakia, and (non-EU) Norway: 7 votes Cyprus, Estonia, Latvia, Luxembourg, Slovenia, and (non-EU) North Macedonia: 4 votes Malta and (non-EU) Iceland: 3 votes The weighted voting standard was maintained at 71%, meaning that if the 17 largest-weight countries vote for a standard it will pass (this also means the top 50% [by weight] countries voting in favor). If a proposal does not pass this way, a second vote taking into account only EU members is taken, with the threshold again being 71%. However, unlike EU member states, non-EU CENELEC member countries are not required to transfer EN standards into national standards (although they usually do so).

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] European Committee for Standardization (CEN) European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) European Office of Crafts, Trades and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises for Standardisation (NORMAPME) European Norms Electrical Certification (ENEC) Malamud decision References [ edit ] ^ "CENELEC members" . Archived from the original on 2015-09-23 . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

^ "CENELEC affiliates" . Archived from the original on 2015-09-23 . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

^ "CENELEC Global partners" . Archived from the original on 2013-05-24 . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

^ a b Hermann J. Koch (2017).

Practical Guide to International Standardization for Electrical Engineers: Impact on Smart Grid and e-Mobility Markets . Wiley. pp.

92– 93.

ISBN 978-1-119-06743-6 .

^ CENELEC Cooperation with IEC ^ Paul Cook (2002).

Commentary on IEE Wiring Regulations 16th Edition, BS 7671 : 2001: Requirements for Electrical Installations Including Amendment No. 1 : 2002 . IET. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-85296-237-4 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Home automation System Elements Actuators Hardware controllers Sensors Interconnection type Wired Cable ( xDSL ) Optical fiber Powerline PLCBUS Universal powerline bus (UPB) X10 Wireless Radio frequency Bluetooth Bluetooth Low Energy DECT EnOcean GPRS MyriaNed One-Net Thread UMTS Wi-Fi Zigbee Z-Wave Infrared ( Consumer IR ) Both Insteon KNX Matter Network technologies, by function Device interconnection Bluetooth Bluetooth Low Energy FireWire IrDA USB Zigbee Control and automation AllJoyn Bus SCS with OpenWebNet C-Bus (protocol) CEBus EnOcean EHS Insteon IP500 Luxom KNX LonWorks One-Net Universal powerline bus X10 Zigbee Z-Wave Data networking Ethernet HomePlug HomePNA Wi-Fi Tasks Audio and video Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning Lighting control system Other systems Robotics Security Thermostat automation Gateway Smart home hub Other Costs Mesh networking Organizations Smart grid See also Home of the future Building automation Floor plan Home automation Home energy monitor Home network Home server House navigation system INTEGER Millennium House The House for the Future Ubiquitous computing Xanadu Houses Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Norway Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Committee_for_Electrotechnical_Standardization&oldid=1286045411 " Categories : 1973 establishments in Europe Electrical safety standards organizations European Union and science and technology International organisations based in Belgium Science and technology in Europe Standards organisations in Belgium Organizations established in 1973 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2001 This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 11:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization 20 languages Add topic

