Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organization 2 Predecessor: The Niagara Movement 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Formation 3.2 Membership and chapters 3.3 Jim Crow and disenfranchisement 3.4 Legal Defense Fund 3.5 Desegregation 3.6 The 1990s 3.7 Lee Alcorn controversy 3.8 George W. Bush 3.9 Tax exempt status 3.10 LGBT rights 3.11 Travel warning regarding Missouri 3.12 Censorship 3.13 Travel warning regarding Florida 4 Local branch impact 5 Current activities Toggle Current activities subsection 5.1 Youth 5.1.1 Youth and College Division 5.1.2 ACT-SO program 5.2 Environmental justice 5.2.1 Headquarters 6 National convention 7 Awards 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents NAACP 38 languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Íslenska Italiano עברית Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ) American civil rights organization National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Abbreviation NAACP Formation February 12, 1909 ; 116 years ago ( 1909-02-12 ) Founders W. E. B. Du Bois Mary White Ovington Moorfield Storey Ida B. Wells Lillian Wald Henry Moskowitz Tax ID no.

38-4108034 Legal status 501(c)(4) Civic Leagues and Social Welfare Organizations Purpose "To ensure the political, educational, social, and economic equality of rights of all persons and to eliminate racial hatred and racial discrimination." Headquarters Baltimore , Maryland, U.S.

Membership 300,000 [ 1 ] Chairman Leon W. Russell President and CEO Derrick Johnson Main organ Board of directors Publication The Crisis Budget $24,800,000 (2019) [ 2 ] Website naacp .org Part of a series on African Americans History Periods Timeline Atlantic slave trade Abolitionism in the United States Slavery in the colonial history of the US Revolutionary War Antebellum period Slavery and military history during the Civil War Reconstruction era Politicians Juneteenth Civil rights movement (1865–1896) Jim Crow era (1896–1954) Civil rights movement (1954–1968) Black power movement Post–civil rights era Aspects Agriculture history Black Belt in the American South Business history Military history Treatment of the enslaved Migrations Great Migration Second Great Migration New Great Migration Culture Lifeways Dance Family structure Film Folktales Music Musical theater Names Neighborhoods Newspapers Soul food Schools Education during the slave period in the US Education of freed people during the Civil War History of African-American education , after the Civil War Historically black colleges and universities Fraternities Academic study Studies Art Literature Celebrations Martin Luther King Jr. Day Black History Month Juneteenth Kwanzaa Economic class African-American businesses Middle class Upper class Billionaires Symbols and ideas African-American beauty Black is beautiful Black pride African-American hair Good hair Stepping " Lift Every Voice and Sing " Self-determination Religion Institutions Black church Theologies Black theology Womanist theology Non-Christian groups Hoodoo Black Hebrew Israelites African-American Jews African-American Muslims Nation of Islam Louisiana Voodoo African Diaspora Religions Politics Organizations Congressional Black Caucus Joint Center National Black Caucus of State Legislators National Conference of Black Mayors Ideologies Afrocentrism Anarchism Back-to-Africa movement Black power Capitalism Conservatism Garveyism Leftism Liberalism Nationalism Pan-Africanism Patriotism Populism Radicalism Socialism Civic/economic groups Organizations Association for the Study of African American Life and History Black conductors NAACP National Black Chamber of Commerce National Council of Negro Women National Pan-Hellenic Council National Urban League TransAfrica UNCF Sports Negro league baseball Athletic associations and conferences Central (CIAA) HBCU (HBCUAC) Mid-Eastern (MEAC) Southern (SIAC) Southwestern (SWAC) Sub-communities Multiethnic African-American Jews Afro-Puerto Ricans Alabama Creole people Black Indians Black Seminoles Mascogos Blaxicans Brass Ankles Creoles of color Dominickers Freedmen Great Dismal Swamp maroons Louisiana Creoles Melungeon Carmel Redbone Specific ancestries Americo-Liberians Creek Freedmen Gullah Merikins Nova Scotians Samaná Americans Sierra Leone Creole Sexual orientation LGBT community Dialects and languages English dialects African-American English African-American Vernacular English Liberian English Samaná English Tutnese Languages and other dialects Gullah Afro-Seminole Creole Negro Dutch Black American Sign Language Population US states Alabama Arkansas California Florida Georgia Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Louisiana Maryland Mississippi Nebraska New York North Carolina Ohio Oklahoma Oregon South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Virginia US cities Black mecca List of neighborhoods Atlanta Baltimore Boston Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Davenport Detroit Houston Jacksonville Kentucky Lexington Los Angeles New York City Omaha Philadelphia San Antonio San Francisco Historic places District of Columbia Florida Georgia Mississippi Missouri Omaha, Nebraska North Carolina South Carolina Texas West Virginia Population count US states and territories US metropolitan areas US cities US communities Places by plurality of population Diaspora Africa Canada France Ghana Israel Liberia Nova Scotia Sierra Leone Prejudice Racism Black genocide Race and ethnicity in the US census Racism against Black Americans Reparations for slavery School segregation in the US Unarmed African Americans killed by police officers Stereotypes and media depictions Blackface Criminal stereotypes Hollywood Magical Negro Minstrel show United States portal Category Index v t e The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) [ a ] is an American civil rights organization formed in 1909 as an interracial endeavor to advance justice for African Americans by a group including W. E. B. Du Bois , Mary White Ovington , Moorfield Storey , Ida B. Wells , Lillian Wald , and Henry Moskowitz .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Over the years, leaders of the organization have included Thurgood Marshall and Roy Wilkins . The NAACP is the largest and oldest civil rights group in America.

Its mission in the 21st century is "to ensure the political, educational, social, and economic equality of rights of all persons and to eliminate race-based discrimination". NAACP initiatives include political lobbying, publicity efforts, and litigation strategies developed by its legal team.

[ 7 ] The group enlarged its mission in the late 20th century by considering issues such as police misconduct , the status of black foreign refugees and questions of economic development.

[ 8 ] Its name, retained in accordance with tradition, uses the once common term colored people , referring to those with some African ancestry.

[ 9 ] The NAACP started publishing a quarterly magazine The Crisis and it had as its editor W.E.B Du Bois for 24 years.

The NAACP bestows annual awards on African Americans in three categories: Image Awards are for achievements in the arts and media, Theatre Awards are for achievements in theatre and stage, and Spingarn Medals are for outstanding achievements of any kind. Its headquarters are in Baltimore , Maryland.

[ 10 ] Organization The NAACP is headquartered in Baltimore , with additional regional offices in New York , Michigan , Georgia , Maryland, Texas , Colorado , and California .

[ 11 ] Each regional office is responsible for coordinating the efforts of state conferences in that region. Local, youth, and college chapters organize activities for individual members.

In the U.S., the NAACP is administered by a 64-member board led by a chairperson. The board elects one person as the president and one as the chief executive officer for the organization.

Julian Bond , civil rights movement activist and former Georgia State Senator, was chairman until replaced in February 2010 by healthcare administrator Roslyn Brock .

[ 12 ] For decades in the first half of the 20th century, the organization was effectively led by its executive secretary, who acted as chief operating officer.

James Weldon Johnson and Walter F. White , who served in that role successively from 1920 to 1958, were much more widely known as NAACP leaders than were presidents during those years.

[ 13 ] The organization has never had a woman president, except on a temporary basis, and there have been calls to name one.

[ 14 ] Lorraine C. Miller served as interim president after Benjamin Jealous stepped down.

Maya Wiley was rumored to be in line for the position in 2013, but Cornell William Brooks was selected.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Departments within the NAACP govern areas of action. Local chapters are supported by the "Branch and Field Services" department and the "Youth and College" department. The "Legal" department focuses on court cases of broad application to minorities, such as systematic discrimination in employment, government, or education. The Washington, D.C.

, bureau is responsible for lobbying the U.S. government, and the Education Department works to improve public education at the local, state, and federal levels. The goal of the Health Division is to advance health care for minorities through public policy initiatives and education.

[ 17 ] As of 2007 [update] , the NAACP had approximately 425,000 paying and non-paying members.

[ 18 ] The NAACP's non-current records are housed at the Library of Congress , which has served as the organization's official repository since 1964. The records held there comprise approximately five million items spanning the NAACP's history from the time of its founding until 2003.

[ 19 ] In 2011, the NAACP teamed with the digital repository ProQuest to digitize and host online the earlier portion of its archives, through 1972 – nearly two million pages of documents, from the national, legal, and branch offices throughout the country, which offer first-hand insight into the organization's work related to such crucial issues as lynching, school desegregation, and discrimination in all its aspects (in the military, the criminal justice system, employment, housing).

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Predecessor: The Niagara Movement Main article: Niagara Movement The Pan-American Exposition of 1901 in Buffalo, New York , featured many American innovations and achievements, but also included a disparaging caricature of slave life in the South as well as a depiction of life in Africa, called "Old Plantation" and "Darkest Africa", respectively.

[ 22 ] A local African-American woman, Mary Talbert of Ohio , was appalled by the exhibit, as a similar one in Paris highlighted black achievements.  She informed W. E. B. Du Bois of the situation, and a coalition began to form.

[ 22 ] In 1905, a group of thirty-two prominent African-American leaders met to discuss the challenges facing African Americans and possible strategies and solutions.  They were particularly concerned by the Southern states ' disenfranchisement of blacks starting with Mississippi 's passage of a new constitution in 1890.  Through 1908, Southern legislatures, dominated by white Southern Democrats , ratified new constitutions and laws creating barriers to voter registration and more complex election rules.  In practice, this and the Lily-white movement caused the exclusion of most blacks and many poor whites from the political system in southern states.  Black voter registration and turnout dropped markedly in the South as a result of such legislation.  Men who had been voting for thirty years in the South were told they did not "qualify" to register.

[ citation needed ] White-dominated legislatures also passed segregation and Jim Crow laws.

[ 23 ] Because hotels in the US were segregated, the men convened in Canada at the Erie Beach Hotel [ 24 ] on the Canadian side of the Niagara River in Fort Erie, Ontario .  As a result, the group came to be known as the Niagara Movement .  A year later, three non-African-Americans joined the group: journalist William English Walling , a wealthy socialist; and social workers Mary White Ovington and Henry Moskowitz .  Moskowitz, who was Jewish, was then also Associate Leader of the New York Society for Ethical Culture .  They met in 1906 at Storer College , Harpers Ferry, West Virginia , and in 1907 in Boston, Massachusetts .

[ 25 ] The fledgling group struggled for a time with limited resources and internal conflict and disbanded in 1910.

[ 26 ] Seven of the members of the Niagara Movement joined the Board of Directors of the NAACP, founded in 1909.

[ 25 ] Although both organizations shared membership and overlapped for a time, the Niagara Movement was a separate organization.  Historically, it is considered to have had a more radical platform than the NAACP.  The Niagara Movement was formed exclusively by African Americans.  Four European Americans were among the founders of the NAACP, they included Mary White Ovington , Henry Moskowitz , William English Walling and Oswald Garrison Villard .

[ 9 ] History Formation The Race Riot of 1908 in Springfield, Illinois , the state capital and Abraham Lincoln 's hometown, was a catalyst showing the urgent need for an effective civil rights organization in the U.S. In the decades around the turn of the century, the rate of lynchings of blacks, particularly men, was at an all-time high.

Mary White Ovington , journalist William English Walling and Henry Moskowitz met in New York City in January 1909 to work on organizing for black civil rights.

[ 27 ] They sent out solicitations for support to more than 60 prominent Americans, and set a meeting date for February 12, 1909. This was intended to coincide with the 100th anniversary of the birth of President Abraham Lincoln , who emancipated enslaved African Americans. While the first large meeting did not occur until three months later, the February date is often cited as the organization's founding date.

The NAACP was founded on February 12, 1909, by a larger group including African Americans W. E. B. Du Bois , Ida B. Wells , Archibald Grimké , Mary Church Terrell , and the previously named whites Henry Moskowitz , Mary White Ovington , William English Walling (the wealthy Socialist son of a former slave-holding family), [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Florence Kelley , a social reformer and friend of Du Bois; [ 29 ] Oswald Garrison Villard , and Charles Edward Russell , a renowned muckraker and close friend of Walling. Russell helped plan the NAACP and had served as acting chairman of the National Negro Committee (1909), a forerunner to the NAACP.

[ 30 ] On May 30, 1909, the Niagara Movement conference took place at New York City's Henry Street Settlement House; they created an organization of more than 40, identifying as the National Negro Committee .

[ 31 ] Among other founding members were Lillian Wald , a nurse who had founded the Henry Street Settlement where the conference took place.

Du Bois played a key role in organizing the event and presided over the proceedings.  Also in attendance was Ida B. Wells-Barnett , an African-American journalist and anti- lynching crusader. Wells-Barnett addressed the conference on the history of lynching in the United States and called for action to publicize and prosecute such crimes.

[ 32 ] The members chose the new organization's name to be the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and elected its first officers: [ 33 ] National President, Moorfield Storey , Boston Chairman of the executive committee, William English Walling Treasurer, John E. Milholland a prominent New York Republican Disbursing Treasurer, Oswald Garrison Villard Executive Secretary, Frances Blascoer Director of Publicity and Research, W. E. B. Du Bois .

The NAACP was incorporated a year later in 1911. The association's charter expressed its mission: To promote equality of rights and eradicate caste or race prejudice among citizens of the United States; to advance the interest of colored citizens; to secure for them impartial suffrage; and to increase their opportunities for securing justice in the courts, education for their children, employment according to their ability, and complete equality before the law.

[ 34 ] The larger conference resulted in a more diverse organization, where the leadership was predominantly white.

Moorfield Storey , a white attorney from a Boston abolitionist family, served as the president of the NAACP from its founding to 1915. At its founding, the NAACP had one African American on its executive board, Du Bois. Storey was a long-time classical liberal and Grover Cleveland Democrat who advocated laissez-faire free markets, the gold standard , and anti-imperialism . Storey consistently and aggressively championed civil rights , not only for blacks but also for Native Americans and immigrants (he opposed immigration restrictions). Du Bois continued to play a pivotal leadership role in the organization, serving as editor of the association's magazine, The Crisis , which had a circulation of more than 30,000.

[ 35 ] The Crisis was used both for news reporting and for publishing African-American poetry and literature. During the organization's campaigns against lynching, Du Bois encouraged the writing and performance of plays and other expressive literature about this issue.

[ 36 ] The Jewish community contributed greatly to the NAACP's founding and continued financing.

[ 37 ] Jewish historian Howard Sachar 's book A History of Jews in America notes "In 1914, Professor Emeritus Joel Spingarn of Columbia University became chairman of the NAACP and recruited for its board such Jewish leaders as Jacob Schiff , Jacob Billikopf , and Rabbi Stephen Wise ." [ 37 ] Membership and chapters In 1912, the organization added its first branches in Boston and Chicago. Seven more were added in 1913 as the NAACP began to welcome new members. By 1915, there were 50 branches with 6,000 members. World War I saw a surge in membership. By 1920, there were 395 branches and more than 90,000 members.

[ 38 ] The geography was also changing. Initially there were few chapters in the South but by 1920, there were 74 in that region including every state. Membership fell off in the later 1920s and during the Great Depression but resumed during the 1940s. In 1945, the NAACP claimed 894 branches and 351,000 members. Virtually every town or city where Black folks lived also had an NAACP chapter. This included southern communities although Jim Crow violence made this much riskier in the South than elsewhere and kept membership lower on a per capita basis than in other regions.

[ 39 ] That changed in the 1950s. In 1958, the South accounted for well over half of the NAACP's 1,230 chapters and 302,000 members.

[ 40 ] Jim Crow and disenfranchisement An African American drinks out of a segregated water cooler designated for "colored" patrons in 1939 at a streetcar terminal in Oklahoma City .

Sign for the "colored" waiting room at a bus station in Durham , North Carolina, 1940 In its early years, the NAACP was based in New York City . It concentrated on litigation in efforts to overturn disenfranchisement of blacks, which had been established in every southern state by 1908, excluding most from the political system, and the Jim Crow statutes that legalized racial segregation .

In 1913, the NAACP organized opposition to President Woodrow Wilson 's introduction of racial segregation into federal government policy, workplaces, and hiring. African-American women's clubs were among the organizations that protested Wilson's changes, but the administration did not alter its assuagement of Southern cabinet members and the Southern bloc in Congress.

By 1914, the group had 6,000 members and 50 branches. It was influential in winning the right of African Americans to serve as military officers in World War I . Six hundred African-American officers were commissioned and 700,000 men registered for the draft. The following year, the NAACP organized a nationwide protest, with marches in numerous cities, against D. W. Griffith 's silent movie The Birth of a Nation , a film that glamorized the Ku Klux Klan . As a result, several cities refused to allow the film to open.

[ 41 ] The NAACP began to lead lawsuits targeting disfranchisement and racial segregation early in its history. It played a significant part in the challenge of Guinn v. United States (1915) to Oklahoma 's discriminatory grandfather clause , which effectively disenfranchised most black citizens while exempting many whites from certain voter registration requirements. It persuaded the Supreme Court of the United States to rule in Buchanan v. Warley in 1917 that state and local governments cannot officially segregate African Americans into separate residential districts. The Court's opinion reflected the jurisprudence of property rights and freedom of contract as embodied in the earlier precedent it established in Lochner v. New York . It also played a role in desegregating recreational activities via the historic Bob-Lo Excursion Co. v. Michigan after plaintiff Sarah Elizabeth Ray was wrongfully discriminated against when attempting to board a ferry.

In 1916, chairman Joel Spingarn invited James Weldon Johnson to serve as field secretary. Johnson was a former U.S. consul to Venezuela and a noted African-American scholar and columnist. Within four years, Johnson was instrumental in increasing the NAACP's membership from 9,000 to almost 90,000. In 1920, Johnson was elected head of the organization. Over the next ten years, the NAACP escalated its lobbying and litigation efforts, becoming internationally known for its advocacy of equal rights and equal protection for the "American Negro".

[ 42 ] The NAACP devoted much of its energy during the interwar years to fight the lynching of blacks throughout the United States by working for legislation, lobbying, and educating the public. The organization sent its field secretary Walter F. White to Phillips County , Arkansas, in October 1919, to investigate the Elaine Race Riot . Roving white vigilantes killed more than 200 black tenant farmers and federal troops after a deputy sheriff's attack on a union meeting of sharecroppers left one white man dead. White published his report on the riot in the Chicago Daily News .

[ 43 ] The NAACP organized the appeals for twelve black men sentenced to death a month later based on the fact that testimony used in their convictions was obtained by beatings and electric shocks. It gained a groundbreaking Supreme Court decision in Moore v. Dempsey 261 U.S.

86 (1923) that significantly expanded the Federal courts' oversight of the states' criminal justice systems in the years to come. White investigated eight race riots and 41 lynchings for the NAACP and directed its study Thirty Years of Lynching in the United States .

[ 44 ] NAACP leaders Henry L. Moon , Roy Wilkins , Herbert Hill , and Thurgood Marshall in 1956 The NAACP also worked for more than a decade seeking federal anti-lynching legislation, but the Solid South of white Democrats voted as a bloc against it or used the filibuster in the Senate to block passage. Because of disenfranchisement, African Americans in the South were unable to elect representatives of their choice to office. The NAACP regularly displayed a black flag stating "A Man Was Lynched Yesterday" from the window of its offices in New York to mark each lynching.

[ 45 ] It organized the first of the two 1935 New York anti-lynching exhibitions in support of the Costigan-Wagner Bill , having previously widely published an account of the Lynching of Henry Lowry , as An American Lynching , in support of the Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill .

Throughout the 1930s the NAACP revitalized its youth organization. In 1933, Walter F. White  released a memo to the NAACP Board of Directors critiquing the lack of a standardized youth program in the NAACP, saying that one of their biggest problems was that energized young people's ideas were often stifled.

Juanita Jackson Mitchell was appointed the national director of a new Youth and College Division in 1936. Its goals were to form new activists and leaders, educate youth on black history, build pride and cooperation, and support national goals of the NAACP. Youth were frequently mobilized to support national legal and political campaigns.

[ 46 ] In alliance with the American Federation of Labor , the NAACP led the successful fight to prevent the nomination of John Johnston Parker to the Supreme Court, based on his support for denying the vote to blacks and his anti-labor rulings. It organized legal support for the Scottsboro Boys . The NAACP lost most of the internecine battles with the Communist Party and International Labor Defense over the control of those cases and the legal strategy to be pursued in that case.

The organization also brought litigation to challenge the " white primary " system in the South. Southern state Democratic parties had created white-only primaries as another way of barring blacks from the political process. Since the Democrats dominated southern states, the primaries were the only competitive contests. In 1944 in Smith v. Allwright , the Supreme Court ruled against the white primary. Although states had to retract legislation related to the white primaries, the legislatures soon came up with new methods to severely limit the franchise for blacks.

During the Second Red Scare the NAACP was often linked to Communism by right-wing politicians. The House Un-American Activities Committee , the United States Senate Subcommittee on Internal Security , and security agencies sought to prove to the NAACP had been infiltrated by Communists. To distance themselves from these accusations, the NAACP purged suspected Communists from its membership, according to the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee 's website.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Legal Defense Fund The board of directors of the NAACP created the Legal Defense Fund in 1939 specifically for tax purposes. It functioned as the NAACP legal department. Intimidated by the Department of the Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service, the Legal and Educational Defense Fund, Inc., became a separate legal entity in 1957, although it was clear that it was to operate in accordance with NAACP policy. After 1961 serious disputes emerged between the two organizations, creating considerable confusion in the eyes and minds of the public.

[ 49 ] Desegregation NAACP representatives E. Franklin Jackson and Stephen Gill Spottswood meeting with President Kennedy at the White House in 1961 By the 1940s, the federal courts were amenable to lawsuits regarding constitutional rights, against which Congressional action was virtually impossible.  With the rise of private corporate litigators such as the NAACP to bear the expense, civil suits became the pattern in modern civil rights litigation, [ 50 ] and the public face of the Civil Rights Movement .  The NAACP's Legal department, headed by Charles Hamilton Houston and Thurgood Marshall , undertook a campaign spanning several decades to bring about the reversal of the " separate but equal " doctrine announced by the Supreme Court's decision in Plessy v. Ferguson .

The NAACP's Baltimore chapter, under president Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson , challenged segregation in Maryland state professional schools by supporting the 1935 Murray v. Pearson case argued by Marshall. Houston's victory in Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. Canada (1938) led to the formation of the Legal Defense Fund in 1939.

Locals viewing the bomb-damaged home of Arthur Shores , NAACP attorney, Birmingham , Alabama, on September 5, 1963. The bomb exploded on September 4, the previous day, injuring Shores' wife.

The campaign for desegregation culminated in a unanimous 1954 Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education that held state-sponsored segregation of public elementary schools was unconstitutional . Bolstered by that victory, the NAACP pushed for full desegregation throughout the South.

[ 51 ] NAACP activists were excited about the judicial strategy. Starting on December 5, 1955, NAACP activists, including Edgar Nixon , its local president, and Rosa Parks , who had served as the chapter's Secretary, helped organize a bus boycott in Montgomery , Alabama. This was designed to protest segregation on the city's buses, two-thirds of whose riders were black. The boycott lasted 381 days.

[ 52 ] In 1956 the South Carolina legislature created an anti-NAACP oath, and teachers who refused to take the oath lost their positions. After twenty-one Black teachers at the Elloree Training School refused to comply, White school officials dismissed them. Their dismissal led to Bryan v. Austin in 1957, which became an important civil rights case.

[ 53 ] In Alabama, the state responded by effectively barring the NAACP from operating within its borders because of its refusal to divulge a list of its members. The NAACP feared members could be fired or face violent retaliation for their activities. Although the Supreme Court eventually overturned the state's action in NAACP v. Alabama , 357 U.S.

449 (1958), the NAACP lost its leadership role in the Civil Rights Movement while it was barred from Alabama.

New organizations such as the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC, in 1957) and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC, in 1960) rose up with different approaches to activism. Rather than relying on litigation and legislation, these newer groups employed direct action and mass mobilization to advance the rights of African Americans.

Roy Wilkins , NAACP's executive director, clashed repeatedly with Martin Luther King Jr.

and other civil rights leaders over questions of strategy and leadership within the movement.

The NAACP continued to use the Supreme Court's decision in Brown to press for desegregation of schools and public facilities throughout the country.

Daisy Bates , president of its Arkansas state chapter, spearheaded the campaign by the Little Rock Nine to integrate the public schools in Little Rock , Arkansas.

[ 54 ] By the mid-1960s, the NAACP had regained some of its prominence in the Civil Rights Movement by pressing for civil rights legislation. The March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom took place on August 28, 1963. That fall, President John F. Kennedy sent a civil rights bill to Congress before he was assassinated.

President Lyndon B. Johnson worked hard to persuade Congress to pass a civil rights bill aimed at ending racial discrimination in employment, education and public accommodations, and succeeded in gaining passage in July 1964. He followed that with passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 , which provided for protection of the franchise, with a role for federal oversight and administrators in places where voter turnout was historically low.

Under its anti-desegregation director J. Edgar Hoover , the FBI 's COINTELPRO program targeted civil rights groups, including the NAACP, for infiltration, disruption and discreditation.

[ 55 ] Kivie Kaplan became NAACP President in 1966. After his death in 1975, scientist W. Montague Cobb took over until 1982.

Roy Wilkins retired as executive director in 1977, and Benjamin Hooks , a lawyer and clergyman, was elected his successor.

The 1990s In the 1990s, the NAACP ran into debt. The dismissal of two leading officials further added to the picture of an organization in deep crisis.  After such, Rupert Richardson began her term as president of the NAACP in 1992.

In 1993, the NAACP's Board of Directors narrowly selected Reverend Benjamin Chavis over Reverend Jesse Jackson to fill the position of executive director. A controversial figure, Chavis was ousted eighteen months later by the same board. They accused him of using NAACP funds for an out-of-court settlement in a sexual harassment lawsuit.

[ 56 ] Following the dismissal of Chavis, Myrlie Evers-Williams narrowly defeated NAACP chairperson William Gibson for president in 1995, after Gibson was accused of overspending and mismanagement of the organization's funds.

In 1996, Congressman Kweisi Mfume , a Democratic Congressman from Maryland and former head of the Congressional Black Caucus , was named the organization's president. Three years later strained finances forced the organization to drastically cut its staff, from 250 in 1992 to 50.

In the second half of the 1990s, the organization restored its finances, permitting the NAACP National Voter Fund to launch a major get-out-the-vote offensive in the 2000 U.S. presidential elections . 10.5 million African Americans cast their ballots in the election; this was one million more than four years before.

[ 56 ] The NAACP's effort was credited by observers as playing a significant role in Democrat Al Gore 's winning several states where the election was close, such as Pennsylvania and Michigan.

[ 56 ] Lee Alcorn controversy During the 2000 presidential election, Lee Alcorn , president of the Dallas NAACP branch, criticized Al Gore's selection of Senator Joe Lieberman for his vice-presidential candidate because Lieberman was Jewish. On a gospel talk radio show on station KHVN , Alcorn stated, "If we get a Jew person, then what I'm wondering is, I mean, what is this movement for, you know? Does it have anything to do with the failed peace talks ? ... So I think we need to be very suspicious of any kind of partnerships between the Jews at that kind of level because we know that their interest primarily has to do with money and these kind of things." [ 57 ] NAACP President Kweisi Mfume immediately suspended Alcorn and condemned his remarks. Mfume stated, I strongly condemn those remarks. I find them to be repulsive, anti-Semitic, anti-NAACP and anti-American. Mr. Alcorn does not speak for the NAACP, its board, its staff or its membership. We are proud of our long-standing relationship with the Jewish community and I personally will not tolerate statements that run counter to the history and beliefs of the NAACP in that regard.

[ 57 ] Alcorn, who had been suspended three times in the previous five years for misconduct, subsequently resigned from the NAACP. He founded what he called the Coalition for the Advancement of Civil Rights. Alcorn criticized the NAACP, saying, "I can't support the leadership of the NAACP. Large amounts of money are being given to them by large corporations with which I have a problem." [ 57 ] Alcorn also said, "I cannot be bought. For this reason I gladly offer my resignation and my membership to the NAACP because I cannot work under these constraints." [ 58 ] Alcorn's remarks were also condemned by Jesse Jackson , Jewish groups and George W. Bush's rival Republican presidential campaign. Jackson said he strongly supported Lieberman's addition to the Democratic ticket, saying, "When we live our faith, we live under the law. He [Lieberman] is a firewall of exemplary behavior." [ 57 ] Al Sharpton , another prominent African-American leader, said, "The appointment of Mr. Lieberman was to be welcomed as a positive step." [ 59 ] The leaders of the American Jewish Congress praised the NAACP for its quick response, stating that: "It will take more than one bigot like Alcorn to shake the sense of fellowship of American Jews with the NAACP and black America ... Our common concerns are too urgent, our history too long, our connection too sturdy, to let anything like this disturb our relationship." [ 60 ] George W. Bush Louisiana NAACP leads Jena March 6 In 2004, President George W. Bush declined an invitation to speak to the NAACP's national convention.

[ 61 ] Bush's spokesperson said that Bush had declined the invitation to speak to the NAACP because of harsh statements about him by its leaders.

[ 62 ] In an interview, Bush said, "I would describe my relationship with the current leadership as basically nonexistent. You've heard the rhetoric and the names they've called me." [ 62 ] Bush said he admired some members of the NAACP and would seek to work with them "in other ways".

[ 62 ] On July 20, 2006, Bush addressed the NAACP national convention. He made a bid for increasing support by African Americans for Republicans, in the midst of a midterm election . He referred to Republican Party support for civil rights.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Tax exempt status In October 2004, the Internal Revenue Service informed the NAACP that it was investigating its tax-exempt status based on chairman Julian Bond 's speech at its 2004 Convention, in which he criticized President George W. Bush as well as other political figures.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] In general, the US Internal Revenue Code prohibits organizations granted tax-exempt status from "directly or indirectly participating in, or intervening in, any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate for elective public office." [ 67 ] The NAACP denounced the investigation as retaliation for its success in increasing the number of African Americans who were voting.

[ 65 ] [ 68 ] In August 2006, the IRS investigation concluded with the agency's finding "that the remarks did not violate the group's tax-exempt status." [ 69 ] LGBT rights As the American LGBT rights movement gained steam after the Stonewall riots of 1969, the NAACP became increasingly affected by the movement to gain rights for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. While chairman of the NAACP, Bond became an outspoken supporter of the rights of gays and lesbians and stated his support for same-sex marriage . He boycotted the 2006 funeral services for Coretta Scott King , as he said the King children had chosen an anti-gay megachurch . This was in contradiction to their mother's longstanding support for the rights of gay and lesbian people.

[ 70 ] In a 2005 speech in Richmond, Virginia , Bond said: African Americans ... were the only Americans who were enslaved for two centuries, but we were far from the only Americans suffering discrimination then and now. ... Sexual disposition parallels race. I was born this way. I have no choice. I wouldn't change it if I could. Sexuality is unchangeable.

[ 71 ] In a 2007 speech on the Martin Luther King Day Celebration at Clayton State University in Morrow, Georgia , Bond said, "If you don't like gay marriage, don't get gay married." His positions have pitted elements of the NAACP against religious groups in the civil rights movement who oppose gay marriage, mostly within the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). The NAACP became increasingly vocal in opposition against state-level constitutional amendments to ban same-sex marriage and related rights. State NAACP leaders such as William J. Barber II of North Carolina participated actively against North Carolina Amendment 1 in 2012, but voters passed it.

On May 19, 2012, the NAACP's board of directors formally endorsed same-sex marriage as a civil right, voting 62–2 for the policy in a Miami , Florida quarterly meeting.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Benjamin Jealous, the organization's president, said of the decision, "Civil marriage is a civil right and a matter of civil law. ... The NAACP's support for marriage equality is deeply rooted in the 14th Amendment of the United States Constitution and equal protection of all people." Possibly significant in the NAACP's vote was its concern with the HIV/AIDS crisis in the black community; while AIDS support organizations recommend that people live a monogamous lifestyle, the government did not recognize same-sex relationships as part of this.

[ 74 ] As a result of this endorsement, Keith Ratliff Sr. of Des Moines , Iowa, resigned from the NAACP board.

[ 75 ] Travel warning regarding Missouri On June 7, 2017, the NAACP issued a warning for African-American travelers to Missouri : Individuals traveling in the state are advised to travel with extreme CAUTION. Race, gender and color based crimes have a long history in Missouri. Missouri, home of Lloyd Gaines , Dred Scott and the dubious distinction of the Missouri Compromise and one of the last states to lose its slaveholding past, may not be safe. ... [Missouri Senate Bill] SB 43 legalizes individual discrimination and harassment in Missouri and would prevent individuals from protecting themselves from discrimination, harassment, and retaliation in Missouri.

Moreover, over-zealous enforcement of routine traffic violations in Missouri against African Americans has resulted in an increasing trend that shows African Americans are 75% more likely to be stopped than Caucasians.

[ 76 ] Missouri NAACP Conference president Rod Chapel Jr., suggested that visitors to Missouri "should have bail money." [ 77 ] Censorship The NAACP led protests of the 1915 film The Birth of a Nation .

[ 78 ] In 2019, the NAACP called for a ban of all Dr. Seuss books from public schools and libraries, citing discriminatory depictions of Blacks, Jews, Indigenous peoples, Muslims, and Asians.

[ 79 ] In 2023, the group sued to block a book from being banned from school libraries.

[ 80 ] Travel warning regarding Florida In May 2023 in response to new laws targeting people of color and LGBTQ+ individuals, the American Civil Liberties Union , the NAACP, the League of United Latin American Citizens , and Equality Florida issued travel advisories for visitors to Florida.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Under its current Governor, the State of Florida has engaged in an all-out attack on Black Americans, accurate Black history, voting rights, members of the LGBTQ+community, immigrants, women's reproductive rights, and free speech, while simultaneously embracing a culture of fear, bullying, and intimidation by public officials. In his effort to rewrite American history to exclude the voices, contributions of African Americans and the challenges they overcame despite the systemic racism that African Americans have faced since first arriving in this country, Governor DeSantis has signed various controversial anti-civil rights measures into law; including the Combatting Violence, Disorder and Looting and Law Enforcement Protection Act Florida HB 1, Stop Wrongs against Our Kids and Employees Act ("Stop W.O.K.E. Act") Florida HB 7 , Constitutional Carry Act Florida House HB 543, Florida Senate Bill 266, and Florida Senate Bill 7066.

Local branch impact This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "NAACP" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2020 ) This section needs expansion . You can help by making an edit request adding to it .

( July 2020 ) The organization's national initiatives, political lobbying, and publicity efforts were handled by the headquarters staff in New York and Washington, D.C. Court strategies were developed by the legal team based for many years at Howard University .

[ 7 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] NAACP local branches have also been important. When, in its early years, the national office launched campaigns against The Birth of a Nation , it was the local branches that carried out the boycotts.  When the organization fought to expose and outlaw lynching, the branches carried the campaign into hundreds of communities.  And while the Legal Defense Fund developed a federal court strategy of legal challenges to segregation, many branches fought discrimination using state laws and local political opportunities, sometimes winning important victories.

[ 7 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] Those victories were mostly achieved in Northern and Western states before World War II .  When the Southern civil rights movement gained momentum in the 1940s and 1950s, credit went both to the Legal Defense Fund attorneys and to the massive network of local branches that Ella Baker and other organizers had spread across the region.

[ 7 ] Local organizations built a culture of black political activism.

[ 7 ] Current activities NAACP President and CEO Benjamin Jealous and former president Bill Clinton during the Medgar Evers wreath-laying ceremony in Arlington, June 5, 2013 Youth Youth sections of the NAACP were established in 1936; there are now more than 600 groups with a total of more than 30,000 individuals in this category. The NAACP Youth & College Division is a branch of the NAACP in which youth are actively involved. The Youth Council is composed of hundreds of state, county, high school and college operations where youth (and college students) volunteer to share their opinions with their peers and address local and national issues. Sometimes volunteer work expands to a more international scale.

Youth and College Division "The mission of the NAACP Youth & College Division shall be to inform youth of the problems affecting African Americans and other racial and ethnic minorities; to advance the economic, education, social and political status of African Americans and other racial and ethnic minorities and their harmonious cooperation with other peoples; to stimulate an appreciation of the African Diaspora and other African Americans' contribution to civilization; and to develop an intelligent, militant effective youth leadership." [ 89 ] ACT-SO program Since 1978, the NAACP has sponsored the Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics (ACT-SO) program for high school youth around the United States. The program is designed to recognize and award African-American youth who demonstrate accomplishment in academics, technology, and the arts. Local chapters sponsor competitions in various categories for young people in grades 9–12. Winners of the local competitions are eligible to proceed to the national event at a convention held each summer at locations around the United States. Winners at the national competition receive national recognition, along with cash awards and various prizes.

[ 90 ] Environmental justice The environmental justice group at NAACP has 11 full-time staff members. In April 2019, the NAACP published a report outlining the tactics used by the fossil fuel industry. The report claims that "Fossil fuel companies target the NAACP for manipulation and co-optation." [ 91 ] The NAACP has been concerned about the influence of utilities which have contributed massive amounts of money to NAACP chapters in return for chapter support of non-environmentally friendly goals of utilities. In response, the NAACP has been working with its chapters to encourage them to support environmentally sound policies.

[ 92 ] Headquarters On June 29, 2020, WTOP-FM , a Washington, D.C.

news radio station, reported that the NAACP intended to relocate its national headquarters from its longtime home in Baltimore to the Franklin D. Reeves Center of Municipal Affairs, a building owned by the Government of the District of Columbia , [ 93 ] located at U and 14th Streets in Northwest Washington, D.C.

[ 94 ] Derrick Johnson, the NAACP's president and CEO, emphasized that the organization will be better able to engage in and influence change in D.C. than in Baltimore .

[ 95 ] National convention The NAACP's national convention has been held annually in the following cities: 1909: New York City 1910: New York City 1928: Los Angeles 1929: Cleveland 1954: Dallas 1980: Miami Beach, Florida 1981: Denver 1982: Boston 1983: New Orleans 1984: Kansas City, Missouri 1985: Dallas 1986: Baltimore 1987: New York City 1988: Washington, D.C.

1989: Detroit 1990: Los Angeles 1991: Houston 1992: Nashville, Tennessee 1993: Indianapolis 1994: Chicago 1995: Minneapolis 1996: Charlotte, North Carolina 1997: Pittsburgh 1998: Atlanta 1999: New York City 2000: Baltimore 2001: New Orleans 2002: Houston 2003: Miami 2004: Philadelphia 2005: Milwaukee 2006: Washington, D.C.

2007: Detroit 2008: Cincinnati 2009: New York City 2010: Kansas City, Missouri 2011: Los Angeles 2012: Houston 2013: Orlando, Florida 2014: Baltimore 2015: Philadelphia 2016: Cincinnati 2017: Baltimore 2018: San Antonio 2019: Detroit 2020: Virtually 2021: Virtually 2022: Atlantic City, New Jersey 2023: Boston 2024: Chicago Awards NAACP Image Awards – honoring African-American achievements in film, television, music, and literature NAACP Theatre Awards – honoring African-American achievements in theatre productions Spingarn Medal – honoring general African-American achievements Thalheimer Award – for achievements by NAACP branches and chapters Montague Cobb Award – honoring African-American achievements in the field of health Nathaniel Jones Award for Public Service – first awarded to public servants in 2018 Foot Soldier In the Sands Award – awarded to attorneys who have contributed legal expertise to the NAACP on a pro bono basis Juanita Jackson Mitchell Award for Legal Activism – awarded to an NAACP unit for "exemplary legal redress committee activities" William Robert Ming Advocacy Award – awarded to lawyers who exemplify personal and financial sacrifice for human equality Dayton (OH) NAACP President Derrick L. Foward Receives Thalheimer Award for Publications in Atlantic City, New Jersey in July 2022 See also United States portal Althea T. L. Simmons , NAACP attorney Civil rights movement (1896–1954) Chicago Better Housing Association The Crisis , official magazine National Independent Political League NAACP New Orleans Branch NAACP Theatre Award – President's Award Niagara Movement Racial integration Notes ^ NAACP is usually pronounced "N double-A C P." [ 3 ] References ^ NAACP2016AnnualReport naacp.org Archived August 8, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Charity Navigator – Rating for NAACP Empowerment Programs, Inc" .

www.charitynavigator.org .

Archived from the original on August 21, 2021 . Retrieved August 21, 2021 .

^ "NAACP" .

Cambridge Dictionary .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2024 . Retrieved August 22, 2023 .

^ "National Association for the Advancement of Colored People | History" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2021 . Retrieved December 15, 2019 .

^ Kwame Anthony Appiah, Henry Louis Gates, Jr., eds.

Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience , in articles "Civil Rights Movement" by Patricia Sullivan (pp 441–455) and "National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" by Kate Tuttle (pp 1,388–1,391).

ISBN 0-465-00071-1 .

^ Foer, Franklin (March 4, 2024).

"The Golden Age of American Jews is Ending" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on March 19, 2024 . Retrieved March 19, 2024 .

^ a b c d e "NAACP History and Geography" .

Mapping American Social Movements Through the 20th Century . University of Washington.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2017 . Retrieved April 13, 2017 .

^ "NAACP – Our Mission" . Archived from the original on June 11, 2008 . Retrieved September 5, 2008 .

^ a b "NAACP" .

HISTORY . October 29, 2009.

Archived from the original on May 15, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ "Contact Us" . National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Archived from the original on November 9, 2009 . Retrieved November 17, 2009 .

^ NAACP, " Youth and College – Advisor's Manual Archived July 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ", p 9.

^ Ian Urbina, "Health Executive Named Chairwoman of N.A.A.C.P.," The New York Times , February 21, 2010, p. 4.

^ "Who's going to be the next president of the NAACP?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ "Amid Tumult, N.A.A.C.P. Elects 18th Leader" .

The New York Times . May 17, 2014.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2018 . Retrieved February 19, 2017 .

The organization has never had a woman fill the role of president and chief executive permanently, and there were calls to name one after Mr. Jealous's departure.

^ "Amid Tumult, N.A.A.C.P. Elects 18th Leader" .

The New York Times . May 17, 2014.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2018 . Retrieved February 19, 2017 .

^ "Who's going to be the next president of the NAACP?" .

The Washington Post . September 20, 2013.

Archived from the original on July 10, 2021 . Retrieved May 31, 2016 .

^ health naacp.org Archived May 2, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ^ Texeira, Erin (March 5, 2007).

"NAACP president to step down, cites discord with board" .

USA Today . Associated Press.

Archived from the original on June 28, 2011 . Retrieved March 4, 2007 .

^ " The NAACP Records Archived January 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ".

Information Bulletin , March 2010. Library of Congress. Retrieved January 4, 2017.

^ Dempsey, Beth (November 7, 2011).

"NAACP Archives Go Digital" .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2016 . Retrieved January 4, 2017 .

^ Laguardia, Cheryl; Swoger, Bonnie J. M. (June 5, 2014). " ProQuest's NAACP Papers, History Vault & Treehouse Archived January 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ". Reference eReviews.

Library Journal . Retrieved January 4, 2017.

^ a b Goldman, Mark (2007).

City on the edge: Buffalo, New York . Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books. pp.

19– 22.

ISBN 978-1-59102-457-6 .

^ "Jim Crow Laws" .

HISTORY . February 28, 2018.

Archived from the original on April 19, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ "Niagara Movement First Annual Meeting" .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2014 . Retrieved November 27, 2012 .

^ a b "The story of the Niagara Movement and the N. A. A. C. P., ca. 1945" .

credo.library.umass.edu .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2014 . Retrieved November 27, 2012 .

^ "Niagara Movement" .

W.E.B. DuBois Papers, Special Collections and University Archives W.E.B Du Bois Library, UMass, Amherst, Massachusetts . Archived from the original on March 26, 2012 . Retrieved September 3, 2009 .

^ a b "NAACP Timeline" .

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . Archived from the original on June 17, 2010.

^ Simkin, John.

"William English Walling biography" . Spartacus Educational. Archived from the original on January 4, 2014.

^ Kathryn Kish Sklar, "Florence Kelley", in Rima Lunin Schultz and Adele Hast (eds), Women Building Chicago, 1790–1990: A Biographical Dictionary , Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press, 2001, p. 463.

^ Library of Congress.

"NAACP Founder Charles Edward Russell" . Library of Congress. Archived from the original on May 24, 2013.

^ Marlin, John Tepper.

"NAACP, Happy 100th Birthday" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2017 . Retrieved March 12, 2017 .

^ Wells-Barnett, Ida A., "Lynching:  Our National Cause", Proceedings of the National Negro Conference Archived January 11, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , p. 174.  New York: May 31 – June 1, 1909.

^ "NAACP – How NAACP Began" . Archived from the original on January 22, 2009.

^ Snowden-McCray, Lisa (February 13, 2019).

"The NAACP Was Established February 12, 1909" .

The Crisis .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved July 28, 2020 .

^ "The Crisis | Definition, History, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2023 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ "Black News & Politics | The Crisis Magazine | United States" .

crisismagazine .

Archived from the original on May 18, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ a b Sachar, Howard.

"Working to Extend America's Freedoms: Jewish Involvement in the Civil Rights Movement" .

Excerpt from A History of Jews in America, published by Vintage Books . MyJewishLearning.com. Archived from the original on March 1, 2009 . Retrieved February 4, 2009 .

^ "NAACP History and Geography 1909-1980– Mapping American Social Movements" .

depts.washington.edu . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ "Mapping NAACP chapters 1912-1977– Mapping American Social Movements" .

depts.washington.edu . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ "Mapping NAACP chapters 1912-1977– Mapping American Social Movements" .

depts.washington.edu . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ " "The Birth of A Nation" opens, glorifying the KKK" .

HISTORY . February 9, 2010.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2022 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ Siracusa, Anthony (November 24, 2020).

"A century ago, James Weldon Johnson became the first Black person to head the NAACP" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on May 6, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ Kenneth Robert Janken, Walter White: Mr. NAACP , Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 2006, p.49 ^ Kenneth Robert Janken, Walter White: Mr. NAACP , Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 2006, p.2 and 42 ^ Rogers, Angelica (July 14, 2016).

"Does This Flag Make You Flinch?" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on May 6, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ Bynum, Thomas L. (September 2009). " "We must march forward!": Juanita Jackson and the origin of the NAACP youth movement".

The Journal of African American History .

94 (4): 491– 503.

doi : 10.1086/JAAHv94n4p487 .

^ "Red-Baiting" . SNCC Digital Gateway.

Archived from the original on April 7, 2023 . Retrieved April 6, 2023 .

^ "Black Civil Rights and Liberal Anticommunism: The NAACP in the Early Cold War" (PDF) .

Organization of American Historians .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 8, 2023 . Retrieved April 8, 2023 .

^ Benjamin L. Hooks, "Birth and Separation of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund," Crisis 1979 86(6): 218–220.  0011–1422 ^ Pacelle, Richard L. Jr; Curry, Brett W.; Marshall, Bryan W. (2011).

Decision Making by the Modern Supreme Court . Cambridge University Press. p. 111.

ISBN 978-1-139-49879-1 .

^ James T. Patterson and William W. Freehling, Brown v. Board of Education: A civil rights milestone and its troubled legacy (2001).

^ Randall Kennedy,  "Martin Luther King's constitution: a legal history of the Montgomery bus boycott." Yale Law Journal 98.6 (1989): 999–1067.

^ Cunningham, Candace (February 2021).

" "Hell is Popping Here in South Carolina": Orangeburg County Black Teachers and Their Community in the Immediate Post-Brown Era" .

History of Education Quarterly .

61 (1): 35– 62.

doi : 10.1017/heq.2020.66 .

^ Judith Bloom Fradin,  and Dennis B. Fradin, The power of one: Daisy Bates and the Little Rock Nine (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2004).

^ "Federal Surveillance of African Americans" . University of North Carolina Wilmington.

Archived from the original on January 19, 2019 . Retrieved January 19, 2019 .

^ a b c Marable, Manning (August 2002).

"The NAACP's 93rd Convention: An Assessment (archived copy)" (PDF) .

Along the Color Line . Archived from the original (PDF) on January 6, 2007.

^ a b c d "NAACP Leader Quits Under Fire" .

CBS News . August 9, 2000.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2009 . Retrieved April 4, 2008 .

^ "Bush campaign denounces Dallas NAACP comments on Lieberman" . CNN. August 9, 2000.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2009 . Retrieved April 5, 2008 .

^ Campbell, Duncan (August 10, 2000).

"Black leader suspended for anti-semitic Lieberman slur" .

The Guardian . London.

^ AJCongress on Statement by NAACP Chapter Director on Lieberman Archived February 14, 2009, at the Wayback Machine , American Jewish Congress (AJC), August 9, 2000.

^ "Editorial: No mutual respect: Mr. Bush unwisely forgoes NAACP meeting" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . July 17, 2004.

Archived from the original on September 14, 2007 . Retrieved July 29, 2007 .

^ a b c Allen, Mike (July 10, 2004).

"Bush Criticizes NAACP's Leadership" .

The Washington Post . p. A05.

Archived from the original on October 19, 2016 . Retrieved September 5, 2017 .

^ "President Bush addresses the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People's (NAACP) national convention" . FORA.tv. July 20, 2006. Archived from the original on February 2, 2009 . Retrieved November 30, 2006 .

^ Bush invokes civil rights in NAACP speech , Associated Press (reprinted by NBC News), July 20, 2006. (retrieved on October 14, 2008).

^ a b Janofsky, Michael (October 29, 2004).

"Citing July Speech, I.R.S. Decides to Review N.A.A.C.P." The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 22, 2013 . Retrieved February 19, 2017 .

^ "NAACP chairman calls for Bush's ouster" .

CNN . July 13, 2004.

Archived from the original on February 24, 2008 . Retrieved February 12, 2008 .

^ "Election Year Activities and the Prohibition on Political Campaign Intervention for Section 501(c)(3) Organizations" .

Internal Revenue Service . February 2006. Archived from the original on March 5, 2011.

^ Anderson, Makebra M (February 8, 2005).

"NAACP says IRS has no "Legitimate" Claim" .

National Newspaper Publishers Association . Amsterdam News.

Archived from the original on September 16, 2021 . Retrieved February 12, 2008 .

^ Fears, Darryl (September 1, 2006).

"IRS Ends 2-Year Probe Of NAACP's Tax Status" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2017 . Retrieved September 5, 2017 .

^ Bronner, Angela (September 25, 2006).

"BV Q&A With Julian Bond; Why This Civil Rights Icon Embraces Gay Rights" .

Blackvoices.com . Archived from the original on May 4, 2010 . Retrieved April 13, 2017 .

^ "NAACP chair says 'gay rights are civil rights' " .

Washington Blade . April 8, 2004. Archived from the original on March 21, 2006 . Retrieved September 24, 2009 .

^ Barbaro, Michael (May 19, 2012).

"N.A.A.C.P. Endorses Same-Sex Marriage" .

The Caucus . The New York Times.

Archived from the original on May 21, 2012 . Retrieved May 20, 2012 .

^ "NAACP Passes Resolution in Support of Marriage Equality" . NAACP. May 19, 2012. Archived from the original on May 22, 2012 . Retrieved May 20, 2012 .

^ Castellanos, Dalina (May 19, 2012).

"NAACP endorses same-sex marriage, says it's a civil right" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on May 21, 2012 . Retrieved May 21, 2012 .

^ After NAACP's Gay Marriage Stance, Discord And Discussion Archived February 11, 2018, at the Wayback Machine . NPR (June 8, 2012). Retrieved on May 24, 2014.

^ "National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved December 9, 2019 .

^ Coleman, Nancy (August 2, 2017).

"NAACP issues its first statewide travel advisory, for Missouri" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 9, 2019 . Retrieved December 9, 2019 .

^ " 'The Birth of a Nation': The most racist movie ever made" .

The Washington Post . October 6, 2021.

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2021 . Retrieved November 16, 2023 .

^ "NAACP Calls for Censorship of all Dr. Seuss Books/Works in all Public Schools/Institutions and Public Libraries | NAACP" . January 2019.

^ Limon, Janice (April 27, 2023).

" 'Pure censorship': NAACP, parents file federal lawsuit over Upstate school district's book ban" .

WYFF .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2023 . Retrieved November 16, 2023 .

^ "Civil rights groups warn tourists about traveling to Florida" .

NPR . May 22, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 5, 2023 . Retrieved August 3, 2023 .

^ Hutchinson, Bill.

"NAACP issues travel advisory alleging, Florida 'hostile to African Americans' " .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2023 . Retrieved August 4, 2023 .

^ "A New Legal Team at the NAACP - Separate Is Not Equal" .

americanhistory.si.edu .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ "Charles Hamilton Houston" .

law.howard.edu .

Archived from the original on August 25, 2021 . Retrieved May 25, 2021 .

^ " 'The Birth of a Nation': The most racist movie ever made" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ "Brown@50: Brief History of Brown Fifty Years Later" .

law.howard.edu .

Archived from the original on October 10, 2020 . Retrieved May 25, 2021 .

^ "Ella Baker Center for Human Rights Who Was Ella Baker?" .

ellabakercenter.org .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2019 . Retrieved May 25, 2021 .

^ "Ella Baker" .

Biography . May 4, 2021.

Archived from the original on May 25, 2021 . Retrieved May 25, 2021 .

^ youth-college naacp.org Archived May 2, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ^ "NAACP Proudly Announces 30th Anniversary ACT-SO Medalists" . National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Archived from the original on February 4, 2009 . Retrieved January 31, 2009 .

^ "NAACP Fossil Fuels report" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ Penn, Ivan (January 5, 2020).

"N.A.A.C.P. Tells Local Chapters: Don't Let Energy Industry Manipulate You" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ District of Columbia Office of Tax and Revenue property information for the Franklin D. Reeves Center of Municipal Affairs Archived September 26, 2021, at the Wayback Machine (Retrieved November 9, 2020) ^ NAACP intends to move national headquarters from Baltimore to DC's U Street corridor Archived November 9, 2020, at the Wayback Machine (Retrieved from WTOP Radio, Washington D.C. on November 9, 2020) ^ Booker, Brakkton (June 30, 2020).

"NAACP Plans To Move Its Headquarters From Baltimore To Washington, D.C." NPR .

Archived from the original on May 6, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

Further reading Library resources about NAACP Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Alexander, Shawn Leigh.

An Army of Lions: The Civil Rights Struggle Before the NAACP . (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2012).

Berg, Manfred .

The Ticket to Freedom: The NAACP and the Struggle for Black Political Integration . University Press of Florida, 2007.

Browne-Marshall, Gloria J.

The Voting Rights War: The NAACP and the Ongoing Struggle for Justice . Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2016.

Bynum, Thomas L.

NAACP: Youth and the Fight for Black Freedom, 1936–1965 . Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee Press, 2013.

Carle, Susan D.

Defining the Struggle: National Racial Justice Organizing, 1880–1915 (Oxford University Press, 2013). 404pp. Focus on NAACP.

Dalfiume, Richard M. (June 1, 1968).

"The "Forgotten Years" of the Negro Revolution" .

Journal of American History .

55 (1): 90– 106.

doi : 10.2307/1894253 .

ISSN 0021-8723 .

JSTOR 1894253 .

Fleming, Cynthia Griggs.

In the Shadow of Selma: The Continuing Struggle for Civil Rights in the Rural South . Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2004.

Francis, Megan Ming (2014). "The Birth of the NAACP, Mob Violence, and the Challenge of Public Opinion".

Civil Rights and the Making of the Modern American State . Cambridge University Press. pp.

29– 58.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139583749.002 .

ISBN 978-1-107-03710-6 .

Goings, Kenneth W. (1990).

The NAACP Comes of Age: The Defeat of Judge John J. Parker .

Hughes, Langston (1962).

Fight for Freedom: The Story of the NAACP .

Janken, Kenneth Robert.

White: The Biography of Walter White, Mr. NAACP . New York: The New Press, 2003.

Jonas, Gilbert S.

Freedom's Sword: The NAACP and the Struggle against Racism in America, 1909–1969 . London: Routledge, 2005.

Kellogg, Charles Flint.

NAACP: A History of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1967.

Lewis, David Levering .

W.E.B. DuBois . In two volumes ( 1994 ; 2001 ).

Mosnier, Joseph L. (2005).

Crafting Law in the Second Reconstruction: Julius Chambers, the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and Title VII (PhD dissertation). University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

OCLC 70810152 .

Murphy, Walter F. (1959).

"The South Counterattacks: The Anti-NAACP Laws" .

The Western Political Quarterly .

12 (2): 371– 390.

doi : 10.2307/443977 .

ISSN 0043-4078 .

JSTOR 443977 .

Reed, Christopher Robert.

The Chicago NAACP and the Rise of Black Professional Leadership, 1910–1966 . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1997.

Ring, Natalie J.

"National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" .

Encyclopedia of American Studies , ed. Simon J. Bronner (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015).

Ross, Barbara Joyce (1972).

J. E. Spingarn and the Rise of the NAACP, 1911–1939 .

Ryan, Yvonne.

Roy Wilkins: The Quiet Revolutionary and the NAACP . Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky, 2014.

Sartain, Lee.

Borders of Equality: The NAACP and the Baltimore Civil Rights Struggle, 1914–1970 . Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi, 2013.

Sartain, Lee.

Invisible Activists: Women of the Louisiana NAACP and the Struggle for Civil Rights, 1915–1945 . Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press. 2007.

Schneider, Mark Robert.

We Return Fighting: The Civil Rights Movement in the Jazz Age . Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press, 2001.

St. James, Warren D. (1958).

The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People: A Case Study in Pressure Groups .

Sullivan, Patricia.

Lift Every Voice: The NAACP and the Making of the Civil Rights Movement . New York: The New Press, 2010.

Thompson, Christina M. (2010).

A More Perfect Union: Race, Rights, and Rhetoric in the NAACP and the White Citizens' Council (MA thesis). Simmons College.

OCLC 754658741 .

Topping, Simon (2004).

" "Supporting Our Friends and Defeating Our Enemies": Militancy and Nonpartisanship in the NAACP, 1936-1948" .

The Journal of African American History .

89 (1): 17– 35.

doi : 10.2307/4134044 .

ISSN 1548-1867 .

JSTOR 4134044 .

Tushnet, Mark V.

The NAACP's Legal Strategy against Segregated Education, 1925–1950 . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1987.

Wedin, Carolyn.

Inheritors of the Spirit: Mary White Ovington and the Founding of the NAACP . Wiley 1998.

Woodley, Jenny.

Art for Equality: The NAACP's Cultural Campaign for Civil Rights . Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky, 2014.

Verney, Kevern, and Lee Sartain, eds. (2009).

Long Is the Way and Hard: One Hundred Years of the NAACP .

Zangrando, Robert.

The NAACP Crusade Against Lynching, 1909–1950 . Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1980.

External links NAACP at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Official website NAACP History and Geography - Mapping American Social Movements Map of NAACP branches - Mapping American Social Movements Civil Rights Movement Archive , crmvet.org NAACP in Georgia , georgiaencyclopedia.org NAACP Turns 100: The History and Future of the Nation's Oldest and Largest Civil Rights Organization , democracynow.org video FBI file on the NAACP v t e National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Leaders Executive Secretaries (1910–1964) Executive Directors (1964–1996) Presidents and CEOs (1996–present) Frances Blascoer (1910–1911) Mary White Ovington (1911–1912) May Childs Nerney (1912–1916) Mary White Ovington (1916) Royal Freeman Nash (1916–1917) James Weldon Johnson (1917–1918) John Shillady (1918–1920) James Weldon Johnson (1920–1929) Walter White (1929–1955) Roy Wilkins (1955–1977) Benjamin Hooks (1977–1992) Benjamin Chavis (1993–1994) Earl Shinhoster (1994–1996) Kweisi Mfume (1996–2004) Dennis Courtland Hayes (2004–2005, interim) Bruce S. Gordon (2005–2007) Dennis Courtland Hayes (2007–2008, interim) Ben Jealous (2008–2013) Lorraine Miller (2013–2014, interim) Cornell William Brooks (2014–2017) Derrick Johnson (2017–present) Presidents (1909–1996) Moorfield Storey (1909–1929) Joel Elias Spingarn (1930–1939) Arthur B. Spingarn (1940–1965) Kivie Kaplan (1966–1975) Montague Cobb (1976–1982) James Kemp (1983) Enolia McMillan (1984–1990) Hazel Dukes (1990–1992) Rupert Richardson (1992–1996) Board Chairs English Walling (1910–1911) Oswald Garrison Villard (1911–1914) Joel Elias Spingarn (1914–1919) Mary White Ovington (1919–1934) Louis T. Wright (1934–1953) Channing Heggie Tobias (1953–1960) Robert C. Weaver (1960–1961) Stephen Gill Spottswood (1961–1975) Margaret Bush Wilson (1975–1983) Kelly Alexander Sr.

(1983–1984) William Gibson (1985–1995) Myrlie Evers-Williams (1995–1998) Julian Bond (1998–2010) Roslyn Brock (2010–2017) Leon W. Russell (2017–present) See also NAACP Theatre Awards NAACP Image Awards NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund NAACP Youth Council Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics Spingarn Medal Niagara Movement National Negro Committee The Crisis v t e Civil rights movement (1954–1968) Events ( timeline ) Prior to 1954 Journey of Reconciliation Executive Order 9981 Murders of Harry and Harriette Moore Sweatt v. Painter (1950) McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950) Baton Rouge bus boycott 1954–1959 Brown v. Board of Education Bolling v. Sharpe Briggs v. Elliott Davis v. Prince Edward County Gebhart v. Belton Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company Read's Drug Store sit-in Emmett Till Montgomery bus boycott Browder v. Gayle Tallahassee bus boycott Mansfield school desegregation 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom " Give Us the Ballot " Royal Ice Cream sit-in Little Rock Nine Cooper v. Aaron Civil Rights Act of 1957 Ministers' Manifesto Dockum Drug Store sit-in Katz Drug Store sit-in Kissing Case Biloxi wade-ins 1960–1963 New Year's Day March Sit-in movement Greensboro sit-ins Nashville sit-ins Sibley Commission Atlanta sit-ins Savannah Protest Movement Greenville Eight Civil Rights Act of 1960 Ax Handle Saturday New Orleans school desegregation Gomillion v. Lightfoot Boynton v. Virginia University of Georgia desegregation riot Rock Hill sit-ins Robert F. Kennedy's Law Day Address Freedom Rides Anniston and Birmingham bus attacks Garner v. Louisiana Albany Movement Cambridge movement University of Chicago sit-ins " Second Emancipation Proclamation " Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot Atlanta's Berlin Wall "Segregation now, segregation forever" Stand in the Schoolhouse Door 1963 Birmingham campaign Letter from Birmingham Jail Children's Crusade Birmingham riot 16th Street Baptist Church bombing John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Civil Rights Detroit Walk to Freedom March on Washington "I Have a Dream" Big Six St. Augustine movement 1964–1968 Twenty-fourth Amendment Chester school protests Bloody Tuesday 1964 Monson Motor Lodge protests Freedom Summer workers' murders Civil Rights Act of 1964 Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States Katzenbach v. McClung 1964–1965 Scripto strike 1965 Selma to Montgomery marches " How Long, Not Long " SCOPE Project Voting Rights Act of 1965 Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections March Against Fear White House Conference on Civil Rights Chicago Freedom Movement/Chicago open housing movement Loving v. Virginia Memphis sanitation strike King assassination funeral riots Civil Rights Act of 1968 Poor People's Campaign Green v. County School Board of New Kent County Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co.

1968 Olympics Black Power salute Activist groups Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights American Friends Service Committee Atlanta Negro Voters League Atlanta Student Movement Black Panther Party Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) Committee for Freedom Now Committee on Appeal for Human Rights An Appeal for Human Rights Council for United Civil Rights Leadership Council of Federated Organizations Dallas County Voters League Deacons for Defense and Justice Georgia Council on Human Relations Highlander Folk School Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights Lowndes County Freedom Organization Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party Montgomery Improvement Association NAACP Youth Council Nashville Student Movement Nation of Islam Northern Student Movement National Council of Negro Women National Urban League Operation Breadbasket Regional Council of Negro Leadership Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Southern Regional Council Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) The Freedom Singers United Auto Workers (UAW) Wednesdays in Mississippi Women's Political Council Activists Juanita Abernathy Ralph Abernathy Victoria Gray Adams Zev Aelony Mathew Ahmann Muhammad Ali William G. Anderson Gwendolyn Armstrong Arnold Aronson Ella Baker James Baldwin Marion Barry Daisy Bates Harry Belafonte James Bevel Claude Black Gloria Blackwell Randolph Blackwell Unita Blackwell Ezell Blair Jr.

Joanne Bland Julian Bond Joseph E. Boone William Holmes Borders Amelia Boynton Bruce Boynton Raylawni Branch Stanley Branche Ruby Bridges Aurelia Browder H. Rap Brown Ralph Bunche John H. Calhoun Guy Carawan Stokely Carmichael Johnnie Carr James Chaney J. L. Chestnut Shirley Chisholm Colia Lafayette Clark Ramsey Clark Septima Clark Xernona Clayton Eldridge Cleaver Kathleen Cleaver Josephine Dobbs Clement Charles E. Cobb Jr.

Annie Lee Cooper Dorothy Cotton Claudette Colvin Vernon Dahmer Jonathan Daniels Abraham Lincoln Davis Angela Davis Joseph DeLaine Dave Dennis Annie Bell Robinson Devine John Wesley Dobbs Patricia Stephens Due Joseph Ellwanger Charles Evers Medgar Evers Myrlie Evers-Williams Chuck Fager James Farmer Walter Fauntroy James Forman Marie Foster Golden Frinks Andrew Goodman Robert Graetz Fred Gray Jack Greenberg Dick Gregory Lawrence Guyot Prathia Hall Fannie Lou Hamer Fred Hampton William E. Harbour Vincent Harding Dorothy Height Audrey Faye Hendricks Lola Hendricks Aaron Henry Oliver Hill Donald L. Hollowell James Hood Myles Horton Zilphia Horton T. R. M. Howard Ruby Hurley Cecil Ivory Jesse Jackson Jimmie Lee Jackson Richie Jean Jackson T. J. Jemison Esau Jenkins Barbara Rose Johns Vernon Johns Frank Minis Johnson Clarence Jones J. Charles Jones Matthew Jones Vernon Jordan Tom Kahn Clyde Kennard A. D. King C.B. King Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Martin Luther King Sr.

Bernard Lafayette James Lawson Bernard Lee Sanford R. Leigh Jim Letherer Stanley Levison John Lewis Viola Liuzzo Z. Alexander Looby Joseph Lowery Clara Luper Danny Lyon Malcolm X Mae Mallory Vivian Malone Bob Mants Thurgood Marshall Benjamin Mays Franklin McCain Charles McDew Ralph McGill Floyd McKissick Joseph McNeil James Meredith William Ming Jack Minnis Amzie Moore Cecil B. Moore Douglas E. Moore Harriette Moore Harry T. Moore Queen Mother Moore William Lewis Moore Irene Morgan Bob Moses William Moyer Elijah Muhammad Diane Nash Charles Neblett Huey P. Newton Edgar Nixon Jack O'Dell James Orange Rosa Parks James Peck Charles Person Homer Plessy Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Fay Bellamy Powell Rodney N. Powell Al Raby Lincoln Ragsdale A. Philip Randolph George Raymond George Raymond Jr.

Bernice Johnson Reagon Cordell Reagon James Reeb Frederick D. Reese Walter Reuther Gloria Richardson David Richmond Bernice Robinson Jo Ann Robinson Angela Russell Bayard Rustin Bernie Sanders Michael Schwerner Bobby Seale Pete Seeger Cleveland Sellers Charles Sherrod Alexander D. Shimkin Fred Shuttlesworth Modjeska Monteith Simkins Glenn E. Smiley A. Maceo Smith Kelly Miller Smith Mary Louise Smith Maxine Smith Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson Charles Kenzie Steele Hank Thomas Dorothy Tillman A. P. Tureaud Hartman Turnbow Albert Turner C. T. Vivian A. T. Walden Wyatt Tee Walker Hollis Watkins Walter Francis White Roy Wilkins Hosea Williams Kale Williams Robert F. Williams Q. V. Williamson Andrew Young Whitney Young Sammy Younge Jr.

Bob Zellner James Zwerg By region Omaha, Nebraska South Carolina Movement songs "Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me 'Round" "If You Miss Me at the Back of the Bus" "Kumbaya" "Keep Your Eyes on the Prize" "Oh, Freedom" "This Little Light of Mine" "We Shall Not Be Moved" "We Shall Overcome" "Woke Up This Morning (With My Mind Stayed On Freedom)" Influences Nonviolence Padayatra Sermon on the Mount Mahatma Gandhi Ahimsa Satyagraha The Kingdom of God Is Within You Frederick Douglass W. E. B. Du Bois Mary McLeod Bethune Related Lyndon B. Johnson Jim Crow laws Lynching in the United States Plessy v. Ferguson Separate but equal Buchanan v. Warley Hocutt v. Wilson Powell v. Alabama Smith v. Allwright Hernandez v. Texas Loving v. Virginia African-American women in the movement Jews in the civil rights movement Fifth Circuit Four 16th Street Baptist Church Kelly Ingram Park A.G. Gaston Motel Bethel Baptist Church Brown Chapel Dexter Avenue Baptist Church Holt Street Baptist Church Edmund Pettus Bridge March on Washington Movement African-American churches attacked List of lynching victims in the United States Freedom Schools Freedom songs Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam " Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence " Voter Education Project 1960s counterculture African American founding fathers of the United States Eyes on the Prize Legacy In popular culture Birmingham Civil Rights Institute Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument Civil Rights Memorial Civil Rights Movement Archive Emmett Till and Mamie Till-Mobley National Monument Medgar and Myrlie Evers Home National Monument Freedom Rides Museum Freedom Riders National Monument King Center for Nonviolent Social Change Martin Luther King Jr. Day Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial other King memorials Mississippi Civil Rights Museum National Civil Rights Museum National Voting Rights Museum St. Augustine Foot Soldiers Monument Olympic Black Power Statue Noted historians Taylor Branch Clayborne Carson John Dittmer Michael Eric Dyson Jonathan Eig Chuck Fager Adam Fairclough David Garrow David Halberstam Vincent Harding Steven F. Lawson Doug McAdam Diane McWhorter Charles M. Payne Thomas E. Ricks Timothy Tyson Akinyele Umoja Movement photographers Civil rights movement portal v t e W. E. B. Du Bois Life W.E.B. Du Bois Boyhood Homesite Atlanta Conference of Negro Problems Atlanta Sociological Laboratory The Exhibit of American Negroes (1900) First Pan-African Conference (1900) Niagara Movement NAACP (co-founder) The Crisis magazine The Brownies' Book magazine Freedom newspaper Pan-African Congress Fisk University protest (1924–1925) W. E. B. Du Bois Memorial Centre for Pan African Culture (home, burial site, and memorial) Concepts Talented Tenth Color line Double consciousness Non-fiction The Suppression of the African Slave-trade to the United States of America (1894) The Study of the Negro Problems (1898) The Philadelphia Negro (1899) The Souls of Black Folk (1903) The Negro in the South (1907) John Brown (1909) The Negro (1915) Darkwater: Voices from Within the Veil (1920) Black Reconstruction in America (1935) Dusk of Dawn (1940) Fiction " The Comet " (1920) Dark Princess (1928) Honors W. E. B. Du Bois Library W.E.B. Du Bois Career of Distinguished Scholarship Award W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute Related Shirley Graham Du Bois (second wife) Yolande Du Bois (daughter) Encyclopedia Africana The Negro Problem (1903 book) W.E.B. Du Bois Clubs of America African American founding fathers of the United States v t e African Americans History Timeline Abolitionism African American founding fathers Afrocentrism American Civil War Atlantic slave trade Black Codes Black cowboys Black genocide Black Lives Matter Brown v. Board of Education (1954) Children of the plantation Civil Rights Acts 1964 Voting Rights Act of 1965 1968 Civil rights movement 1865–1896 Civil right movement 1896–1954 Civil rights movement 1954–1968 Montgomery bus boycott Browder v. Gayle (1956) Sit-in movement Freedom Riders Birmingham movement March on Washington Freedom Summer Selma to Montgomery marches Chicago Freedom Movement Post–civil rights era Cornerstone Speech COVID-19 impact Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) Free Negro Free people of color George Floyd protests Great Migration Second New Exodusters Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009 / Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013 Jim Crow laws Lynching Military history Million Man March Nadir of American race relations The Negro Motorist Green Book Partus sequitur ventrem Plantations Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) Reconstruction Amendments Reconstruction era Redlining Separate but equal Silent Parade Slavery Treatment of slaves Tulsa race massacre Underground Railroad Women's suffrage movement Culture Afrofuturism Art Black mecca Businesses Dance Family structure Film Folktales Hair Harlem Renaissance New Negro Hoodoo Juneteenth Kwanzaa LGBTQ community Literature Music Musical theater Names Negro National Anthem Neighborhoods Newspapers Soul food Stereotypes Middle class Upper class Notable people Ralph Abernathy Maya Angelou Crispus Attucks James Baldwin James Bevel Julian Bond Amelia Boynton James Bradley Carol Moseley Braun Edward Brooke Blanche Bruce Ralph Bunche George Washington Carver Shirley Chisholm Claudette Colvin Frederick Douglass W. E. B. Du Bois Medgar Evers James Farmer Henry Highland Garnet Marcus Garvey Fred Gray Prathia Hall Fannie Lou Hamer Kamala Harris Jimi Hendrix Jesse Jackson Ketanji Brown Jackson Michael Jackson Harriet Jacobs Barbara Jordan Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Bernard Lafayette James Lawson Huddie Ledbetter John Lewis Joseph Lowery Malcolm X Thurgood Marshall Toni Morrison Bob Moses Diane Nash Barack Obama Michelle Obama Rosa Parks Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Colin Powell Gabriel Prosser Joseph Rainey A. Philip Randolph Hiram Revels Paul Robeson Al Sharpton Fred Shuttlesworth Clarence Thomas Emmett Till Sojourner Truth Harriet Tubman Nat Turner Denmark Vesey C. T. Vivian David Walker Booker T. Washington Ida B. Wells Roy Wilkins Oprah Winfrey Andrew Young Whitney Young Education, science and technology Black studies Black schools Historically black colleges and universities Inventors and scientists Museums Women in computer science in medicine in STEM fields Religion African-American Jews Islam American Society of Muslims Nation of Islam Black church Azusa Street Revival Black Hebrew Israelites Black theology Doctrine of Father Divine Political movements Anarchism Back-to-Africa movement Black power Movement Capitalism Conservatism Leftism Pan-Africanism Populism Raised fist Self-determination Nationalism Socialism Civic and economic groups Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH) Black Panther Party Committee to Eliminate Media Offensive to African People (CEMOTAP) Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Nashville Student Movement National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC) National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) National Urban League (NUL) Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) Thurgood Marshall College Fund United Negro College Fund (UNCF) Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL) Sports Negro league baseball Baseball color line Black players in professional American football Black NFL quarterbacks Black players in ice hockey Muhammad Ali Arthur Ashe Jack Johnson Joe Louis Jesse Owens Jackie Robinson Serena Williams Athletic associations and conferences Central (CIAA) Mid-Eastern (MEAC) Southern (SIAC) Southwestern (SWAC) Ethnic subdivisions By African descent Fula Gullah Igbo Yoruba Alabama Creole Black Indians Black Seminoles Cherokee Freedmen Choctaw Freedmen Creek Freedmen Black Southerners Blaxicans Great Dismal Swamp maroons Louisiana Creole of color Melungeon Demographics Neighborhoods list U.S. cities with large populations 2000 majorities 2010 majorities Metropolitan areas States and territories Languages Afro-Seminole Creole American Sign Black American Sign English American English African-American English African-American Vernacular English social context Gullah Louisiana Creole By state/city Alabama Arkansas California Los Angeles San Francisco Florida Jacksonville Tallahassee Georgia Atlanta Hawaii Illinois Chicago Indiana Iowa Davenport Kansas Kentucky Lexington Louisiana Maryland Baltimore Massachusetts Boston Michigan Detroit Mississippi Nebraska Omaha New Jersey New York New York City North Carolina Ohio Cleveland Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Philadelphia Puerto Rico South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Austin Dallas–Fort Worth Houston San Antonio Utah Virginia West Virginia Diaspora Africa Gambia Ghana Liberia Sierra Leone America Canada Dominican Republic Haiti Mexico Trinidad and Tobago Israel Europe France Lists African Americans Activists Actors Astronauts Billionaires Journalists Jurists Mathematicians Republicans Singers Sportspeople Spingarn Medal winners US cabinet members US representatives US senators Visual artists Writers African-American firsts Mayors Sports firsts US state firsts Historic places Index of related articles Landmark African-American legislation Lynching victims Monuments Neighborhoods Topics related to the African diaspora Category United States portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Israel Catalonia Artists Museum of Modern Art Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=NAACP&oldid=1303091233 " Categories : NAACP 1909 establishments in the United States African-American organizations Civil liberties advocacy groups in the United States Civil rights movement organizations Liberalism in the United States Nonpartisan organizations in the United States Organizations based in Baltimore Organizations established in 1909 African-American upper class Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use American English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles needing additional references from July 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from July 2020 All articles to be expanded Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 02:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents NAACP 38 languages Add topic

