Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Categories Toggle Categories subsection 1.1 Individual risk assessment 1.2 Systems risk assessment 2 Concept Toggle Concept subsection 2.1 Mild versus wild risk 2.2 Mathematical conceptualization 2.3 Quantitative risk assessment 2.4 Risk engineering 3 Process Toggle Process subsection 3.1 Dose dependent risk 4 Dynamic risk assessment 5 Fields of application Toggle Fields of application subsection 5.1 General human health 5.1.1 Small sub-populations 5.1.2 Acceptable risk criteria 5.2 Public health 5.3 Human settlements 5.3.1 Sub-Saharan Africa 5.4 Auditing 5.5 Project management 5.6 Information security 5.7 Cybersecurity 5.8 Megainvestment projects 5.9 Software evolution 5.10 Shipping industry 5.11 Underwater diving 5.12 Outdoor and wilderness adventure 5.13 Environment 5.14 Biodiversity 5.15 Law 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 References 7.2 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Risk assessment 21 languages العربية Català Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Español Estremeñu فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Lietuvių Монгол 日本語 Português Română Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Estimation of risk associated with exposure to a given set of hazards This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( February 2021 ) Risk assessment is a process for identifying hazards, potential (future) events which may negatively impact on individuals, assets, and/or the environment because of those hazards, their likelihood and consequences, and actions which can mitigate these effects. The output from such a process may also be called a risk assessment.

Hazard analysis forms the first stage of a risk assessment process. Judgments "on the tolerability of the risk on the basis of a risk analysis" (i.e. risk evaluation) also form part of the process.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The results of a risk assessment process may be expressed in a quantitative or qualitative fashion.

[ 3 ] Risk assessment forms a key part of a broader risk management strategy to help reduce any potential risk-related consequences.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Categories [ edit ] Individual risk assessment [ edit ] Risk assessment and risk management Venn diagram Risk assessments can be undertaken in individual cases, including in patient and physician interactions.

[ 4 ] In the narrow sense chemical risk assessment is the assessment of a health risk in response to environmental exposures.

[ 5 ] The ways statistics are expressed and communicated to an individual, both through words and numbers impact his or her interpretation of benefit and harm. For example, a fatality rate may be interpreted as less benign than the corresponding survival rate .

[ 4 ] A systematic review of patients and doctors from 2017 found that overstatement of benefits and understatement of risks occurred more often than the alternative.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] A systematic review from the Cochrane collaboration suggested "well-documented decision aids" are helpful in reducing effects of such tendencies or biases.

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] Aids may help people come to a decision about their care based on evidence informed information that align with their values.

[ 7 ] Decision aids may also help people understand the risks more clearly, and they empower people to take an active role when making medical decisions.

[ 7 ] The systematic review did not find a difference in people who regretted their decisions between those who used decision aids and those who had the usual standard treatment.

[ 7 ] An individual's own risk perception may be affected by psychological, ideological, religious or otherwise subjective factors, which impact rationality of the process.

[ 4 ] Individuals tend to be less rational when risks and exposures concern themselves as opposed to others.

[ 4 ] There is also a tendency to underestimate risks that are voluntary or where the individual sees themselves as being in control, such as smoking.

[ 4 ] Systems risk assessment [ edit ] Risk assessment can also be made on a much larger systems theory scale, for example assessing the risks of an ecosystem or an interactively complex mechanical, electronic, nuclear, and biological system or a hurricane (a complex meteorological and geographical system). Systems may be defined as linear and nonlinear (or complex), where linear systems are predictable and relatively easy to understand given a change in input, and non-linear systems unpredictable when inputs are changed.

[ 8 ] As such, risk assessments of non-linear/complex systems tend to be more challenging.

In the engineering of complex systems , sophisticated risk assessments are often made within safety engineering and reliability engineering when it concerns threats to life, natural environment , or machine functioning. The agriculture, nuclear, aerospace, oil, chemical, railroad, and military industries have a long history of dealing with risk assessment.

[ 9 ] Also, medical, hospital, social service , [ 10 ] and food industries control risks and perform risk assessments on a continual basis. Methods for assessment of risk may differ between industries and whether it pertains to general financial decisions or environmental, ecological, or public health risk assessment.

[ 9 ] Concept [ edit ] Rapid technological change, increasing scale of industrial complexes, increased system integration, market competition , and other factors have been shown to increase societal risk in the past few decades.

[ 1 ] As such, risk assessments become increasingly critical in mitigating accidents, improving safety, and improving outcomes. Risk assessment consists of an objective evaluation of risk in which assumptions and uncertainties are clearly considered and presented. This involves identification of risk (what can happen and why), the potential consequences, the probability of occurrence , the tolerability or acceptability of the risk, and ways to mitigate or reduce the probability of the risk.

[ 2 ] Optimally, it also involves documentation of the risk assessment and its findings, implementation of mitigation methods, and review of the assessment (or risk management plan), coupled with updates when necessary.

[ 1 ] Sometimes risks can be deemed acceptable, meaning the risk "is understood and tolerated ... usually because the cost or difficulty of implementing an effective countermeasure for the associated vulnerability exceeds the expectation of loss." [ 11 ] Mild versus wild risk [ edit ] Benoit Mandelbrot distinguished between "mild" and "wild" risk and argued that risk assessment and risk management must be fundamentally different for the two types of risk.

[ 12 ] Mild risk follows normal or near-normal probability distributions , is subject to regression to the mean and the law of large numbers , and is therefore relatively predictable. Wild risk follows fat-tailed distributions , e.g., Pareto or power-law distributions , is subject to regression to the tail (infinite mean or variance, rendering the law of large numbers invalid or ineffective), and is therefore difficult or impossible to predict. A common error in risk assessment and management is to underestimate the wildness of risk, assuming risk to be mild when in fact it is wild, which must be avoided if risk assessment and management are to be valid and reliable, according to Mandelbrot.

Mathematical conceptualization [ edit ] Risk assessment from a financial point of view To see the risk management process expressed mathematically, one can define expected risk as the sum over individual risks, R i {\displaystyle R_{i}} , which can be computed as the product of potential losses, L i {\displaystyle L_{i}} , and their probabilities, p ( L i ) {\displaystyle p(L_{i})} : R i = L i p ( L i ) {\displaystyle R_{i}=L_{i}p(L_{i})\,\!} R e x p = ∑ ∑ i L i p ( L i ) {\displaystyle R_{exp}=\sum _{i}L_{i}p(L_{i})\,\!} Even though for some risks R i , R j {\displaystyle R_{i},R_{j}} , we might have R i = R j {\displaystyle R_{i}=R_{j}} , if the probability p ( L j ) {\displaystyle p(L_{j})} is small compared to p ( L i ) {\displaystyle p(L_{i})} , its estimation might be based only on a smaller number of prior events, and hence, more uncertain. On the other hand, since R i = R j {\displaystyle R_{i}=R_{j}} , L j {\displaystyle L_{j}} must be larger than L i {\displaystyle L_{i}} , so decisions based on this uncertainty would be more consequential, and hence, warrant a different approach.

This becomes important when we consider the variance of risk R v a r = ∑ ∑ i L i 2 p ( L i ) − − ( ∑ ∑ i R i ) 2 {\displaystyle R_{var}=\sum _{i}L_{i}^{2}p(L_{i})-\left(\sum _{i}R_{i}\right)^{2}} as a large L i {\displaystyle L_{i}} changes the value.

Financial decisions, such as insurance, express loss in terms of dollar amounts.  When risk assessment is used for public health or environmental decisions, the loss can be quantified in a common metric such as a country's currency or some numerical measure of a location's quality of life.  For public health and environmental decisions, the loss is simply a verbal description of the outcome, such as increased cancer incidence or incidence of birth defects. In that case, the "risk" is expressed as R i = p ( L i ) {\displaystyle R_{i}=p(L_{i})\,\!} If the risk estimate takes into account information on the number of individuals exposed, it is termed a "population risk" and is in units of expected increased cases per time period. If the risk estimate does not take into account the number of individuals exposed, it is termed an "individual risk" and is in units of incidence rate per time period.  Population risks are of more use for cost/benefit analysis; individual risks are of more use for evaluating whether risks to individuals are "acceptable".

Quantitative risk assessment [ edit ] Further information: Quantitative risk assessment software In quantitative risk assessment, an annualized loss expectancy (ALE) may be used to justify the cost of implementing countermeasures to protect an asset. This may be calculated by multiplying the single loss expectancy (SLE), which is the loss of value based on a single security incident, with the annualized rate of occurrence (ARO), which is an estimate of how often a threat would be successful in exploiting a vulnerability.

The usefulness of quantitative risk assessment has been questioned, however.

Barry Commoner , Brian Wynne and other critics have expressed concerns that risk assessment tends to be overly quantitative and reductive. For example, they argue that risk assessments ignore qualitative differences among risks. Some charge that assessments may drop out important non-quantifiable or inaccessible information, such as variations among the classes of people exposed to hazards, or social amplification.

[ 13 ] Furthermore, Commoner [ 14 ] and O'Brien [ 15 ] claim that quantitative approaches divert attention from precautionary or preventative measures.

[ 16 ] Others, like Nassim Nicholas Taleb consider risk managers little more than "blind users" of statistical tools and methods.

[ 17 ] Risk engineering [ edit ] Risk engineering is central to the assessment phase, where risks are not only identified but rigorously analyzed, quantified, and modeled. In the context of financial systems—particularly credit risk—risk engineering involves understanding the dynamic behavior of risk parameters such as probability of default, exposure at default, and loss given default.

[ 18 ] These are not treated as isolated figures but as interconnected components that respond to systemic and idiosyncratic changes. As individual risks aggregate into portfolios or larger systems, risk engineers deploy statistical models and simulation techniques to uncover dependencies and potential cascade effects. This systems-level view enables the modeling of stress scenarios and rare, high-impact events—what some refer to as "wild risk." It also supports the design of robust structures capable of absorbing shocks and preventing systemic collapse.

[ 19 ] Regulatory frameworks add another layer to the assessment process, requiring that risk engineering efforts not only reflect real-world complexity but also align with institutional constraints.

Process [ edit ] Older textbooks distinguish between the term risk analysis and risk evaluation ;
a risk analysis includes the following 4 steps: [ 1 ] establish the context, which restricts the range of hazards to be considered. It is also necessary to identify the potential parties or assets which may be affected by the threat, and the potential consequences to them if the hazard is activated.

hazard identification , an identification of visible and implied hazards and determining the qualitative nature of the potential adverse consequences of each hazard. Without a potential adverse consequence, there is no hazard.

frequency analysis If a consequence is dependent on dose, i.e. the amount of exposure, the relationship between dose and severity of consequence must be established, and the risk depends on the probable dose, which may depend on concentration or amplitude and duration or frequency of exposure. This is the general case for many health hazards where the mechanism of injury is toxicity or repetitive injury, particularly where the effect is cumulative .

consequence analysis. For other hazards, the consequences may either occur or not, and the severity may be extremely variable even when the triggering conditions are the same. This is typical of many biological hazards as well as a large range of safety hazards. Exposure to a pathogen may or may not result in actual infection, and the consequences of infection may also be variable. Similarly, a fall from the same place may result in minor injury or death, depending on unpredictable details. In these cases, estimates must be made of reasonably likely consequences and associated probability of occurrence.

A risk evaluation means that judgements are made on the tolerability of the identified risks, leading to risk acceptance. When risk analysis and risk evaluation are made at the same time, it is called risk assessment.

[ 1 ] As of 2023, chemical risk assessment follows these 4 steps: [ 5 ] hazard characterization exposure assessment dose-response modeling risk characterization.

There is tremendous variability in the dose-response relationship between a chemical and human health outcome in particularly susceptible subgroups, such as pregnant women, developing fetuses, children up to adolescence, people with low socioeconomic status, those with preexisting diseases, disabilities, genetic susceptibility , and those with other environmental exposures .

[ 5 ] The process of risk assessment may be somewhat informal at the individual social level, assessing economic and household risks, [ 20 ] [ 21 ] or a sophisticated process at the strategic corporate level. However, in both cases, ability to anticipate future events and create effective strategies for mitigating them when deemed unacceptable is vital.

At the individual level, identifying objectives and risks, weighing their importance, and creating plans, may be all that is necessary.
At the strategic organisational level, more elaborate policies are necessary, specifying acceptable levels of risk, procedures to be followed within the organisation, priorities, and allocation of resources.

[ 22 ] : 10 At the strategic corporate level, management involved with the project produce project level risk assessments with the assistance of the available expertise as part of the planning process and set up systems to ensure that required actions to manage the assessed risk are in place. At the dynamic level, the personnel directly involved may be required to deal with unforeseen problems in real time. The tactical decisions made at this level should be reviewed after the operation to provide feedback on the effectiveness of both the planned procedures and decisions made in response to the contingency.

Dose dependent risk [ edit ] Food risk assessment nomogram This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Dose-Response Analysis , is determining the relationship between dose and the type of adverse response and/or probability or the incidence of effect (dose-response assessment). The complexity of this step in many contexts derives mainly from the need to extrapolate results from experimental animals (e.g.

mouse , rat ) to humans, and/or from high to lower doses, including from high acute occupational levels to low chronic environmental levels. In addition, the differences between individuals due to genetics or other factors mean that the hazard may be higher for particular groups, called susceptible populations. An alternative to dose-response estimation is to determine a concentration unlikely to yield observable effects, that is, a no effect concentration . In developing such a dose, to account for the largely unknown effects of animal to human extrapolations, increased variability in humans, or missing data, a prudent approach is often adopted by including safety or uncertainty factors in the estimate of the "safe" dose, typically a factor of 10 for each unknown step.

Exposure Quantification , aims to determine the amount of a contaminant (dose) that individuals and populations will receive, either as a contact level (e.g., concentration in ambient air) or as intake (e.g., daily dose ingested from drinking water). This is done by examining the results of the discipline of exposure assessment . As a different location, lifestyle, and other factors likely influence the amount of contaminant that is received, a range or distribution of possible values is generated in this step. Particular care is taken to determine the exposure of the susceptible population(s).

The results of these steps are combined to produce an estimate of risk. Because of the different susceptibilities and exposures, this risk will vary within a population. An uncertainty analysis is usually included in a health risk assessment.

Dynamic risk assessment [ edit ] During an emergency response, the situation and hazards are often inherently less predictable than for planned activities (non-linear). In general, if the situation and hazards are predictable (linear), standard operating procedures should deal with them adequately. In some emergencies, this may also hold true, with the preparation and trained responses being adequate to manage the situation. In these situations, the operator can manage risk without outside assistance, or with the assistance of a backup team who are prepared and available to step in at short notice.

Other emergencies occur where there is no previously planned protocol, or when an outsider group is brought in to handle the situation, and they are not specifically prepared for the scenario that exists but must deal with it without undue delay. Examples include police, fire department, disaster response, and other public service rescue teams. In these cases, ongoing risk assessment by the involved personnel can advise appropriate action to reduce risk.

[ 22 ] HM Fire Services Inspectorate has defined dynamic risk assessment (DRA) as: The continuous assessment of risk in the rapidly changing circumstances of an operational incident, in order to implement the control measures necessary to ensure an acceptable level of safety.

[ 22 ] Dynamic risk assessment is the final stage of an integrated safety management system that can provide an appropriate response during changing circumstances. It relies on experience, training and continuing education, including effective debriefing to analyse not only what went wrong, but also what went right, and why, and to share this with other members of the team and the personnel responsible for the planning level risk assessment.

[ 22 ] Fields of application [ edit ] The application of risk assessment procedures is common in a wide range of fields, and these may have specific legal obligations, codes of practice, and standardised procedures. Some of these are listed here.

General human health [ edit ] There are many resources that provide human health risk information: The National Library of Medicine provides risk assessment and regulation information tools for a varied audience.

[ 23 ] These include: TOXNET (databases on hazardous chemicals, environmental health, and toxic releases), [ 24 ] the Household Products Database (potential health effects of chemicals in over 10,000 common household products), [ 25 ] TOXMAP (maps of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Superfund and Toxics Release Inventory data).

The United States Environmental Protection Agency provides basic information about environmental health risk assessments for the public for a wide variety of possible environmental exposures.

[ 26 ] The Environmental Protection Agency began actively using risk assessment methods to protect drinking water in the United States after the passage of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974. The law required the National Academy of Sciences to conduct a study on drinking water issues, and in its report, the NAS described some methodologies for doing risk assessments for chemicals that were suspected carcinogens, recommendations that top EPA officials have described as perhaps the study's most important part.

[ 27 ] Considering the increase in junk food and its toxicity, FDA required in 1973 that cancer-causing compounds must not be present in meat at concentrations that would cause a cancer risk greater than 1 in a million over a lifetime. The US Environmental Protection Agency provides extensive information about ecological and environmental risk assessments for the public via its risk assessment portal.

[ 28 ] The Stockholm Convention on persistent organic pollutants (POPs) supports a qualitative risk framework for public health protection from chemicals that display environmental and biological persistence, bioaccumulation , toxicity (PBT) and long range transport; most global chemicals that meet this criterion have been previously assessed quantitatively by national and international health agencies.

[ 29 ] For non-cancer health effects, the terms reference dose (RfD)   or reference concentration (RfC) are used to describe the safe level of exposure in a dichotomous fashion. Newer ways of communicating the risk is the probabilistic risk assessment .

[ 30 ] Small sub-populations [ edit ] When risks apply mainly to small sub-populations, it can be difficult to determine when intervention is necessary. For example, there may be a risk that is very low for everyone, other than 0.1% of the population. It is necessary to determine whether this 0.1% is represented by: all infants younger than X days or recreational users of a particular product.

If the risk is higher for a particular sub-population because of abnormal exposure rather than susceptibility, strategies to further reduce the exposure of that subgroup are considered.  If an identifiable sub-population is more susceptible due to inherent genetic or other factors, public policy choices must be made. The choices are: to set policies for protecting the general population that are protective of such groups, e.g. for children when data exists, the Clean Air Act for populations such as asthmatics or not to set policies, because the group is too small, or the costs too high.

Acceptable risk criteria [ edit ] "Acceptable risk" redirects here. For the television show, see Acceptable Risk (TV series) . For the book, see Acceptable Risk (novel) .

Acceptable risk is a risk that is understood and tolerated usually because the cost or difficulty of implementing an effective countermeasure for the associated vulnerability exceeds the expectation of loss.

[ 31 ] The idea of not increasing lifetime risk by more than one in a million has become commonplace in public health discourse and policy.

[ 32 ] It is a heuristic measure. It provides a numerical basis for establishing a negligible increase in risk.

Environmental decision making allows some discretion for deeming individual risks potentially "acceptable" if less than one in ten thousand chance of increased lifetime risk. Low risk criteria such as these provide some protection for a case where individuals may be exposed to multiple chemicals e.g. pollutants, food additives, or other chemicals.

[ citation needed ] In practice, a true zero-risk is possible only with the suppression of the risk-causing activity.

[ citation needed ] Stringent requirements of 1 in a million may not be technologically feasible or may be so prohibitively expensive as to render the risk-causing activity unsustainable, resulting in the optimal degree of intervention being a balance between risks vs. benefit.

[ citation needed ] For example, emissions from hospital incinerators result in a certain number of deaths per year. However, this risk must be balanced against the alternatives.  There are public health risks, as well as economic costs, associated with all options. The risk associated with no incineration is the potential spread of infectious diseases or even no hospitals. Further investigation identifies options such as separating noninfectious from infectious wastes, or air pollution controls on a medical incinerator.

Intelligent thought about a reasonably full set of options is essential.  Thus, it is not unusual for there to be an iterative process between analysis, consideration of options, and follow up analysis.

[ citation needed ] Public health [ edit ] In the context of public health , risk assessment is the process of characterizing the nature and likelihood of a harmful effect to individuals or populations from certain human activities. Health risk assessment can be mostly qualitative or can include statistical estimates of probabilities for specific populations. In most countries, the use of specific chemicals or the operations of specific facilities (e.g. power plants, manufacturing plants) is not allowed unless it can be shown that they do not increase the risk of death or illness above a specific threshold. For example, the American Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates food safety through risk assessment, while the EFSA does the same in EU.

[ 33 ] An occupational risk assessment is an evaluation of how much potential danger a hazard can have to a person in a workplace environment. The assessment takes into account possible scenarios in addition to the probability of their occurrence and the results.

[ 34 ] The six types of hazards to be aware of are safety (those that can cause injury), chemicals , biological , physical , psychosocial (those that cause stress, harassment) and ergonomic (those that can cause musculoskeletal disorders ).

[ 35 ] To appropriately access hazards there are two parts that must occur. Firstly, there must be an " exposure assessment " which measures the likelihood of worker contact and the level of contact. Secondly, a "risk characterization" must be made which measures the probability and severity of the possible health risks.

[ 36 ] Human settlements [ edit ] The importance of risk assessments to manage the consequences of climate change and variability is recalled in the global frameworks for disaster risk reduction , adopted by the member countries of the United Nations at the end of the World Conferences held in Kobe (2005) and Sendai (2015). The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction brings attention to the local scale and encourages a holistic risk approach, which should consider all the hazards to which a community is exposed, the integration of technical-scientific knowledge with local knowledge, and the inclusion of the concept of risk in local plans to achieve a significant disaster reduction by 2030. Taking these principles into daily practice poses a challenge for many countries. The Sendai framework monitoring system highlights how little is known about the progress made from 2015 to 2019 in local disaster risk reduction.

[ 37 ] Sub-Saharan Africa [ edit ] As of 2019, in the South of the Sahara, risk assessment is not yet an institutionalized practice. The exposure of human settlements to multiple hazards (hydrological and agricultural drought, pluvial, fluvial and coastal floods) is frequent and requires risk assessments on a regional, municipal, and sometimes individual human settlement scale. The multidisciplinary approach and the integration of local and technical-scientific knowledge are necessary from the first steps of the assessment. Local knowledge remains unavoidable to understand the hazards that threaten individual communities, the critical thresholds in which they turn into disasters, for the validation of hydraulic models , and in the decision-making process on risk reduction . On the other hand, local knowledge alone is not enough to understand the impacts of future changes and climatic variability and to know the areas exposed to infrequent hazards.
The availability of new technologies and open access information (high resolution satellite images, daily rainfall data) allow assessment today with an accuracy that only 10 years ago was unimaginable. The images taken by unmanned vehicle technologies allow to produce very high resolution digital elevation models and to accurately identify the receptors.

[ 38 ] Based on this information, the hydraulic models allow the identification of flood areas with precision even at the scale of small settlements.

[ 39 ] The information on loss and damages and on cereal crop at individual settlement scale allow to determine the level of multi-hazard risk on a regional scale.The multi-temporal high-resolution satellite images allow to assess the hydrological drought and the dynamics of human settlements in the flood zone.

[ 40 ] Risk assessment is more than an aid to informed decision making about risk reduction or acceptance.

[ 41 ] It integrates early warning systems by highlighting the hot spots where disaster prevention and preparedness are most urgent.

[ 42 ] When risk assessment considers the dynamics of exposure over time, it helps to identify risk reduction policies that are more appropriate to the local context.
Despite these potentials, the risk assessment is not yet integrated into the local planning in the South of the Sahara which, in the best of cases, uses only the analysis of vulnerability to climate change and variability.

[ 42 ] Auditing [ edit ] For audits performed by an outside audit firm, risk assessment is a crucial stage before accepting an audit engagement. According to ISA315 Understanding the Entity and its Environment and Assessing the Risks of Material Misstatement , "the auditor should perform risk assessment procedures to obtain an understanding of the entity and its environment, including its internal control". Evidence relating to the auditor's risk assessment of a material misstatement in the client's financial statements. Then, the auditor obtains initial evidence regarding the classes of transactions at the client and the operating effectiveness of the client's internal controls. Audit risk is defined as the risk that the auditor will issue a clean unmodified opinion regarding the financial statements, when in fact the financial statements are materially misstated, and therefore do not qualify for a clean unmodified opinion. As a formula, audit risk is the product of two other risks: Risk of Material Misstatement and Detection Risk. This formula can be further broken down as follows: inherent risk × control risk × detection risk .

Project management [ edit ] In project management , risk assessment is an integral part of the risk management plan, studying the probability, the impact, and the effect of every known risk on the project, as well as the corrective action to take should an incident be implied by a risk occur.

[ 43 ] Of special consideration in this area are the relevant codes of practice that are enforced in the specific jurisdiction. Understanding the regime of regulations that risk management must abide by is integral to formulating safe and compliant risk assessment practices.

Information security [ edit ] Main article: IT risk management § Risk assessment Information technology risk assessment can be performed by a qualitative or quantitative approach, following different methodologies. One important difference [ clarification needed ] in risk assessments in information security is modifying the threat model to account for the fact that any adversarial system connected to the Internet has access to threaten any other connected system.

[ 44 ] Risk assessments may therefore need to be modified to account for the threats from all adversaries, instead of just those with reasonable access as is done in other fields.

NIST Definition: The process of identifying risks to organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation, resulting from the operation of an information system. Part of risk management incorporates threat and vulnerability analyses and considers mitigations provided by security controls planned or in place.

[ 45 ] There are various risk assessment methodologies and frameworks available which include NIST Risk Management Framework (RMF), [ 46 ] Control Objectives for Information and Related Technologies (COBIT), [ 47 ] Factor Analysis of Information Risk (FAIR), [ 48 ] Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation (OCTAVE), [ 49 ] The Center for Internet Security Risk Assessment Method (CIS RAM), [ 50 ] and The Duty of Care Risk Analysis (DoCRA) Standard, [ 51 ] which helps define 'reasonable' security.

Cybersecurity [ edit ] Main article: cybersecurity The Threat and Risk Assessment (TRA) process is part of risk management referring to risks related to cyber threats . The TRA process will identify cyber risks, assess risks' severities, and may recommend activities to reduce risks to an acceptable level.

There are different methodologies for performing TRA (e.g., Harmonized TRA Methodology [ 52 ] ), all utilize the following elements: [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] identifying of assets (what should be protected), identifying and assessing of the threats and vulnerabilities for the identified assets, determining the exploitability of the vulnerabilities, determining the levels of risk associated with the vulnerabilities (what are the implications if the assets were damaged or lost), and recommending a risk mitigation program.

Megainvestment projects [ edit ] Megaprojects (sometimes also called "major programs") are extremely large-scale investment projects, typically costing more than US$1 billion per project. They include bridges, tunnels, highways, railways, airports, seaports, power plants, dams, wastewater projects, coastal flood protection, oil and natural gas extraction projects, public buildings, information technology systems, aerospace projects, and defence systems. Megaprojects have been shown to be particularly risky in terms of finance, safety, and social and environmental impacts .

Software evolution [ edit ] Studies have shown that early parts of the system development cycle such as requirements and design specifications are especially prone to error. This effect is particularly notorious in projects involving multiple stakeholders with different points of view. Evolutionary software processes offer an iterative approach to requirement engineering to alleviate the problems of uncertainty, ambiguity, and inconsistency inherent in software developments, including uncertainty, ambiguity, and inconsistency inherent in software developments.

[ clarification needed ] Shipping industry [ edit ] In July 2010, shipping companies agreed to use standardized procedures in order to assess risk in key shipboard operations. These procedures were implemented as part of the amended ISM Code .

[ 56 ] Underwater diving [ edit ] See also: List of diving hazards and precautions Formal risk assessment is a required component of most professional dive planning , but the format and methodology may vary. Consequences of an incident due to an identified hazard are generally chosen from a small number of standardised categories, and probability is estimated based on statistical data on the rare occasions when it is available, and on a best guess estimate based on personal experience and company policy in most cases. A simple risk matrix is often used to transform these inputs into a level of risk, generally expressed as unacceptable, marginal or acceptable. If unacceptable, measures must be taken to reduce the risk to an acceptable level, and the outcome of the risk assessment must be accepted by the affected parties before a dive commences. Higher levels of risk may be acceptable in special circumstances, such as military or search and rescue operations when there is a chance of recovering a survivor.

Diving supervisors are trained in the procedures of hazard identification and risk assessment , and it is part of their planning and operational responsibility. Both health and safety hazards must be considered. Several stages may be identified. There is risk assessment done as part of the diving project planning, on site risk assessment which takes into account the specific conditions of the day, and dynamic risk assessment which is ongoing during the operation by the members of the dive team, particularly the supervisor and the working diver.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] In recreational scuba diving , the extent of risk assessment expected of the diver is relatively basic and is included in the pre-dive checks . Several mnemonics have been developed by diver certification agencies to remind the diver to pay some attention to risk, but the training is rudimentary. Diving service providers are expected to provide a higher level of care for their customers, and diving instructors and divemasters are expected to assess risk on behalf of their customers and warn them of site-specific hazards and the competence considered appropriate for the planned dive. Technical divers are expected to make a more thorough assessment of risk, but as they will be making an informed choice for a recreational activity, the level of acceptable risk may be considerably higher than that permitted for occupational divers under the direction of an employer.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Outdoor and wilderness adventure [ edit ] In outdoor activities including commercial outdoor education, wilderness expeditions, and outdoor recreation , risk assessment refers to the analysis of the probability and magnitude of unfavorable outcomes such as injury, illness, or property damage due to environmental and related causes, compared to the human development or other benefits of outdoor activity. This is of particular importance as school programs and others weigh the benefits of youth and adult participation in various outdoor learning activities against the inherent and other hazards present in those activities.  Schools, corporate entities seeking team-building experiences, parents/guardians, and others considering outdoor experiences expect or require [ 61 ] organizations to assess the hazards and risks of different outdoor activities—such as sailing, target shooting, hunting, mountaineering, or camping—and select activities with acceptable risk profiles.

Outdoor education, wilderness adventure, and other outdoor-related organizations should, and are in some jurisdictions required, to conduct risk assessments prior to offering programs for commercial purposes.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] Such organizations are given guidance on how to provide their risk assessments.

[ 65 ] Risk assessments for led outdoor activities form only one component of a comprehensive risk management plan, as many risk assessments use a basic linear-style thinking that does not employ more modern risk management practice employing complex socio-technical systems theory.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Environment [ edit ] Environmental Risk Assessment (ERA) aims to assess the effects of stressors, usually chemicals, on the local environment. A risk is an integrated assessment of the likelihood and severity of an undesired event. In ERA, the undesired event often depends on the chemical of interest and on the risk assessment scenario.

[ 68 ] This undesired event is usually a detrimental effect on organisms, populations or ecosystems . Current ERAs usually compare an exposure to a no-effect level, such as the Predicted Environmental Concentration / Predicted No-Effect Concentration (PEC/PNEC) ratio in Europe. Although this type of ratio is useful and often used in regulation purposes, it is only an indication of an exceeded apparent threshold.

[ 69 ] New approaches start to be developed in ERA in order to quantify this risk and to communicate effectively on it with both the managers and the general public.

[ 68 ] Ecological risk assessment is complicated by the fact that there are many nonchemical stressors that substantially influence ecosystems, communities, and individual plants and animals, as well as across landscapes and regions.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Defining the undesired (adverse) event is a political or policy judgment, further complicating applying traditional risk analysis tools to ecological systems.  Much of the policy debate surrounding ecological risk assessment is over defining precisely what is an adverse event.

[ 72 ] Biodiversity [ edit ] Biodiversity Risk Assessments evaluate risks to biological diversity , specially the risk of species extinction or the risk of ecosystem collapse . The units of assessments are the biological (species, subspecies or populations ) or ecological entities ( habitats , ecosystems , etc.), and the risk are often related to human actions and interventions (threats and pressures). Regional and national protocols have been proposed by multiple academic or governmental institutions and working groups, [ 73 ] but global standards such as the Red List of Threatened Species and the IUCN Red List of Ecosystems have been widely adopted, and are recognized or proposed as official indicators of progress toward international policy targets and goals, such as the Aichi targets and the Sustainable Development Goals .

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Law [ edit ] Risk assessments are used in numerous stages during the legal process and are developed to measure a wide variety of items, such as recidivism rates, potential pretrial issues, probation/parole, and to identify potential interventions for defendants.

[ 76 ] Clinical psychologists, forensic psychologists, and other practitioners are responsible for conducting risk assessments.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] Depending on the risk assessment tool, practitioners are required to gather a variety of background information on the defendant or individual being assessed. This information includes their previous criminal history (if applicable) and other records (i.e. Demographics, Education, Job Status, Medical History), which can be accessed through direct interview with the defendant or on-file records.

[ 76 ] In the pre-trial stage, a widely used risk assessment tool is the Public Safety Assessment, [ 79 ] which predicts failure to appear in court, likelihood of a new criminal arrest while on pretrial release, and likelihood of a new violent criminal arrest while on pretrial release. Multiple items are observed and taken into account based on which aspect of the PSA is being focused, and like all other actuarial risk assessments, each item is assigned a weighted amount to produce a final score.

[ 76 ] Detailed information such as transparency on the items the PSA factors and how scores are distributed are accessible online.

[ 80 ] For defendants who have been incarcerated, risk assessments are used to determine their likelihood of recidivism and inform sentence length decisions. Risk assessments also aid parole/probation officers in determining the level of supervision a probationer should be subjected to and what interventions could be implemented to improve offender risk status.

[ 77 ] The Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions (COMPAS) is a risk assessment too designed to measure pretrial release risk, general recidivism risk, and violent recidivism risk. Detailed information on scoring and algorithms for COMPAS are not accessible to the general public.

See also [ edit ] Acceptable loss – Military euphemism Benefit shortfall – When the actual benefits of a venture are less than the projected or estimated benefits Control self-assessment – Technique to assess process effectiveness Cost overrun – Unexpected incurred costs in excess of budgeted amounts Digital continuity Duty of care – Type of legal obligation Edwards v National Coal Board Extreme risk – Low-probability risk of very bad outcomes Environmental impact assessment – Assessment of the environmental consequences of a decision before action Flood risk assessment – Type of risk assessment with respect to floods Form 696 – Metropolitan Police risk assessment Global catastrophic risk – Hypothetical global-scale disaster risk Hazard analysis – Method for assessing risk Hazard analysis and critical control points ( HACCP ) – Systematic preventive approach to food safety Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets risk assessment in food Health impact assessment – Type of public health document Horizon scanning – Methodology in futures studies Information assurance – Multi-disciplinary methods for decision support systems security Index of auditing-related articles ISO 28000 – Management system standard ISO 31000 – Set of international standards for risk management ISSOW Megaprojects and Risk – 2003 book by Bent Flyvbjerg, Nils Bruzelius and Werner Rothengatter Network theory in risk assessment Occupational exposure banding – Process to assign chemicals into categories corresponding to permissible exposure concentrations Optimism bias – Type of cognitive bias PIMEX a video exposure monitoring method Planning fallacy – Cognitive bias of underestimating time needed Probabilistic risk assessment – Methodology for evaluating risks Probit model – Statistical regression where the dependent variable can take only two values Project risk management Reference class forecasting – Method of predicting the future Reliability engineering – Sub-discipline of systems engineering that emphasizes dependability Risk assessment using qualifiers Risk-based auditing Risk management tools Risk matrix – Risk assessment comparing the likelihood of a risk to its severity Safety engineering – Engineering discipline which assures that engineered systems provide acceptable levels of safety Security risk – Possibility of something bad happening Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Statistical risk Strategic misrepresentation – Cognitive bias of underestimating time needed Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Gordon–Loeb model for cyber security investments References [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Rausand M (2013).

"Chapter 1: Introduction" .

Risk Assessment: Theory, Methods, and Applications . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

1– 28.

ISBN 9780470637647 .

^ a b c Manuele FA (2016).

"Chapter 1: Risk Assessments: Their Significance and the Role of the Safety Professional" . In Popov G, Lyon BK, Hollcraft B (eds.).

Risk Assessment: A Practical Guide to Assessing Operational Risks . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

1– 22.

ISBN 9781118911044 .

^ Hodge, N. (2021), "How to Address Low-Probability, High-Impact Risks" , Risk Management ^ a b c d e f g Levi R (1 June 2018).

"Getting Real About Both Benefits and Risks" .

Science & Practice, English Special 2018 . Swedish Agency of Health Technology Assessment and Assessment of Social Services.

ISSN 1104-1250 . Retrieved 2018-06-14 .

^ a b c Varshavsky JR, Rayasam SD, Sass JB, Axelrad DA, Cranor CF, Hattis D, et al. (January 2023).

"Current practice and recommendations for advancing how human variability and susceptibility are considered in chemical risk assessment" .

Environmental Health .

21 (Suppl 1): 133.

Bibcode : 2023EnvHe..21S.133V .

doi : 10.1186/s12940-022-00940-1 .

PMC 9835253 .

PMID 36635753 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: overridden setting ( link ) ^ Hoffmann TC, Del Mar C (February 2015).

"Patients' expectations of the benefits and harms of treatments, screening, and tests: a systematic review" (PDF) .

JAMA Internal Medicine .

175 (2): 274– 86.

doi : 10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.6016 .

PMID 25531451 .

^ a b c d Stacey D, Lewis KB, Smith M, Carley M, Volk R, Douglas EE, et al. (January 2024).

"Decision aids for people facing health treatment or screening decisions" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

1 (1): CD001431.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD001431.pub6 .

PMC 10823577 .

PMID 38284415 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: overridden setting ( link ) ^ Rausand M (2013).

"Chapter 6: Accident Models" .

Risk Assessment: Theory, Methods, and Applications . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

137– 76.

ISBN 9780470637647 .

^ a b Vamanu BI, Gheorghe AV, Kaina PF (2016).

Critical Infrastructures: Risk and Vulnerability Assessment in Transportation of Dangerous Goods: Transportation by Road and Rail . Springer. p. 11.

ISBN 9783319309316 .

^ Lacey P (2011). "An Application of Fault Tree Analysis to the Identification and Management of Risks in Government Funded Human Service Delivery".

Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Public Policy and Social Sciences .

SSRN 2171117 .

^ Shirey R (August 2007).

"Internet Security Glossary, Version 2" .

Network Working Group . The IETF Trust: 9 . Retrieved 19 July 2018 .

^ Mandelbrot B, Hudson RL (2008).

The (mis)Behaviour of Markets: A Fractal View of Risk, Ruin and Reward . London: Profile Books.

ISBN 9781846682629 .

^ Kasperson RE, Renn O, Slovic P, Brown HS, Emel J, Goble R, et al. (1988).

"The social amplification of risk: A conceptual framework" (PDF) .

Risk Analysis .

8 (2): 177– 187.

Bibcode : 1988RiskA...8..177K .

doi : 10.1111/j.1539-6924.1988.tb01168.x .

^ Commoner B . "Comparing apples to oranges: Risk of cost/benefit analysis". In Iannone AP (ed.).

Contemporary moral controversies in technology . pp.

64– 65.

^ O'Brien M (2002).

Making better environmental decisions: an alternative to risk assessment . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press .

ISBN 0-262-65053-3 . Retrieved 27 September 2010 .

^ Shrader-Frechette K, Westra L (October 1997).

Technology and Values . Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-4616-4399-9 .

^ Taleb NN (September 2008).

The fourth quadrant: a map of the limits of statistics (PDF) .

An Edge original essay (Report).

^ Modern Financial Engineering | Topics in Systems Engineering . Vol. 02. 2022.

doi : 10.1142/12725 .

ISBN 978-981-12-5235-8 .

^ B Chapman C (1 February 1990).

"A risk engineering approach to project risk management" .

International Journal of Project Management .

8 : 5– 16.

doi : 10.1016/0263-7863(90)90003-T .

^ Holzmann R, Jørgensen S (2001). "Social Risk Management: A New Conceptual Framework for Social Protection, and Beyond".

International Tax and Public Finance .

8 (4): 529– 56.

doi : 10.1023/A:1011247814590 .

S2CID 14180040 .

^ Nakaš N (21 November 2017).

"Three Lessons About Risk Management from Everyday Life" .

Knowledge Hub . Center of Excellence in Finance . Retrieved 19 July 2018 .

^ a b c d Lock G (June 2017). Phillips M (ed.).

"Public Safety Diving-Dynamic Risk Assessment" (PDF) .

PS Diver Magazine (116): 9 . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ "Risk Assessment and Regulation Information from the NLM" .

National Library of Medicine . Archived from the original on July 14, 2012 . Retrieved 9 June 2013 .

^ "Databases on toxicology, hazardous chemicals, environmental health, and toxic releases" .

TOXNET .

NLM . May 2012 . Retrieved 9 June 2013 .

^ "Household Products Database" . U.S. Dept. of Health & Human Services. January 2013. Archived from the original on August 3, 2003 . Retrieved 9 June 2013 .

^ "Risk Assessment Portal" .

EPA . 13 May 2013 . Retrieved 9 June 2013 .

^ EPA Alumni Association: Senior EPA officials discuss early implementation of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, Video , Transcript (see pages 11,14).

^ "Risk Assessment" .

www.epa.gov . US Environmental Protection Agency. 2013-09-26 . Retrieved 2016-04-07 .

^ Szabo DT, Loccisano AE (March 30, 2012). "POPs and Human Health Risk Assessment".

Dioxins and Persistent Organic Pollutants (3rd ed.). pp.

579– 618.

doi : 10.1002/9781118184141.ch19 .

ISBN 9781118184141 .

^ Nielsen GH, Heiger-Bernays WJ, Levy JI, White RF, Axelrad DA, Lam J, et al. (January 2023).

"Application of probabilistic methods to address variability and uncertainty in estimating risks for non-cancer health effects" .

Environmental Health .

21 (Suppl 1): 129.

Bibcode : 2023EnvHe..21S.129N .

doi : 10.1186/s12940-022-00918-z .

PMC 9835218 .

PMID 36635712 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: overridden setting ( link ) ^ R. Shirey (August 2007).

Internet Security Glossary, Version 2 . Network Working Group.

doi : 10.17487/RFC4949 .

RFC 4949 .

Informational.

^ Hunter PR, Fewtrell L (2001).

"Acceptable Risk" (PDF) .

World Health Organization .

^ Merrill RA (1997).

"Food safety regulation: reforming the Delaney Clause" .

Annual Review of Public Health .

18 : 313– 40.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.18.1.313 .

PMID 9143722 .

This source includes a useful historical survey of prior food safety regulation.

^ Current intelligence bulletin 69: NIOSH practices in occupational risk assessment (Report). 2020-02-01.

doi : 10.26616/nioshpub2020106 .

^ "OSHA's 5 Workplace Hazards" .

Grainger Industrial Supply .

^ Waters M, McKernan L, Maier A, Jayjock M, Schaeffer V, Brosseau L (2015-11-25).

"Exposure Estimation and Interpretation of Occupational Risk: Enhanced Information for the Occupational Risk Manager" .

Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene .

12 (Suppl 1): S99-111.

Bibcode : 2015JOEH...12S..99W .

doi : 10.1080/15459624.2015.1084421 .

PMC 4685553 .

PMID 26302336 .

^ UNDRR (2019).

Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction . Geneva: UNDRR. p. 472.

ISBN 978-92-1-004180-5 . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

^ Tiepolo M (2019).

"Flood Assessment for Risk-Informed Planning along the Sirba River, Niger" .

Sustainability .

11 (4003).

Bibcode : 2019Water..11.1018M .

doi : 10.3390/w11051018 .

^ Massazza G (2019).

"Flood Hazard Scenarios of the Sirba River (Niger): Evaluation of the Hazard Thresholds and Flooding Areas" .

Water .

11 (5): 1018.

Bibcode : 2019Water..11.1018M .

doi : 10.3390/w11051018 .

^ Tiepolo M (2018).

"Multihazard Risk Assessment for Planning with Climate in the Dosso Region, Niger" .

Climate .

6 (67): 67.

Bibcode : 2018Clim....6...67T .

doi : 10.3390/cli6030067 .

^ International Organization for Standardization (8 November 2017).

"ISO Guide 73: 2009. Risk management – Vocabulary" .

ISO . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

^ a b Tarchiani V (2020).

"Community and Impact Based Early Warning System for Flood Risk Preparedness: The Experience of the Sirba River in Niger" .

Sustainability .

12 (2196).

doi : 10.3390/su12062196 .

^ Managing Project Risks - Retrieved May 20th, 2010 ^ Spring J, Kern S, Summers A (2015-05-01). "Global adversarial capability modeling".

2015 APWG Symposium on Electronic Crime Research (eCrime) . pp.

1– 21.

doi : 10.1109/ECRIME.2015.7120797 .

ISBN 978-1-4799-8909-6 .

S2CID 24580989 .

^ "Risk assessment" .

NIST Computer Security Resource Center Glossary . National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

^ "NIST" .

NIST . 30 November 2016.

^ "ISACA COBIT" .

ISACA .

^ "FAIR" .

FAIR .

^ "Carnegie Mellon University" .

Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University . 31 August 1999.

^ "Center for Internet Security" .

Center for Internet Security (CIS) .

^ "DoCRA" .

Duty of Care Risk Analysis (DoCRA) .

^ Canadian Centre for Cyber Security (2018-08-15).

"Canadian Centre for Cyber Security" .

Canadian Centre for Cyber Security . Retrieved 2021-08-09 .

^ Baingo D (2021). "Threat Risk Assessment (TRA) for Physical Security". In Masys AJ (ed.).

Sensemaking for Security . Advanced Sciences and Technologies for Security Applications. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

243– 270.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-71998-2_14 .

ISBN 978-3-030-71998-2 .

S2CID 236706551 .

^ "An Overview of Threat and Risk Assessment | SANS Institute" .

www.sans.org . Retrieved 2021-08-09 .

^ Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat (2006-03-06).

"Rescinded [2019-06-28] - Security Organization and Administration Standard" .

www.tbs-sct.gc.ca . Retrieved 2021-08-09 .

^ "ISM CODE – Amendments from 1st July 2010 Risk Assessment" . Archived from the original on 27 April 2014.

^ "Diving Regulations 2009" .

Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 – Regulations and Notices – Government Notice R41 . Pretoria: Government Printer. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 – via Southern African Legal Information Institute.

^ Staff (August 2016). "15 - General safety requirements".

Guidance for diving supervisors IMCA D 022 (Revision 1 ed.). London, UK: International Marine Contractors Association. pp.

15– 5.

^ Staff (1977).

"The Diving at Work Regulations 1997" .

Statutory Instruments 1997 No. 2776 Health and Safety . Kew, Richmond, Surrey: Her Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO) . Retrieved 6 November 2016 .

^ Gurr K (August 2008). "13: Operational Safety". In Mount T, Dituri J (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

165– 180.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ "2018 Accreditation Rubric" (PDF) . Seattle, Washington: Northwest Association of Independent Schools.

^ "Adventure Activities Regulations" .

supportadventure.co.nz .

^ "Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Regulations 2016 (LI 2016/19)" .

New Zealand Legislation .

^ "Adventure Activities Licensing" .

The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) . gov.uk.

^ "Adventure activities" .

Work Safe . New Zealand.

^ Dallat C, Salmon PM, Goode N (2015).

"All about the Teacher, the Rain and the Backpack: The Lack of a Systems Approach to Risk Assessment in School Outdoor Education Programs" .

Procedia Manufacturing .

3 : 1157– 1164.

doi : 10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.193 .

^ Baierlein J (2019).

Risk Management for Outdoor Programs: a Guide to Safety in Outdoor Education, Recreation and Adventure . Seattle, WA: Viristar LLC.

^ a b Goussen B, Price OR, Rendal C, Ashauer R (October 2016).

"Integrated presentation of ecological risk from multiple stressors" .

Scientific Reports .

6 : 36004.

Bibcode : 2016NatSR...636004G .

doi : 10.1038/srep36004 .

PMC 5080554 .

PMID 27782171 .

^ Jager T, Heugens EH, Kooijman SA (April 2006). "Making sense of ecotoxicological test results: towards application of process-based models".

Ecotoxicology .

15 (3): 305– 14.

Bibcode : 2006Ecotx..15..305J .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.453.1811 .

doi : 10.1007/s10646-006-0060-x .

PMID 16739032 .

S2CID 18825042 .

^ Goussen B, Rendal C, Sheffield D, Butler E, Price OR, Ashauer R (December 2020).

"Bioenergetics modelling to analyse and predict the joint effects of multiple stressors: Meta-analysis and model corroboration" .

The Science of the Total Environment .

749 : 141509.

arXiv : 2102.13107 .

Bibcode : 2020ScTEn.74941509G .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141509 .

PMID 32827825 .

^ Landis WG (2005).

Regional scale ecological risk assessment : using the relative risk model . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

ISBN 1-56670-655-6 .

OCLC 74274833 .

^ Lackey R (1997). "If ecological risk assessment is the answer, what is the question".

Human and Ecological Risk Assessment .

3 (6): 921– 928.

Bibcode : 1997HERA....3..921L .

doi : 10.1080/10807039709383735 .

^ Nicholson E, Regan TJ, Auld TD, Burns EL, Chisholm LA, English V, et al. (2015). "Towards consistency, rigour and compatibility of risk assessments for ecosystems and ecological communities".

Austral Ecology .

40 (4): 347– 363.

Bibcode : 2015AusEc..40..347N .

doi : 10.1111/aec.12148 .

hdl : 1885/66771 .

ISSN 1442-9985 .

S2CID 82412136 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: overridden setting ( link ) ^ Keith DA, Rodríguez JP, Brooks TM, Burgman MA, Barrow EG, Bland L, et al. (2015).

"The IUCN Red List of Ecosystems: Motivations, Challenges, and Applications" .

Conservation Letters .

8 (3): 214– 226.

Bibcode : 2015ConL....8..214K .

doi : 10.1111/conl.12167 .

hdl : 10536/DRO/DU:30073631 .

ISSN 1755-263X .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: overridden setting ( link ) ^ Brooks TM, Butchart SH, Cox NA, Heath M, Hilton-Taylor C, Hoffmann M, et al. (2015).

"Harnessing biodiversity and conservation knowledge products to track the Aichi Targets and Sustainable Development Goals" .

Biodiversity .

16 ( 2– 3): 157– 174.

Bibcode : 2015Biodi..16..157B .

doi : 10.1080/14888386.2015.1075903 .

ISSN 1488-8386 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: overridden setting ( link ) ^ a b c d "What is Risk Assessment" .

Bureau of Justice Assistance . U.S. Department of Justice.

^ a b Monahan J, Skeem JL (2016).

"Risk Assessment in Criminal Sentencing" .

Annual Review of Clinical Psychology .

12 : 489– 513.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-021815-092945 .

PMID 26666966 .

^ Heilbrun K (2009). "Risk Assessment in Evidence-Based Sentencing: Context and Promising Sues".

Chapman Journal of Criminal Justice .

1 : 127– 142.

^ "Advancing Pretrial Policy & Research: What is the PSA?" . Advancing Pretrial Policy and Research (APPR).

^ "How the PSA Works" . Advancing Pretrial Policy and Research (APPR).

Further reading [ edit ] Dorne JC, Kass GE, Bordajandi LR, Amzal B, Bertelsen U, Castoldi AF, et al. (2011). "Chapter 2. Human Risk Assessment of Heavy Metals: Principles and Applications". In Sigel A, Sigel H, Sigel RK (eds.).

Metal Ions in Toxicology . Metal Ions in Life Sciences. RSC Publishing. pp.

27– 60.

doi : 10.1039/9781849732116-00027 .

ISBN 978-1-84973-091-4 .

S2CID 24530234 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: overridden setting ( link ) Mumtaz MM, Hansen H, Pohl HR (2011). "Chapter 3. Mixtures and Their Risk Assessment in Toxicology". In Sigel A, Sigel H, Sigel RK (eds.).

Metal Ions in Toxicology . Metal Ions in Life Sciences. RSC Publishing. pp.

61– 80.

doi : 10.1039/9781849732116-00061 .

ISBN 978-1-84973-091-4 .

Committee on Risk Assessment of Hazardous Air Pollutants (1994), Science and judgment in risk assessment , Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press , ISBN 978-0-309-04894-1 , retrieved 27 September 2010 Orlando G, Bufalo M, Penikas H, Zurlo C (2022).

Modern financial engineering: counterparty, credit, portfolio and systemic risks . Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific Publishing Co.

doi : 10.1142/12725 .

ISBN 978-981-12-5235-8 .

Hallenbeck WH (1986).

Quantitative risk assessment for environmental and occupational health . Chelsea, Mich.: Lewis Publishers.

Harremoës P (ed.).

Late lessons from early warnings: the precautionary principle 1896–2000 .

Lachin JM.

Biostatistical methods: the assessment of relative risks .

Lerche I, Glaesser W (2006).

Environmental risk assessment : quantitative measures, anthropogenic influences, human impact . Berlin: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-540-26249-7 . Retrieved 27 September 2010 .

Kluger J (November 26, 2006).

"How Americans Are Living Dangerously" .

Time . Archived from the original on November 27, 2006 . Retrieved 27 September 2010 .

Also published as December 4 cover title: "Why We Worry About the Wrong Things: The Psychology of Risk" |work=Time A Review of risk assessment methodologies (Report). Washington: U.S: Congressional Research Service , Library of Congress, for the Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Technology. 1983.

Mayo DG (1997). "Sociological versus metascientific views of technological risk assessment". In Shrader-Frechette K, Westra L (eds.).

Technology and values . Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8476-8631-5 . Retrieved 27 September 2010 .

Rozell DJ (2020).

Dangerous Science: Science Policy and Risk Analysis for Scientists and Engineers . London: Ubiquity Press.

doi : 10.5334/bci .

ISBN 978-1-911529-90-3 .

S2CID 213952232 .

v t e Risk management Risk type & source Risk type Business risks Reputational damage Personal risk Health risk Psychosocial hazard Natural risk Natural disaster Anthropogenic hazard Political risk Technology risk IT risk AI Macro risk / External risk Extreme risk Global catastrophic risk Safety hazard Security risk Vulnerability (computing) Threat Accident Operational risk Execution risk Model risk Reputational risk Country risk Legal risk Financial risk Credit risk Liquidity risk Interest rate risk Exchange rate risk Market risk Profit risk Systemic risk Strategic risk Residual risk Risk source Hazard Conflict Uncertainty Vulnerability Countermeasures Enterprise risk management Corporate governance Regulatory compliance GRC Internal control Personal risk management Health insurance Stress management Disease management Operational risk management Supply chain Project Quality Security management Identity and access management Vulnerability management Incident management Business continuity planning Disaster risk reduction Financial risk management Diversification Hedge Risk pool Strategic management Risk communication Warning system Precautionary principle Insurance Crisis management Disaster management Occupational safety and health Swiss cheese model Risk assessment Exposure assessment Hazard analysis Scenario planning Contingency plan Brainstorming Structured or semi-structured interviews Delphi method Checklist Preliminary hazard analysis (PHA) Hazard and operability study (HAZOP) Hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) Threat assessment Toxicity assessment Structured What If Technique (SWIFT) Scenario analysis Business impact analysis Root cause analysis Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) / FMECA Fault tree analysis Event tree analysis Cause and consequence analysis Cause-and-effect analysis Layers of protection analysis (LOPA) Decision tree Human reliability analysis (HRA) Bow tie analysis Reliability centered maintenance Sneak circuit analysis Markov analysis Monte Carlo simulation Bayesian statistics and Bayes nets FN curve Risk index Risk Matrix Cost/benefit analysis Risk–benefit ratio Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) Related concepts ISO 31000 ISO/IEC 31010 COSO Risk appetite Hazard map Rare events Problem solving Security Opportunity cost Crisis management v t e Insurance Types of insurance Health Accident Accidental death and dismemberment Dental Disability Total permanent disability Business overhead expense Income protection Long-term care National health Payment protection Life Longevity insurance Mortgage life Term life Unitised fund Universal life Variable universal life Whole life Business Bond Business interruption Business owner Collateral protection Directors and officers liability Fidelity Over-redemption Payment protection Pollution Professional liability Protection and indemnity Surety Trade credit Umbrella Residential Boiler Builder's risk Contents Earthquake Flood Home Landlords' Lenders mortgage Mortgage Property Renters' Title Transport/ Communication Aviation GAP insurance Inland marine Public auto Marine Satellite Shipping Travel Vehicle Other Reinsurance Catastrophe bond Insurance-linked securities Casualty Climate risk Crime Crop Catastrophic Multi-peril Cyber Deposit Expatriate Extended warranty Group Index-based Parametric Interest rate Kidnap and ransom Legal expenses Liability No-fault Pet Political risk Prize indemnity Takaful Terrorism Tuition War risk Weather Workers' compensation Insurance policy and law Act of God Actuarial science Actuary Adverse selection Risk Risk assessment Risk management Uncertainty / Knightian Value of life Actual cash value Cash value Broker Cancellation Pro rata Short rate table Claim Claims adjuster Deductible Co-insurance Copayment Out-of-pocket expense Explanation of benefits Force majeure General average Indemnity Insurability Insurable interest Insurance fraud Proximate cause Replacement value Risk pool Self-insurance Total loss Underinsurance Underwriting Profit Insurance by country Australia China India Pakistan Serbia United Kingdom United States Climate change Health insurance Health insurance costs Health insurance coverage Vehicle insurance History Mesopotamian banker Code of Hammurabi §100–105; §126 ; §234 ; §235–238; §240 ; §275–277 Collegium Burial society Guild Corpus Juris Civilis Digesta Syndicate Benefit / Friendly society Cooperative Cooperative banking Credit union Fraternal order Mutual organization Mutual savings bank Rochdale Principles Savings and loan association Social insurance Trade union Insurance cycle Category List of topics v t e Occupational safety and health Occupational diseases and injuries Acrodynia Asbestosis Asthma Barotrauma Berylliosis Brucellosis Burnout Byssinosis ("brown lung") Cardiovascular Chalicosis Chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy Chronic stress Chimney sweeps' carcinoma Coalworker's pneumoconiosis ("black lung") Concussions in sport Decompression sickness De Quervain syndrome Erethism Exposure to human nail dust Farmer's lung Fiddler's neck Flock worker's lung Glassblower's cataract Golfer's elbow Hearing loss Hospital-acquired infection Indium lung Laboratory animal allergy Lead poisoning Low back pain Mesothelioma Metal fume fever Mule spinners' cancer Noise-induced hearing loss Phossy jaw Pneumoconiosis Radium jaw Repetitive strain injury Silicosis Silo-filler's disease Sports injury Surfer's ear Tennis elbow Tinnitus Writer's cramp Occupational hygiene Occupational hazard Biological hazard Chemical hazard Physical hazard Psychosocial hazard Occupational stress Hierarchy of hazard controls Prevention through design Exposure assessment Occupational exposure limit Occupational epidemiology Workplace health surveillance Professions Environmental health Industrial engineering Occupational health nursing Occupational health psychology Occupational medicine Occupational therapist Safety engineering Agencies and organizations International European Agency for Safety and Health at Work International Labour Organization World Health Organization National Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (Canada) Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (Germany) Istituto nazionale per l'assicurazione contro gli infortuni sul lavoro (Italy) National Institute for Safety and Health at Work (Spain) Health and Safety Executive (UK) Occupational Safety and Health Administration National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (US) Safe Work Australia (Australia) Standards Bangladesh Accord OHSAS 18001 ISO 45001 Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 Worker Protection Standard (US) Working Environment Convention, 1977 Safety Checklist Code of practice Contingency plan Diving safety Emergency procedure Emergency evacuation Hazard Hierarchy of hazard controls Hazard elimination Administrative controls Engineering controls Hazard substitution Personal protective equipment Job safety analysis Lockout-tagout Permit To Work Operations manual Redundancy (engineering) Risk assessment Safety culture Standard operating procedure Immediately dangerous to life or health Legislation Diving regulations Occupational Safety and Health Act (United States) Potty parity ( United States ) Right to sit ( United States ) Workers' right to access the toilet See also Aerosol Break Break room Drug policy Effects of overtime Environment, health and safety Environmental toxicology Ergonomics Fire Fighter Fatality Investigation and Prevention Program Hawks Nest Tunnel disaster Health physics Hostile work environment Indoor air quality International Chemical Safety Card Job strain National Day of Mourning (Canada) NIOSH air filtration rating Overwork Process safety Public health Quality of working life Risk management Safety data sheet Source control Toxic tort Toxic workplace Workers' compensation Workplace hazard controls for COVID-19 Workplace health promotion Category Occupational diseases Journals Organizations Commons v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐b499cfbc7‐4xwpl
Cached time: 20250815155348
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.610 seconds
Real time usage: 2.057 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14476/1000000
Revision size: 75872/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 812306/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19286/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 25/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 360643/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.902/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26504206/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1455.203      1 -total
 29.30%  426.331      1 Template:Reflist
 25.49%  370.927      1 Template:Cmn
 24.48%  356.227     40 Template:Annotated_link
 12.26%  178.338     41 Template:Navbox
 10.04%  146.127     26 Template:Cite_journal
  9.47%  137.790     26 Template:Cite_book
  8.84%  128.626     31 Template:Cite_web
  7.58%  110.372      1 Template:Ref_RFC
  6.88%  100.130      2 Template:Cite_IETF Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:219072:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815155348 and revision id 1303798801. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Risk_assessment&oldid=1303798801 " Categories : Impact assessment Probability assessment Risk analysis Hazard analysis Safety engineering Reliability engineering Occupational safety and health Corporate development Hidden categories: CS1 maint: overridden setting Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from February 2021 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from February 2021 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2017 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Risk assessment 21 languages Add topic

