Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Navarrenx 39 languages Aragonés 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Cebuano Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano Қазақша Kurdî Ladin Latina Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°19′22″N 0°45′29″W ﻿ / ﻿ 43.3228°N 0.7581°W ﻿ / 43.3228; -0.7581 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(December 2008) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Navarrenx]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Navarrenx}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Commune in Nouvelle-Aquitaine, France Navarrenx Navarrencs ( Occitan ) Nabarrenkoxe ( Basque ) Commune The town hall of Navarrenx Coat of arms Location of Navarrenx Navarrenx Show map of France Navarrenx Show map of Nouvelle-Aquitaine Coordinates: 43°19′22″N 0°45′29″W ﻿ / ﻿ 43.3228°N 0.7581°W ﻿ / 43.3228; -0.7581 Country France Region Nouvelle-Aquitaine Department Pyrénées-Atlantiques Arrondissement Oloron-Sainte-Marie Canton Le Cœur de Béarn Intercommunality Béarn des Gaves Government • Mayor (2020–2026) Nadine Barthe [ 1 ] Area 1 6.21 km 2 (2.40 sq mi) Population (2022) [ 2 ] 1,046 • Density 170/km 2 (440/sq mi) Demonym Navarrais·e (FR) Time zone UTC+01:00 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+02:00 ( CEST ) INSEE /Postal code 64416 /64190 Elevation 118–269 m (387–883 ft) (avg. 125 m or 410 ft) 1 French Land Register data, which excludes lakes, ponds, glaciers > 1 km 2 (0.386 sq mi or 247 acres) and river estuaries.

Navarrenx ( French pronunciation: [navaʁɛ̃ks] ; Occitan : Navarrencs [naβaˈreŋts] ; Basque : Nabarrengose , Zuberoan : Nabarrenkoxe ) is a town and commune in the French department of Pyrénées-Atlantiques and the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine .
The demonym is Navarre. Since 2014, the town has been in the association Les Plus Beaux Villages de France .
It is located in the cultural area of Béarn.

Etymology [ edit ] The name Navarrenx comes from sponda Navarrensi , meaning the "bedstead of Navarre" or "House of the Navarreses". According to linguist Michel Grosclaude it may have meant the edge of the Navarre.

[ 3 ] There may be kinship between the Basque radical Navarre and Navarrenx, but Basque philologists hesitate to link the several etymologies.

The first written mention of the name of the city lies in a charter of 1078.

[ citation needed ] Navarrenx (Navarrensis) is mentioned five times.

History [ edit ] The earliest history of the site dates to the first century. Navarrenx is reported in a cartulary of the eleventh century under the name of Sponda-Navarrensis.

There was a long-standing agreement between Centulle V , Viscount of Béarn, and Oloron and his vassal Raymond-William , Viscount of Soule. The latter came to Navarrenx to repair the harm done to the Béarnais by the Souletins . He could make it right and do justice on oath, either by paying a fine or by ordeal. In this case, the text says that the duel would happen, not on the bank of the Gave the side of the Soule, but the shore-side of Navarrenx ( Belluno Fiet Quod non in ripa Soulensi, sed in Sponda Navarrensis ). The place is still known today as the camp batalha .

In 1188, Gaston VI called for a charter of a "Bridge of Navarrenx", a stone bridge, and the establishment of a market, and a perimeter "sauveté" (a sauveté is, in the south of France in the Middle Ages, an area of extraterritoriality, protected by the Catholic Church and in which man's law no longer applies). This space of freedom, in the scope of which it was forbidden to pursue the fugitives, was marked by boundaries, with "hospitau" and chapel. The bridge was finally built in 1289. It facilitates access to Pyrenean passes and Navarra, particularly for pilgrims on the Way of Saint Jacques de Compostela. Indeed, the village is an important step on the road to Puy crossroads leading to the Somport pass to the east and to the west of Roncesvalles.

[ 4 ] The Viscount of Béarn built a magnificent castle Casterasse ("fortress") on the hill to the west, at the confluence of the rivers Gave d'Oloron and Arroder. In 1523, the Castilians led by Philibert of Chalon , Prince of Orange, seized the city and destroyed the Casterasse.

Henry II of Albret , the king of Navarre, decided to reinforce defences on the right bank of the mountain stream of Oloron. From 1538 to 1546, fortification works were carried out under the direction of Béarn master builders François Girard and Arnaud de Mirassor, as per the design of Italian architectural engineer Fabricio Siciliano. Navarrenx was thus transformed into a modern fortified town "Italian-style", based on the citadel of Lucca in Tuscany. Later, a powder magazine would be built that would store up to 25,000 lb (11,000 kg) of gunpowder: a square-shaped construction little more than 9 m (30 ft) long, it was originally surrounded by a wall, part of which was visible aboveground. While this wall has since disappeared, the thickness of this wall (1.4 m (4 ft 7 in)) and the lowness of the building (6 m (20 ft)) prevented it from receiving direct hits from enemy forces.

The fortifications were tried and tested during religious wars under the reign of Jeanne of Albret , when the garrison under the command of the Baron of Arros successfully resisted a three-month siege in 1568. The town was re-equipped in the 18th century, in particular with the Saint-Antoine gate built by engineer De Salmon on the ruins of an old church. Facing Spain, the gate owed its name to a chapel that welcomed pilgrims and was destroyed during the construction of the ramparts. With three massive arcades, the town was accessed via a drawbridge, the passage of the chains of which can still be seen today. In the 19th century, work on road and rail infrastructure led to the destruction of the old Saint-Germain gate which faced France.

Over the centuries, the fortified wall of Navarrenx has retained its main features. It outlines a reinforced firing range at each of its five corners with a bastion. Two of the five are fitted with anti-mine galleries, while a glacis and ground structures reinforce the town to the east, ahead of the moat. Several barracks were built inside the walls to house the garrison, one of which nowadays is used as the tourist information office. From the top of the ramparts (for example, from the crenellation platform overhanging the Saint-Antoine gate), there is a pleasant view of the Pyrenees and, below, the arches of the bridge of Navarrenx (13th century).
Visits: There is free access to the 1818-metre perimeter of the town. The walls of the city contain bilingual (French-English) descriptive plaques that trace the history of each structure. Information on guided visits can be obtained from the Navarrenx district tourist office.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Communes of the Pyrénées-Atlantiques department References [ edit ] ^ "Répertoire national des élus: les maires" (in French). data.gouv.fr, Plateforme ouverte des données publiques françaises. 13 September 2022.

^ "Populations de référence 2022" (in French).

The National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies . 19 December 2024.

^ "Chateau-espalungue-Navarrenx" .

Chateau-espalungue-Navarrenx . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 June 2015 .

^ "Navarrenx > History" . Archived from the original on 21 October 2014 . Retrieved 7 June 2015 .

^ "Navarrenx" .

Navarrenx . Retrieved 8 June 2015 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Navarrenx .

v t e Communes of the Pyrénées-Atlantiques department Aast Abère Abidos Abitain Abos Accous Agnos Ahaxe-Alciette-Bascassan Ahetze Aïcirits-Camou-Suhast Aincille Ainharp Ainhice-Mongelos Ainhoa Alçay-Alçabéhéty-Sunharette Aldudes Alos-Sibas-Abense Amendeuix-Oneix Amorots-Succos Ance Féas Andoins Andrein Angaïs Anglet Angous Anhaux Anos Anoye Aramits Arancou Araujuzon Araux Arbérats-Sillègue Arbonne Arbouet-Sussaute Arbus Arcangues Aren Aressy Arette Argagnon Argelos Arget Arhansus Armendarits Arnéguy Arnos Aroue-Ithorots-Olhaïby Arrast-Larrebieu Arraute-Charritte Arricau-Bordes Arrien Arros-de-Nay Arrosès Arthez-d'Asson Arthez-de-Béarn Artigueloutan Artiguelouve Artix Arudy Arzacq-Arraziguet Asasp-Arros Ascain Ascarat Assat Asson Aste-Béon Astis Athos-Aspis Aubertin Aubin Aubous Audaux Auga Auriac Aurions-Idernes Aussevielle Aussurucq Auterrive Autevielle-Saint-Martin-Bideren Aydie Aydius Ayherre Baigts-de-Béarn Balansun Baleix Baliracq-Maumusson Baliros Banca Barcus Bardos Barinque Barraute-Camu Barzun Bassillon-Vauzé Bassussarry Bastanès La Bastide-Clairence Baudreix Bayonne subpr Bédeille Bedous Béguios Béhasque-Lapiste Béhorléguy Bellocq Bénéjacq Bentayou-Sérée Béost Bérenx Bergouey-Viellenave Bernadets Berrogain-Laruns Bescat Bésingrand Bétracq Beuste Beyrie-en-Béarn Beyrie-sur-Joyeuse Biarritz Bidache Bidarray Bidart Bidos Bielle Bilhères Billère Biriatou Biron Bizanos Boeil-Bezing Bonloc Bonnut Borce Bordères Bordes Bosdarros Boucau Boueilh-Boueilho-Lasque Bougarber Bouillon Boumourt Bourdettes Bournos Briscous Bruges-Capbis-Mifaget Bugnein Bunus Burgaronne Buros Burosse-Mendousse Bussunarits-Sarrasquette Bustince-Iriberry Buziet Buzy Cabidos Cadillon Cambo-les-Bains Came Camou-Cihigue Cardesse Çaro Carrère Carresse-Cassaber Castagnède Casteide-Cami Casteide-Candau Casteide-Doat Castéra-Loubix Castet Castetbon Castétis Castetnau-Camblong Castetner Castetpugon Castillon-d'Arthez Castillon-de-Lembeye Caubios-Loos Cescau Cette-Eygun Charre Charritte-de-Bas Chéraute Ciboure Claracq Coarraze Conchez-de-Béarn Corbère-Abères Coslédaà-Lube-Boast Coublucq Crouseilles Cuqueron Denguin Diusse Doazon Dognen Domezain-Berraute Doumy Eaux-Bonnes Escos Escot Escou Escoubès Escout Escurès Eslourenties-Daban Espéchède Espelette Espès-Undurein Espiute Espoey Esquiule Estérençuby Estialescq Estos Etcharry Etchebar Etsaut Eysus Fichous-Riumayou Gabaston Gabat Gamarthe Gan Garindein Garlède-Mondebat Garlin Garos Garris Gayon Gelos Ger Gerderest Gère-Bélesten Géronce Gestas Géus-d'Arzacq Geüs-d'Oloron Goès Gomer Gotein-Libarrenx Guéthary Guiche Guinarthe-Parenties Gurmençon Gurs Hagetaubin Halsou Hasparren Haut-de-Bosdarros Haux Hélette Hendaye Herrère Higuères-Souye L'Hôpital-d'Orion L'Hôpital-Saint-Blaise Hosta Hours Ibarrolle Idaux-Mendy Idron Igon Iholdy Ilharre Irissarry Irouléguy Ispoure Issor Isturits Itxassou Izeste Jasses Jatxou Jaxu Jurançon Juxue Laà-Mondrans Laàs Labastide-Cézéracq Labastide-Monréjeau Labastide-Villefranche Labatmale Labatut-Figuières Labets-Biscay Labeyrie Lacadée Lacarre Lacarry-Arhan-Charritte-de-Haut Lacommande Lacq Lagor Lagos Laguinge-Restoue Lahonce Lahontan Lahourcade Lalongue Lalonquette Lamayou Lanne-en-Barétous Lannecaube Lanneplaà Lantabat Larceveau-Arros-Cibits Laroin Larrau Larressore Larreule Larribar-Sorhapuru Laruns Lasclaveries Lasse Lasserre Lasseube Lasseubetat Lay-Lamidou Lecumberry Ledeuix Lée Lées-Athas Lembeye Lème Léren Lescar Lescun Lespielle Lespourcy Lestelle-Bétharram Lichans-Sunhar Lichos Licq-Athérey Limendous Livron Lohitzun-Oyhercq Lombia Lonçon Lons Loubieng Louhossoa Lourdios-Ichère Lourenties Louvie-Juzon Louvie-Soubiron Louvigny Luc-Armau Lucarré Lucgarier Lucq-de-Béarn Lurbe-Saint-Christau Lussagnet-Lusson Luxe-Sumberraute Lys Macaye Malaussanne Mascaraàs-Haron Maslacq Masparraute Maspie-Lalonquère-Juillacq Maucor Mauléon-Licharre Maure Mazères-Lezons Mazerolles Méharin Meillon Mendionde Menditte Mendive Méracq Méritein Mesplède Mialos Miossens-Lanusse Mirepeix Momas Momy Monassut-Audiracq Moncaup Moncayolle-Larrory-Mendibieu Moncla Monein Monpezat Monségur Mont Montagut Montaner Montardon Montaut Mont-Disse Montfort Montory Morlaàs Morlanne Mouguerre Mouhous Moumour Mourenx Musculdy Nabas Narcastet Narp Navailles-Angos Navarrenx Nay Noguères Nousty Ogenne-Camptort Ogeu-les-Bains Oloron-Sainte-Marie subpr Oraàs Ordiarp Orègue Orin Orion Orriule Orsanco Orthez Os-Marsillon Ossas-Suhare Osse-en-Aspe Ossenx Osserain-Rivareyte Ossès Ostabat-Asme Ouillon Ousse Ozenx-Montestrucq Pagolle Parbayse Pardies Pardies-Piétat Pau pref Peyrelongue-Abos Piets-Plasence-Moustrou Poey-de-Lescar Poey-d'Oloron Pomps Ponson-Debat-Pouts Ponson-Dessus Pontacq Pontiacq-Viellepinte Portet Pouliacq Poursiugues-Boucoue Préchacq-Josbaig Préchacq-Navarrenx Précilhon Puyoô Ramous Rébénacq Ribarrouy Riupeyrous Rivehaute Rontignon Roquiague Saint-Abit Saint-Armou Saint-Boès Saint-Castin Saint-Dos Sainte-Colome Sainte-Engrâce Saint-Esteben Saint-Étienne-de-Baïgorry Saint-Faust Saint-Girons-en-Béarn Saint-Gladie-Arrive-Munein Saint-Goin Saint-Jammes Saint-Jean-de-Luz Saint-Jean-le-Vieux Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port Saint-Jean-Poudge Saint-Just-Ibarre Saint-Laurent-Bretagne Saint-Martin-d'Arberoue Saint-Martin-d'Arrossa Saint-Médard Saint-Michel Saint-Palais Saint-Pé-de-Léren Saint-Pée-sur-Nivelle Saint-Pierre-d'Irube Saint-Vincent Salies-de-Béarn Salles-Mongiscard Sallespisse Sames Samsons-Lion Sare Sarpourenx Sarrance Saubole Saucède Sauguis-Saint-Étienne Sault-de-Navailles Sauvagnon Sauvelade Sauveterre-de-Béarn Séby Sedze-Maubecq Sedzère Séméacq-Blachon Sendets Serres-Castet Serres-Morlaàs Serres-Sainte-Marie Sévignacq Sévignacq-Meyracq Simacourbe Siros Soumoulou Souraïde Suhescun Sus Susmiou Tabaille-Usquain Tadousse-Ussau Tardets-Sorholus Taron-Sadirac-Viellenave Tarsacq Thèze Trois-Villes Uhart-Cize Uhart-Mixe Urcuit Urdos Urepel Urost Urrugne Urt Ustaritz Uzan Uzein Uzos Verdets Vialer Viellenave-d'Arthez Viellenave-de-Navarrenx Vielleségure Vignes Villefranque Viodos-Abense-de-Bas Viven pref : prefecture subpr : subprefecture v t e Villages in the association Les Plus Beaux Villages de France Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes Arlempdes Balazuc Blesle Bonneval-sur-Arc Charroux Grignan La Garde-Adhémar Lavaudieu Le Poët-Laval Mirmande Montbrun-les-Bains Montpeyroux Oingt Pérouges Pradelles Saint Antoine l'Abbaye Saint-Floret Saint-Saturnin Sainte-Croix-en-Jarez Salers Sixt-Fer-à-Cheval Tournemire Usson Vogüé Yvoire Bourgogne-Franche-Comté Baume-les-Messieurs Châteauneuf-en-Auxois Château-Chalon Flavigny-sur-Ozerain Lods Noyers Pesmes Semur-en-Brionnais Vézelay Brittany Île de Sein Le Faou Locronan Moncontour Rochefort-en-Terre Saint-Suliac Centre-Val de Loire Apremont-sur-Allier Candes-Saint-Martin Crissay-sur-Manse Gargilesse-Dampierre Lavardin Montrésor Saint-Benoît-du-Sault Yèvre-le-Châtel Corsica Piana Sant'Antonino Grand Est Eguisheim Hunawihr Hunspach Mittelbergheim Riquewihr Rodemack Saint-Quirin Hauts-de-France Parfondeval Gerberoy Île-de-France Barbizon La Roche-Guyon Normandy Beuvron-en-Auge Barfleur Saint-Céneri-le-Gérei Le Bec-Hellouin Lyons-la-Forêt Nouvelle-Aquitaine Ainhoa Angles-sur-l'Anglin Ars-en-Ré Aubeterre-sur-Dronne Belvès Beynac-et-Cazenac Castelnaud-la-Chapelle Collonges-la-Rouge Coulon Curemonte Domme La Bastide-Clairence La Flotte La Roque-Gageac Limeuil Monflanquin Monpazier Mornac-sur-Seudre Mortemart Navarrenx Pujols-le-Haut Saint-Amand-de-Coly Saint-Jean-de-Côle Saint-Léon-sur-Vézère Saint-Robert Sare Ségur-le-Château Talmont-sur-Gironde Treignac Turenne Occitanie Aiguèze Autoire Auvillar Belcastel Brousse-le-Château Bruniquel Camon Capdenac Cardaillac Carennac Castelnau-de-Montmiral Castelnou Conques Estaing Eus Évol Fourcès La Couvertoirade La Garde-Guérin Lagrasse Larressingle La Roque-sur-Cèze Lautrec Lauzerte Loubressac Minerve Monestiés Montréal-du-Gers Mosset Najac Olargues Peyre Puycelsi Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges Saint-Cirq-Lapopie Saint-Côme-d'Olt Saint-Guilhem-le-Désert Saint-Lizier Sainte-Enimie Sainte-Eulalie-d'Olt Sarrant Sauveterre-de-Rouergue Villefranche-de-Conflent Pays de la Loire Montsoreau Sainte-Suzanne Vouvant Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur Ansouis Bargème Coaraze Gassin Gordes Gourdon La Grave Les Baux-de-Provence Lourmarin Ménerbes Moustiers-Sainte-Marie Roussillon Saint-Véran Sainte-Agnès Séguret Seillans Tourtour Venasque Réunion Hell-Bourg Commons Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany France BnF data Geographic MusicBrainz area Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Navarrenx&oldid=1270007845 " Category : Communes of Pyrénées-Atlantiques Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 French-language sources (fr) Geography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Occitan (post 1500)-language text Articles containing Basque-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using infobox settlement with image map1 but not image map Pages with French IPA Pages with Occitan (post 1500) IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 17 January 2025, at 13:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Navarrenx 39 languages Add topic

