Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin and early works 2 Research in cognitive geography 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Notes 4.2 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cognitive geography Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interdisciplinary study of cognitive science and geography Diagram showing elements of spatial contextual (or geographic) awareness.

Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Cognitive geography is an interdisciplinary study of cognitive science and geography . It aims to understand how humans view space, place, and environment. It involves formalizing factors that influence our spatial cognition to create a more effective representation of space. These improved models assist in a variety of issues, for example, developing maps that communicate better, providing navigation instructions that are easier to follow, utilizing space more practically, accounting for the cultural differences on spatial thinking for more effective cross-cultural information exchange, and an overall increased understanding of our environment.

Notable researchers in this branch of geography include David Mark , Daniel Montello , Max J. Egenhofer, Andrew U. Frank , Christian Freksa, Edward Tolman , and Barbara Tversky , among others.

The conference on Spatial Information Theory (COSIT) is a biennial international conference with a focus on the theoretical aspect of space and spatial information.

The US National Research Council published a book titled, "Learning to think spatially (2006)" written by the Committee on Support for Thinking Spatially. The committee believes incorporating GIS and other spatial technologies in the K–12 curriculum would promote spatial thinking and reasoning.

Origin and early works [ edit ] The connection between spatial cognition, human activity, and survival has existed since ancient times. As learned from etymology, geometry originates in land surveying of the annual floods of the Nile river.

[ 1 ] Spatial cognition developed from the study of cognitive psychology which began to be considered as a separate field in the late 1960s through Ulric Neisser 's book Cognitive Psychology (1967).

[ 1 ] Initially, research on spatial cognition was hindered due to many leading researchers believing that visual and spatial world could be explained using language processing.

[ 1 ] Later on, research on imagery showed that by reducing the representation of the visual and spatial world into language, researchers ignored 'fascinating' issues.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Around the same time, geographers were studying how people perceived and remembered the geographical world.

[ 4 ] Cognitive geography and behavioral geography draw from early behaviorist works such as Tolman 's concepts of "cognitive maps". More cognitively oriented, these geographers focus on the cognitive processes underlying spatial reasoning, decision-making, and behavior. More behaviorally oriented geographers are materialists and look at the role of basic learning processes and how they influence the landscape patterns or even group identity .

[ 5 ] Examples of early works on Cognitive Geography include Tolman's "Cognitive maps in rats and men" compared the behavior of laboratory rats with the navigation and wayfinding abilities of humans. Similar work during that period dealt with the peoples' perception of direction and spatial relations, for example, Americans typically think that South America is aligned directly south of North America when in fact most of South America is much further east.

[ 6 ] In the early 70s, the focus was on how to improve maps by providing useful information, delivering an understandable message, and making it more aesthetically pleasing.

[ 1 ] Research in cognitive geography [ edit ] The interaction between humans and the environment is a major focus among Geographers. This research area aims to minimize the disparity between the environment and its geometric representation and remove inherent spatial cognitive biases. Examples of spatial cognitive biases include overestimating the distance between two locations when there are many intersections and nodes in the path. There is a tendency to recollect irregular streets or rivers as straighter, more parallel, or more perpendicular than they are.

David Mark through his research illustrates how spatial features like inland water bodies (lakes, ponds, lagoons) are categorized differently in English and French-speaking population and, therefore, could cause issues in cross-cultural geographical information exchange.

Studies have been done on wayfinding and navigation. Wayfinding is "the mental processes involved in determining a route between two points and then following that route" and involves planning trips, optimizing routes, and exploring different places. The researchers are trying to find the perfect amount of information, not more and not less, for making navigation more efficient. Landmarks play an important factor in wayfinding and navigation, therefore, researchers are looking to automate the selection of landmarks which would make maps easier to follow.

Displaying information through maps has shaped how humans sense space and direction. Communicating effectively through maps is a challenge for many cartographers. For example, symbols, their color, and their relative size have an important role to play in the interaction between the map and the mapmaker.

The study of Geo-ontology also has interested researchers in this field. Geo-ontology involves the study of the variations among different cultures in how they view and sense landforms, how to communicate spatial knowledge with other cultures while overcoming such barriers, an understanding of the cognitive aspects of spatial relations, and how to represent them in computational models.

[ 7 ] For example, there might be some geographic meaning that might not be well explained using words. There might be some differences in understanding when spatial information is explained verbally instead of non-verbal form.

Some of the questions that cognitive geographers deal with include the influence of scale on the information provided in maps, and the difference in how we view geographic knowledge differently from different sources, for example, text-based, map-based, or any real-world experience. A typical study in Cognitive Geography involves volunteers responding to a questionnaire after being shown some spatial information. The researchers use this data to find the spectrum of interpretations by the volunteers about the subject in focus.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Behavioral geography Cognitive psychology Geovisualization Spatial cognition Wayfinding References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Mark, David M.; Freksa, Christian; Hirtle, Stephen C.; Lloyd, Robert; Tversky, Barbara (1999-12-01). "Cognitive models of geographical space".

International Journal of Geographical Information Science .

13 (8): 747– 774.

doi : 10.1080/136588199241003 .

ISSN 1365-8816 .

^ Kosslyn, Stephen Michael.

Image and mind . Harvard University Press, 1980.

^ Cognitive processes that resemble perceptual processes . 1978.

^ O'keefe, John, and Lynn Nadel.

The hippocampus as a cognitive map . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978.

^ Norton, W. (1997). Human geography and behavior analysis: An application of behavior analysis to the evolution of human landscapes.

The Psychological Record , 47, 439–460 ^ Tversky, Barbara (1981-07-01). "Distortions in memory for maps".

Cognitive Psychology .

13 (3): 407– 433.

doi : 10.1016/0010-0285(81)90016-5 .

S2CID 17569801 .

^ Mark, David M. "Spatial representation: a cognitive view." Geographical information systems: Principles and applications 1 (1999): 81–89.

^ Montello, Daniel R. "Cognitive research in GIScience: Recent achievements and future prospects." Geography Compass 3.5 (2009): 1824–1840.

^ Montello, Daniel R. "Cognitive geography." (2009).

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Cognitive geography Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Downs, Roger M., and David Stea. (1977).

Maps in Minds: Reflections on Cognitive Mapping.

HarperCollins Publishers.

Kitchin, Rob, and Scott Freundschuh, eds. (2000).

Cognitive Mapping: Past, Present, and Future.

Vol. 4. Psychology Press.

Mark, David M ., et al. (1999). " Cognitive models of geographical space ." International Journal of Geographical Information Science 13.8: 747–774.

Montello, Daniel R.

(2009). "Cognitive geography." pp. 160–166 in International Encyclopedia of Human Geography 2.

Montello, Daniel R ., et al. (2003). " Testing the first law of cognitive geography on point-display spatializations ." pp. 316–331 in Spatial Information Theory. Foundations of Geographic Information Science.

Berlin/ Heidelberg: Springer.

Portugali, Juval , ed. (1996).

The Construction of Cognitive Maps.

Vol. 32. Springer Science & Business Media.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Cognitive geography at Wikimedia Commons v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cognitive_geography&oldid=1300379897 " Categories : Branches of cognitive science Environmental social science Human geography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 00:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cognitive geography Add languages Add topic

